     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024158

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P154784                                     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                       Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59450                                  31-Jan-2022                                        255,957,345.25

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Feb-2017                                30-Nov-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        255,957,345.25                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hassan Maher Amin           Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDO) of Kenya's Climate Smart Agriculture Project (KCSAP) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 16) and aimed to:




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



   "Increase agricultural productivity and build resilience to climate change risks in the targeted
   smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Kenya, and in the event of an Eligible Crisis or
   Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response."

   Parsing the PDO. In this Review, the PDO will be parsed based on the following three Objectives:

   1. To increase agricultural productivity in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Kenya.

   2. To build resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in
   Kenya.

   3. To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following five components:

   1. Upscaling Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (appraisal cost: US$163.80 million equivalent,
   actual cost: US$163.80 million equivalent). This component financed interventions that promoted and
   facilitated the adoption of Technology Innovation Management Practices (TIMPs). It included three sub-
   components as follows:

   1.1. Building Institutional Capacity and Strengthening Service Delivery. This sub-component aimed to
   build institutional capacity at the county, ward, and community levels to plan, implement, manage, and
   monitor ward/county sub-projects and community micro-projects in all 24 project counties. More specifically,
   it would finance project interventions related to: (i) strengthening the capacity of counties and wards to
   deliver agricultural services; (ii) supporting Climate-Smart Agriculture (CSA) planning and prioritization at
   county and ward levels; (iii) contracting private advisory service providers to facilitate mobilization of
   community institutions and assist in Micro-project planning and implementation; and (iv) facilitating
   community institutions.

   1.2. Supporting Investments in Smallholder Agro-pastoral Production Systems. This sub-component
   would finance CSA investments in the form of community micro-projects, identified through participatory
   processes, to help beneficiaries achieve the triple wins of increased productivity, enhanced resilience, and
   reduced Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in the 17 project counties located in semi-arid and medium-to-
   high-potential non- Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASAL) areas. Specifically, this sub-component would support
   CSA investments aimed at: (i) improving water and soil management (active microclimate management); (ii)
   promoting livelihoods and crop diversification, including drought-tolerant crops, stall-fed intensive dairy
   production, and agroforestry systems; and (iii) improving small-scale farmer managed irrigation schemes for
   crop and pasture/fodder development/production. Matching grants would be provided through three
   windows: (i) community-level investments to finance microprojects (Agro-Pastoral Microprojects); (ii) county-

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



level investments to finance relatively larger subprojects that benefit multiple wards or communities (Agro-
Pastoral Subprojects); and (iii) productive alliance investments through PPPs with producers (PPP sub-
projects).

1.3. Supporting Investments in Pastoral Production Systems. This sub-component would support
operationalization of the North-Eastern Development
Initiative (NEDI) and would cover seven of the eight NEDI counties: Marsabit, Isiolo, Tana River, Garissa,
Wajir, Mandera, and Lamu. This sub-component aimed to help beneficiaries achieve the triple-wins
(mentioned above) through interventions aimed at: (i) increasing productivity of livestock systems, animal
health, and herd management and off-take rates; (ii) promoting integrated soil fertility and sustainable land
management (SLM) practices based on crop-livestock integration (for example, manure management, use
of crop residues as feed) and modern inputs; (iii) supporting market access (for example, through livestock
corridors, watering points, quarantines, and animal markets); and (iv) developing infrastructure for value
addition.

 2. Strengthening Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Seed Systems (appraisal cost: US$53.7
million equivalent, actual cost: US$38.70 million equivalent). This component aimed to support the
development, validation, and adoption of context specific CSA TIMPS to target beneficiaries under
components 1 and 3 and also develop sustainable seed production and distribution systems. It included
three sub-components as follows:

2.1. Supporting Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Innovations. This sub-component aimed to
finance the development, validation, and dissemination of context-specific TIMPS that deliver CSA triple-
wins. TIMPs would be developed and validated through demand-driven adaptive research approaches; and
made available for scaling up and dissemination under components 1 and 3, respectively.

2.2. Building Competitive and Sustainable Seed Systems. This sub-component would finance crop,
livestock, and aquaculture breeding programs; and promote private sector and community involvement in
producing and distributing commercial seed.

2.3. Strengthening Technical and Institutional Capacity. This sub-component would strengthen the
National Agricultural Research System (NARS’s) technical and institutional capacity to deliver CSA TIMPs,
and it will also support development of sustainable seed, breeding stock, and fingerling delivery systems in
Kenya.

3. Supporting Agro-weather, Market, Climate, and Advisory Services (appraisal cost: US$32.9 million
equivalent, actual cost: US$33.63 million equivalent). This component aimed to finance the
development of agro-weather forecasting and marketing information system and their dissemination tools
through three sub-components as follows:

3.1. Improving Agro-meteorological Forecasting and Monitoring. This sub-component would finance
urgently needed investments to: (i) enhance agro-weather and climate information services; (ii) build core
capacity for agro-weather observation and forecasting; and (iii) develop the long-term ability to operate and
maintain agro-weather and climate information services.

3.2. Developing Integrated Weather and Market Information System. This subcomponent would finance
activities related to: (i) developing ‘big data’ for CSA; (ii) strengthening the Market Information Systems; and



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



  (iii) delivering integrated weather and market advisory services using information and communication
  technology (ICT) and existing agricultural extension networks.

  3.3. Building Technical and Institutional and Capacity. This sub-component aimed to build the
  institutional and technical capacity of national and
  eligible county governments to deliver on their component 3 mandates. The main beneficiaries of this
  capacity building would be the semi-autonomous agencies (Kenya Meteorological Department - KMD,
  Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization - KALRO) and the Agricultural Statistics Unit
  (ASU) and Agriculture Insurance Unit (AIU) within the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries
  (MoALF).

  4. Project Coordination and Management (appraisal cost: US$29.30 million equivalent, actual cost:
  US$29.80 million equivalent). This component would finance activities related to national and county-level
  project coordination and management through the following two sub-components:

  4.1. Project Coordination. This sub-component would finance the costs of the National Project
  Coordination Unit (NPCU) and County Project Coordination Units (CPCUs).

  4.2. Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Evaluation. This sub-component would finance a web-based
  M&E system to collect and process information at the national, county, and community levels and verify the
  inputs, outputs, effects, and eventually the impacts of project activities over time.

   5. Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (appraisal cost: US$0.00 million
  equivalent, actual cost: US$13.77 million equivalent). This zero-cost component aimed to finance
  eligible expenditures under the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) in case of natural or man-made
  crises or disasters, severe economic shocks, or other crises and emergencies in Kenya. This contingency
  facility could be triggered through formal declaration of a national emergency by the government authority
  and upon a formal request from the Government of Kenya to the World Bank through the National Treasury.

  Revised Components. The June 2020 restructuring triggered the CERC to support the government of
  Kenya in tackling the locust crisis. Locust attacks had severely impacted livelihoods of more than 3 million
  people in Kenya. The resulting restructuring involved reallocation of US$13.77 million from component 2 to
  the CERC.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost of the project at appraisal was estimated to be US$279.70 million. The actual
  cost according to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$255.96 million or 91.5% of the appraisal amount.

  Financing. The project was financed through an International Development Association (IDA) Credit worth
  US$250.00 million under an Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. The actual amount
  disbursed according to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$US$255.96 million. The higher disbursement
  amount was due to exchange rate variations (US$ to KSH ) during the project implementation period
  (project team).

  Borrower Contribution. The Borrower was expected to contribute US$29.70 million of counterpart funds
  distributed as follows: national government counterpart funds (US$15.90 million), county governments


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



   contributions (US$8.30 million), and beneficiary contributions (US$5.50 million equivalent). The
   beneficiaries’ contributions were co-financing for matching grants (ICR, paragraph 10). However, none of
   the afore-mentioned amounts was contributed and the ICR (data Sheet page 2) reported that the Borrower
   contribution at completion was US$0.00 million. In a further communication, the project team explained
   that the borrower contributed nearly US$29.70 million both in terms of the Cash and in-kind contribution. In-
   kind contributions included salaries, office buildings, and land donated to the project interventions.

   Dates. The project was approved on February 9, 2017 and became effective three months later on May 16,
   2017. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on September 4, 2020 which was in line with the PAD
   expectations that the MTR would be conducted three years after effectiveness. The project closed on
   November 30, 2023 which was 21 months beyond the original closing date on January 31, 2022. The
   reasons for the extension of the Loan closing date are stated below.

   The project was restructured four times, all of which were Level 2 restructuring, as follows:

   1. On June 11 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$85.67 million, in order to reallocate funds
   between disbursement categories. This restructuring triggered the CERC to support the government of
   Kenya in combating the locust crisis that severely impacted livelihoods of more than 3 million people in
   Kenya. This involved reallocation across disbursement categories and enabled the allocation of US$13.77
   million from component 2 to the CERC.

   2. On December 2, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$137.63 million, in order to introduce changes
   in the implementation agency, revise the Results Framework, change components and costs, reallocate
   funds between disbursement categories, and extend the Loan closing date by 18 months from January 31,
   2022, to June 30, 2023. This extension was needed to accommodate slow disbursement of funds, weak
   implementation capacity at the counties, and also to allow for the completion of activities already started
   (ICR, paragraph 56).

   3. On May 16, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$255.87 million, in order to extend the Loan
   closing date by three months from June 30, 2023 to September 30, 2023. This extension according to the
   ICR (paragraph 56) was to allow more time to complete the project investments.

   4. On September 12, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$255.87 million, in order to in order to
   extend the Loan closing date by two months from September 30, 2023 to November 30, 2023. This
   extension was to "enable the County Government of Isiolo to complete the full payment for a contract and
   ensure the World Bank financing allocated for this investment was fully utilized (ICR, paragraph 21)."




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In Kenya, agriculture is the dominant source of employment for roughly half of the
nation and is a major force in the economy, with a leading role in poverty reduction and adaptation to
climate change. However, the performance of the Kenyan agriculture had been highly volatile, with the
principal cause being extreme weather events which are increasing in frequency and intensity with climate
change. The country is particularly vulnerable to increasing temperatures and droughts, as nearly all

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



agriculture in Kenya is rain-fed. Consequently, negative growth had occurred in nine years between 1980
and 2012. The sector is the largest source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the country, contributing
about 58.6% to total emissions. As such, the agriculture sector in Kenya is central in the effort for reducing
GHG emissions and becoming part of the solution to tackle climate change. This project aimed to support
climate-smart agriculture (CSA) and offer an appropriate strategic framework for responding to and
reducing the adverse effects of climate change on smallholder farming and pastoral communities.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank supported a number of community-led agricultural
development projects and institutional platforms that have benefitted rural populations in Kenya. Most
notable were the Western Kenya Community Driven Development and Flood Mitigation Project (P074106)
and Kenya Agricultural Productivity and Agribusiness Project (P109683) where both projects informed the
design of KCSAP. In addition, the World Bank has rich regional and global knowledge, experience, and
networks that were expected to inform the design of a multi-sectoral, community-led, and market-driven
approaches promoted under KCSAP. Overall, the Bank with its global experience combined with the
lessons learnt under the two projects mentioned above, was in a good position to guide the design and
implementation of KCSAP.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with World Bank Group's Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY 2014–FY2018) for Kenya. The KCSAP was relevant for the CPS Domain of
Engagement 2: Protection and Potential Human Resource Development for Shared Prosperity, specifically,
outcome 4: Greater Agricultural Productivity. The PDO was also in line with the Bank's Africa Climate
Business Plan which focused on accelerating climate resilience and low-carbon development.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with World Bank Group's Country Partnership Framework
(CPF, FY2023-FY2028) for Kenya. The project contributed to the CPF objective 3: to foster micro-small-
and-medium enterprises (MSMEs) and small producer success for faster job creation, and objective 6: to
increase household resilience to, and national preparedness for, shocks. The PDO was also in line with
Bank's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Kenya. Specifically, the project contributed to priority 7 for
agriculture which called for enhanced commercialization opportunities across agriculture value chains. The
relevance of the PDO was further emphasized with the Bank's approval (in March 2022) of the National
Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (NAVCDP) which built upon KCSAP.

Consistency with the Government Priorities/Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the
Government of Kenya’s (GoK’s) Vision 2030 development strategy, launched in 2008. Vision 2030
emphasized the importance of transforming smallholder subsistence agriculture into a modern, innovative,
commercially oriented sector. The PDO was also in line with the Agricultural Sector Development Strategy
(ASDS, 2010–2020) which sought to
achieve an average agricultural sector growth of 7% per year between 2010 and 2015 and emphasized the
transformation of smallholder agriculture. ASDS prioritized investments in weather information systems,
research on drought-tolerant varieties, soil and water conservation, water harvesting, and integrated pest
management. For livestock, ASDS prioritizes improved management of grazing systems, biogas, livestock
diversification, and improved breeding.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the new strategy of the Government of Kenya (Bottom-
Up Economic Transformation Plan, 2022-2027) in which agriculture was an important feature. The
plan featured a bottom up agenda that emphasized Farmer Cooperatives, which benefited from the results
achieved by the farmer producer organizations (FPOs) under KCSAP. The PDO was also in line with the
Agriculture Sector Transformation and Growth Strategy (ASTGS, 2019-2029). The main objective of the


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



               ASTGS was to enable the Kenyan agriculture to transition from subsistence to commercialization while
               ensuring food security and enhanced resilience. The ASTGS also reflected the priorities of the
               Government's Big4 Agenda as well as the second generation of County Integrated Development Plans
               (CIDPs). Two of the priorities of the Big4 Agenda were central to agriculture, food security and
               manufacturing. Meanwhile the CIDPs promoted the prioritization of value chains that had great potential to
               contribute to the economic growth of the respective counties.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clearly formulated and
               captured the intended project outcomes. The PDO was pitched at an adequate level of ambition relative to
               the Bank experience and the country context. At project completion, the PDO continued to be in line with
               the current World Bank CPF and the latest Government strategies. Through contributing to climate-smart
               agriculture, the project addressed significant constraints to the Kenyan agriculture. Further, the World
               Bank’s implementation support was responsive to changing needs and triggered the CERC component in
               line with the PDO to address an eligible crisis or emergency. Finally, the Bank's approval of the National
               Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (NAVCDP) in March 2022 further emphasized the relevance
               of the KCSAP's objectives.

               Overall, and based on the discussion above, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Kenya.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). The ToC featured two groups of supported activities: directly
                             supporting beneficiary households through micro-projects and supporting public institutions. The
                             project adopted a Community Driven Development (CDD) approach through Common Interest Groups (CIGs)
                             and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs) which were linked to a Community Driven Development
                             Committee (CDDC) at the ward level and to Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) at Ward/Sub-county
                             level. Investments aimed at supporting public institutions would enable scaling up of the delivery of services
                             by the public sector to farmers. These investments also included investments towards strengthening public
                             research related to climate smart agriculture (CSA). To achieve the stated objective the project supported the
                             following activities:

                             1. Support climate-smart agricultural research and innovation which would finance activities aimed at
                             strengthening the capacity of the NARS to develop, test, and disseminate context-specific technology
                             innovation management practices (TIMPs) that deliver CSA triple-wins across five thematic areas: (i) climate-

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



smart crops; (ii) climate-smart livestock and aquaculture; (iii) socio-economic research on CSA; (iv) land,
water, and agroforestry; and (v) sustainable bio-energy.

2. Support building competitive and sustainable seed systems. The project would finance the development of
breeding programs for crops, livestock, and
aquaculture; and the involvement of private sector and communities in the production and distribution of
commercial seed.

3. Strengthening technical and institutional capacity of NARS to undertake context-specific CSA research and
the dissemination of TIMPs. The technical capacity of the NARS would be strengthened by financing long-
term training (11 PhDs and 20 MScs) in deficient disciplines within the NARS, such as animal and pasture
breeding, bee science, value addition, economic analysis, social and gender analysis, policy research,
statistical analysis, data management, seed science and business development. The project also would
invest in research infrastructure.

4. Support building institutional capacity and strengthen service delivery. The project would use an updated
and customized Contracted Extension Service Delivery Model and Value Chain Development model. The
project would finance the contracting of private service providers (SPs), including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs). The services provided by SPs included: (i) facilitating communities to form CIGs and
VMGs; to plan, implement, manage, and monitor their community CSA investments (microprojects for
adoption of CSA TIMPs); to federate into POs; and to participate in PPPs via production alliances, through
participatory approaches; (ii) providing technical advisory services (for example, advice on good agronomic
and livestock practices, value addition, and post-harvest technologies) to CIG, VMG, and PO members
participating in various priority VCs; (iii) linking smallholder agro-pastoralists and pastoralists to input, output,
and financial markets; (iv) providing financial and business advisory services; and (v) facilitating peer-to-peer
learning among farmers.

5. Support investments in smallholder agro-pastoral production systems, and support county-implemented
sub-projects which were expected to ensure access to a range of services including irrigation, animal
vaccination and/or market infrastructure.

6. Support investments in pastoral production systems. This included providing matching grants for the
existing and newly formed CIGs to invest in community CSA microprojects in extensive/pastoral production
systems. Support would also be provided to finance selected CSA interventions under the priority livestock
sub-sector investments including (i) rehabilitating and equipping selected abattoirs; (ii) developing disease-
free zones; and (iii) supporting breeding programs and animal feed production.

The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities were: identification and dissemination of TIMPs
scaled up, breeding programs established for crops, livestock and aquaculture with the involvement of the
private sector and communities in production and distribution of commercial seeds, scientific knowledge
enhanced at NARS, creation of community institutions, community level investments (micro-projects) funded,
and Public-private Partnership (PPPs) to support private firms and Producer Organizations (POs) for value
chain development for market access for Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and Vulnerable and Marginalized
Groups (VMGs).

The intermediate outcomes were: increased accesses and adoption of TIMPs by smallholders, increased
access to markets, and increased number of community assets/resources under TIMPs.


                                                                                                        Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



This would all contribute to the achievement of increased agricultural productivity in the targeted smallholder
farming and pastoral communities in Kenya.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were linked to outputs, intermediate outcomes and to the PDO
through plausible and logical causal chains. The PDO was also aligned with the higher level objective of
improving food security and to a lesser extent the reduction of green house gas emissions. The ToC
was used as a basis for developing the operation’s results framework and it reflected a good balance
between the complexity and clarity of the causal links. However, the ToC lacked clarity with regards to the
contribution of the stated activities to improving access to markets, and pastoral supporting activities were not
adequately captured at the output/intermediate outcome levels. Also, the ToC in the ICR lacked the critical
assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective. Important critical assumptions
included: the willingness of smallholders to adopt improved technologies, and the responsiveness of the
research system to actual field problems.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      20,652 farmers, of which 55% were females, participated in on-farm TIMP trials, exceeding the overall
         target of 1,440 and the female target of 45%.
        252 TIMPs were tested through on-farm trials with 92% of which were validated which fell short of the
         overall target of 360, but the validation target of 25% was significantly exceeded.
        5,576 metric ton of improved seed were produced by seed and breed stock producers supported by
         the project significantly exceeding the target of 255 metric ton.
        75 PhD degrees were completed (35% were females substantially achieving the target of 40%)
         exceeding the target of 13; 97 MSc degrees were awarded (37% were females which was below the
         target of 50%) exceeding the target of 42; and 374 short-term trainings were provided (80% of
         participants were females exceeding the target of 30%) which was below the overall target of 580.
        1,008,200 client-days of training were provided on TIMPs, of which 55% were female exceeding the
         target of 907,500 and the female target of 45%.
        89% of beneficiaries were satisfied with relevance, timeliness and effectiveness of TIMP advisory
         services received exceeding the target of 70%.
        11,480 Grants were approved for CIGs (8,960 exceeding the target of 4,950), VMGs (2,240 exceeding
         the target of 1,100) , PPPs (134 exceeding the target of 40) and counties (190 exceeding the target of
         87) and were 100% completed significantly exceeding the overall target of 6,177.
        Net GHG emissions per unit (kilogram) of product produced for selected agricultural commodities
         were reduced overall by 34% exceeding the target of 15%.
        595,366 ha of productive assets were brought under TIMPs as a result of the project substantially
         achieving the overall target of 600,000 ha.

Outcomes

      By project completion the total direct project beneficiaries reached 663,200 exceeding the target of
       521,500 (PDO outcome indicator #1). Also, 593,521 targeted beneficiaries in CIGs/VMG (of which
       55% were females) adopted at least one TIMP promoted by the project significantly exceeding the
       target of 108,900 and the female target of 45% (PDO outcome indicator #2).
      The project achieved a 30% increase in productivity of selected agricultural commodities supported by
       the project exceeding the target of 20% (PDO outcome indicator #3). Specifically, sorghum


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



       yield increased from a baseline of 1,000 kg/ha to 1,235 kg/ha exceeding the target of 1,200
       kg/ha, millet yield increased from a baseline of 900 kg/ha to reach 1,359 kg/ha exceeding the target of
       1,080 kg/ha, and cassava yield increased from a baseline of 5,000 kg/ha to 6,285 kg/ha exceeding the
       target of 6,000 kg/ha. Also, the milk production increased from a baseline of 1,500 liters of
       milk/female/lactation period to 1,872 liters of milk/female/lactation period exceeding the target of 1,800
       liters of milk/female/lactation period. Aquaculture production increased from a baseline of 1,200
       tons/ha to 1,500 tons/ha which exceeded the end target of 1,440 tons/ha. The ICR (Annex 6)
       explained that the increase in productivity was estimated based on productivity data collected from the
       Project Management Information System (PMIS) and triangulated with additional data collected
       through the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) team and the household survey conducted by the team
       in change of the Project Completion Report. The ICR (Annex 6, table) also reported the results of a
       difference in difference comparison between project areas and control areas for sorghum, millet, and
       dairy which clearly demonstrated the attribution of the project in the case of sorghum and dairy but
       was less clear for millet. For sorghum the difference in difference as a percent of the baseline was
       91% while it was only 5.8% for millet. No data was reported on cassava. While dairy production in
       non-arid zone and semi-arid zone showed a difference in difference as a percent of the baseline of
       50.5% and 45.2%, respectively. There was no data reported on cassava and aquaculture.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project contributed to increasing agricultural productivity in the
targeted smallholder farming communities in Kenya through creating organized community institutions and
providing them with grants and management training through service providers. The project enabled the
creation of a functional institutional infrastructure for the delivery of the investment program. The project
also built capacity in MoALF agencies, and in particular KALRO. Through the link with counties and
communities, KALRO was enabled to put its knowledge and capacity to use for the farmers. The project also
improved access to high quality climate-smart agriculture inputs and promoted improved agricultural
technologies. As noted above, the project exceeded its targets for the three PDO outcome indicators. Also,
most intermediate results were achieved or exceeded. However, the attribution of the project was only clearly
demonstrated for sorghum and dairy.

Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To build resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in
Kenya.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective and to help farmers address the challenges of
climate variability and change, and to enhance their resilience amid those challenges, the project supported
the following activities:



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



1. Support agro-meteorological forecasting and monitoring. The project would support mapping existing
publicly and privately operated automated weather stations (AWSs) including agrometeorological,
hydrological, and rain gauge stations. The mapping would aim at assessing the distribution, quantity, and
quality of existing public and private agro-meteorological and hydrological AWSs. The project would support
establishing agro-meteorological and hydro-meteorological centers; installing new automated agro-weather
stations. The expanded hydro-met network, especially the centers located in the Tana River basin, would be
critical for improving flood forecasting and management. The project would support developing and upgrading
the Early Warning System (EWS) to improve short-, medium-, and long-range forecasts/monitoring
information for various uses, including flood and drought warnings, disaster reduction, and emergency
response.

2. Develop integrated weather and market information system. The project would support developing “big
data” for CSA which was expected to help famers, agro-pastoralists, and pastoralists make informed
decisions on what, when, where, and how to produce; strengthening market information systems through
financing interventions aimed at strengthening the automated Market Information System at MoALF to enable
users to access real-time market information online; and delivering integrated weather and market advisory
services through obtaining agro-weather data and market information from the databases and scaling this
data down and packaged into actionable advisory messages for different agro-meteorological zones.
Messages would be disseminated through multiple information delivery channels, including SMS and mobile
phone applications, web-portal, and knowledge bank systems, as well as transmit information through more
conventional channels such as radio, television, bulletins, and print. The
improved access to weather and market advisory services was expected to empower farmers to
make informed decisions on what, when, where, and how to produce; to reduce losses related to climate
change risks; and to achieve the triple wins.

3. Build technical and institutional capacity. The project would finance the institutional and technical capacity
building for staff of national and county governments to enable them to deliver on their mandates under
component 3. The main areas for support would include sensitizing stakeholders on CSA concepts and
climate change risks, a capacity needs assessment, and capacity building.

The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities were: mapping of existing agro-meteorological and
hydrological stations; establishment of agro- meteorological and hydro-meteorological centers; development
of early warning system; development of big-data for climate smart agriculture; segmentation and registration
of value chain stakeholders; identification of homogeneous production zones; collection of agricultural
statistics; appointment of normalized different vegetation index agent; setup of infrastructure for big data
analytics; and integrated weather and market advisory service delivered.

The expected intermediate outcomes were: increased access to information services about agro-weather and
markets. The expected outcome was increased resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder
farming and pastoral communities in Kenya. All this combined would contribute to achieving building
resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Kenya.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the output, intermediate outcome and outcome
through plausible realistic and logical causal chains. However, the ToC reported in the ICR lacked the critical
assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO. Also, there was a disconnect between the ToC
and Results Framework which lacked a dedicated PDO outcome indicator to measure the achievement of the
PDO and some activities were not tracked at the output/intermediate outcome level.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



Outputs/Intermediate Results

      5,585,500 users (of which 51% were females) were receiving integrated agro-weather information and
       market information services exceeding the overall target of 4,800,000 and the female target of 50%.
      192 new and refurbished agro-automatic weather stations and hydro-meteorological facilities were
       provided by the project substantially achieving the target of 198. According to the ICR (Annex
       4) county-level climate information was made available as result of the new stations. Daily, 5-days and
       seasonal weather reports were published on the BIG DATA Platform. Also, radio and television
       broadcasting was used to disseminate forecasts.

Notable achievements reported by the ICR (Annex 4) but not captured by the RF included:

      KALRO established the BIG DATA Platform for agriculture, livestock, weather, farmer, and market
         information. The BIG DATA Platform was fully operational with a total farmer database more than 6.4
         million (March 2024) in all 45 counties.
        6.4 million farmers were already registered (March 2023), which allowed to reach out to farmers
         directly with e-extension, e-subsidies and vouchers.
        Data digitalization of existing paper records was being undertaken at national and county levels. The
         open data sharing platform KILIMO Stat was established and is operational.
        Market data in 235 markets were being collected and used by an Early Warning System and by the
         Crop Insurance Programme as well as for policy analysis and preparation. Also, in all 47 counties, a
         total of 315 markets were reporting and uploading market data in the system for 182 commodities and
         inputs.
        The Kenya Agriculture Insurance Program (KAIP) was developed as a Public-private Partnership
         (PPP) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development (MoALD) with insurance companies.
         The KCSAP supported the start of coverage for crop insurance in 2017 to 42 counties. By 2024,
         maize, sorghum, green grams, Irish potato could be insured. Approximately 1.8 million farmers have
         accessed crop insurance (March 2024). Farmers pay 50% of premiums for crops and 100% for
         livestock.

Outcomes

      Building resilience would benefit from activities under Objective 1 including climate smart technologies
         and training. By project completion, 593,521 targeted beneficiaries in CIGs/VMG (of which 55% were
         females) adopted at least one TIMP promoted by the project significantly exceeding the target of
         108,900 and the female target of 45% (PDO outcome indicator #2).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To help smallholder farming and pastoral communities address the
challenges of climate variability and change, and to enhance their resilience amid those challenges the
project aimed to strengthen the forecasting capacity through the provision of agro-meteorological stations.
The project also improved access to meteorological data to better inform farmers and pastoralist about
weather events. The project supported developing and upgrading the Early Warning System (EWS)
to improve short-, medium-, and long-range forecasts/monitoring information for various uses, including flood
and drought warnings, disaster reduction, and emergency response. By project completion, 593,521 targeted
beneficiaries in CIGs/VMG (of which 55% were females) adopted at least one TIMP promoted by the project
significantly exceeding the target of 108,900 and the female target of 45% (PDO outcome indicator #2). It is
plausible to assume that the resilience of smallholders against climate change risks would improve with the

                                                                                                Page 12 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



                            adoption of climate smart agricultural practices. However, the causality between the adoption of TIMPs and
                            an increase in resilience could have benefited from further discussion. Therefore, the efficacy with which this
                            objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.

                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change (ToC). This objective was contingent on the occurrence of an eligible crisis or
                            emergency. The June 2020 restructuring triggered the CERC to support the government of Kenya in tackling
                            the locust crisis. The resulting restructuring involved reallocation across disbursement categories and enabled
                            the allocation of US$13.77 million from component 2 to the CERC.

                            Outcome

                            Through triggering the CERC, the project covered 20 counties through either surveillance or control
                            operations against the locust attack. While this was an immediate response by the project, there was no
                            information reported in the ICR on how effective this response was. In a further communication the project
                            team provided IEG with a timeline detailing the triggering of the CERC up to the disbursement of funds, a
                            process that took about 21 days.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. In 2020, the project responded to a locust outbreak in Kenya through a
                            restructuring that included the triggering of the CERC component and an allocation of US$13.77 million to
                            address the locust crisis. Through this action, the project provided and immediate response to the crisis. The
                            effectiveness of the response is difficult to assess given the emergency nature of the situation.

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project contributed to increasing agricultural productivity in the
                            targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in Kenya through creating organized community


                                                                                                                                 Page 13 of 24
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



  institutions and providing them with grants and management training through service providers. The project
  enabled the creation of a functional institutional infrastructure for the delivery of services. The project also
  improved access to high quality climate-smart agriculture inputs and promoted improved agricultural
  technologies. The project exceeded its targets for the three PDO outcome indicators pertaining to objective 1.
  It is plausible to assume that the resilience of smallholders against climate change risks would improve with
  the adoption of climate smart agricultural practices. However, the causality between the adoption of TIMPs
  and an increase in resilience could have benefited from further discussion. Finally, the project provided
  an immediate response to the locust crisis (objective 3). However, the effectiveness of the response is difficult
  to assess given the emergency nature of the situation.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

Ex-ante

     The EFA at appraisal was based on assumptions from previous experience with Bank-funded projects
        including: Western Kenya Community Driven Development and Flood Mitigation Project, Kenya
        Agricultural Productivity and Agribusiness Project, and Kenya Agricultural and Sustainable Land
        Management Project, because for CDD-type operations like the KCSAP, investments were not known
        ex-ante.
       To justify the KCSAP public financing decision, the economic and financial analysis aimed to answer
        three questions: the rationale for public sector financing, the World Bank’s value added, and the
        project’s development impact.
       Economic Analysis: The economic analysis aggregated the incremental net benefits of crop and livestock
        production as identified in the financial analysis (but valued at economic prices) and the environmental
        benefits captured by the project’s net carbon balance. The analysis was conducted over a period of 20
        years with a discount rate of 6%. The analysis showed a Net present value (NPV) of US$304 million with
        an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 16.7%.
       Rationale for public sector financing: KCSAP aimed to support public and global goods, as well as on-
        site environmental benefits; basic agricultural R&D; institutional and technical capacity building; and
        wider opportunities for inclusive growth and shared prosperity.
       Value added of World Bank support: The World Bank had the ability to draw on vast global knowledge
        and experience leveraging Value Chain, landscape, and CDD approaches to design and deliver
        demand-driven and evidence-based interventions to achieve desired CSA outcomes. Also, KCSAP
        builds on and complements previous interventions funded by the World Bank, including the above-
        mentioned projects.
       The project’s development impact: The investment components of the project were expected to: (i)
        improve the livelihoods of direct and indirect beneficiaries involved in agricultural production activities; (ii)
        improve the provision of ecosystem-related goods and services, which will increase resilience in the


                                                                                                          Page 14 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



      ecosystem, agri-food systems, and households; and (iii) enhance the potential to increase value added
      and tax revenue for the government, contributing to the overall development impact.
     Financial Analysis: Direct and tangible project benefits including increased crop and livestock
      productivity, would result in increased household incomes. The financial analysis was conducted at the
      farm level to estimate the viability of adopting CSA TIMPs for 11 commodities (cassava, green grams,
      sorghum, millet, pigeon peas, bananas, tomatoes, honey, indigenous poultry -meat and eggs, dairy, and
      red meat-cattle) identified as climate-smart priority commodities in the 24 participating counties. The
      financial analysis showed that the project had good potential for increasing and stabilizing net household
      income, as well as for making households more resilient to adverse weather and climate change risks.
     Assumptions for the financial analysis. The analysis treated farmers as homogeneous entities and
      assumed average values in the
      “with project” (WP) and “without project” (WOP) scenarios; the timeframe for each analysis is 20 years,
      with a discount rate of 12%; market prices of inputs and outputs were used ; family labor constitutes
      about 20% of farm labor and is valued at an opportunity cost of KSh 200 per person per day.
     Sensitivity Analysis: The results of the sensitivity analysis showed that the EIRR was most sensitive to a
      reduction in the area in which TIMPS were adopted followed by a reduction in the adoption rate. Overall,
      the sensitivity analyses for key variables demonstrated the robustness of the
      project investments against different scenarios tested as the EIRR remained above the discount rate of
      6%.

Ex-post

     Economic analysis: The economic analysis of KCSAP was based on (a) value chain investments in
      productive goods; and (b) monetized environmental benefits expected to accrue from reduced GHG
      emissions and increased carbon sequestration. Without environmental benefits, the ex-post Economic
      Rate of Return (ERR) of the project was estimated at 22.9% and Net Present Value (NPV) was
      estimated to be US$566 million. Including environmental benefit, using the low and high social cost of
      carbon, the ERR varied between 28.1% and 32.8% and the NPV varied between US$786 million and
      US$1,005 million.
     Financial Analysis: The financial analysis focused on the impact of the TIMPs on smallholder farming in
      the 14 priority value chains. Also, models were developed for seed multiplication and fodder production.
      The analysis showed that TIMPs increased productivity and yield on average by 30% which indicated
      that TIMPS were a sound investment. The internal rate of return for crop models ranged between a low
      of 31% for irish potato to a high of 94% for pigeon pea, while for animal production models the IRR
      ranged from a low of 28% for sheep and goats to a high of 90% for aquaculture. The project achieved a
      cost per beneficiary of US$421.
     Sensitivity Analysis: Results of the baseline scenario were tested for sensitivity to variations in benefits
      and costs and for various lags in the realization of benefits. A two year delay dropped the ERR to 18.1%,
      while a 30% reduction in benefits dropped the ERR to 18.6%.
     Implementation and Administrative Efficiency: The project required a total of 21 months extension
      beyond the original closing date on January 31, 2022. This extension was needed to accommodate slow
      disbursement of funds, weak implementation capacity at the counties, and also to allow for completion of
      activities. Also, the COVID-19 pandemic and national elections caused additional delays. The project
      adopted a CDD model and 44% of its budget went directly to beneficiaries. The project achieved 100%
      disbursement rate.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post economic analysis was based on value chain investments in
productive goods; and monetized environmental benefits expected to accrue from reduced GHG emissions and
increased carbon sequestration. This approach was in line with the methodology used at appraisal, which
makes the ex-ante and ex-post ERRs comparable. The ex-post ERR was estimated at 28.10% which exceeded
the ex-ante estimate at 16.70%. The project experienced implementation delays, some of which were for
reasons beyond the control of the project. Overall, the ex-post EFA was detailed enough and provided an
adequate justification of the project investments .

Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                16.70
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             28.10
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project contributed to
increasing agricultural productivity in the targeted smallholder farming communities in Kenya and improved
access to high quality climate-smart agriculture inputs and promoted improved agricultural technologies. The
project exceeded its targets for the three PDO outcome indicators pertaining to objective 1. However, the
attribution of the project was only clearly demonstrated for sorghum and dairy. Finally, the project provided
an immediate response to the locust crisis (objective 3). However, the effectiveness of the response was difficult
to assess given the emergency nature of the situation. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The ex-post ERR was
estimated at 28.10% which exceeded the ex-ante estimate at 16.70%.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)




The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. A sustainable model for the supply of services to farmers through Disruptive Agricultural
Technologies (DATs) is needed. The access to DATs was funded by KCSAP. It is not clear whether farmers
would be ready to pay fees to access these services after completion. While the National Agricultural Value
Chain Development Project took over after KCSAP, it is important for the government and county
governments to engage in a process of identifying the best ways to move forward with those services. The
government is interested in the model of agri-preneurs which could be a good conduit for the delivery of
these services. However, other options can be identified around the world. Many countries are for example
providing subsidies to registration fees, meaning that they subsidize a percentage of the registration fee to
the digital service. The services could also be procured by extension service officers for the supply of public
services. Also, FPOs business models might not be sustainable after completion because FPO margins are
small. Hence, they might need support developing business plans to ensure their activities can sustain any
shocks (ICR, paragraph 88).

2. Technical risk. An important feature of KCSAP was to enable the adoption by farmers of a selection of
climate smart TIMPs. The adoption of TIMPs should have a long-term impact on beneficiaries, and their user
base is likely to continue to grow through permeation into communities. Many of these TIMPs did not require
capital to be adopted. This is the reason why, even some CIGs/VMGs which were not granted micro projects
adopted them. These TIMPs have proven to increase the productivity of farmers adopting them. It is
therefore likely that the impact will continue in the longer term. The number of beneficiaries (89%) satisfied
with relevance, timeliness and effectiveness of TIMP advisory services and the extent of the adoption
(595,366 hectares at completion) indicates that these TIMPs are likely to be sustained.

3. Institutional risk. The enhancement of capacity of government and county government officers will
continue to support activities of the public sector. The extension of the network of agro-weather stations and
the development of the KALRO Big Data platform also creates a core infrastructure which is now at the
center of the digital transformation of agriculture supported by the government. The impact of these
investments under KCSAP are therefore foundational and will impact the government’s activities in the long
run. Some of these activities still need further investments to be used more efficiently for the delivery of
actionable advice to farmers and governments. These investments are already integrated into the new World
Bank agriculture portfolio which is taking over the building of this digital infrastructure. However, capacity
constraints might undermine the further development of the KALRO Big Data Platform. The digital
transformation of government agencies requires accessing new types of competencies which can be difficult
to procure for a government agency (ICR, paragraph 88).

4. Other stakeholder ownership risk. At the community level, the various layers of institutions created are
likely to be sustained over time, even though some might require to be repurposed to survive well beyond the
project life. The trained lead farmers are expected to continue providing services to their CIGs/VMGs, the
Farmer producer organizations (FPOs) will continue to provide access to markets and Savings and Credit
Cooperatives (SACCOs) access to finance. The Community Driven Development Committees (CDDCs)
proved to be very important to support the CIGs/VMGs but they were created for the implementation of
KCSAP and closely linked to the program and its micro-projects. Various options are considered for ensuring
their continued support activities, including through their linkages to SACCOs. The objective under the new
Bank-funded National Agricultural Value Chain Development Project is to bring the model piloted under
KCSAP to scale beyond the ward and counties which had been selected under KSCAP (ICR, paragraph 87).



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
           Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
           details). The project was expected to help Kenya meet rising food demand and attain the SDGs of
           ending poverty (SDG1), ending hunger (SDG2), and combating climate change and its impacts
           (SDG13). The project would also contribute to the Government of Kenya’s (2008) Vision 2030
           development strategy which emphasized the importance of transforming smallholder subsistence
           agriculture into a modern, innovative, commercially oriented sector.
          Technical, financial and economic aspects. The project design featured a clear and focused
           PDO. The project design featured a Community Driven Development (CDD) approach. Project
           interventions were carried out through Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and Vulnerable and
           Marginalized Groups (VMGs). Those were linked to a Community Driven Development Committee
           (CDDC) at the ward level and to Farmer Producer Organizations (FPOs) at Ward/Sub-
           county level. Households also benefitted directly from the sub- projects that were implemented by
           the County Governments and funded through the project. The design featured several elements
           which according to the ICR (paragraph 80) "were not agile enough to respond to the reality of
           implementation." Finally, the economic and financial analysis in the PAD was detailed enough and
           provided good justification for the project investments.
          Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project addressed both poverty
           reduction and shared prosperity, given its focus on improved productivity, a CDD approach and
           the inclusion of the most vulnerable communities (VMGs) in its areas of activity. The project also
           reflected a Gender and Inclusion Action Plan which ensured that gender and social inclusion
           were mainstreamed in the project. Also, the M&E system captured data disaggregated by gender
           and youth. Design also featured some activities tailored for women including local poultry, pulses,
           vegetables value chains or enterprises that did not demand large financial and land resources
           (ICR, paragraph 46).
          Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design reflected adequate environmental
           aspects. However, financial management proved more challenging as the project
           experienced delays in the flow of funds due to administrative processes involving transferring the
           funds from the national to the county level.
          Risk assessment. The overall risk to achieving the PDO was rated Substantial. Four main risk
           areas were identified at appraisal: political and governance, institutional capacity for
           implementation and sustainability, fiduciary, and environmental and social. While the risk
           analysis envisioned the challenges related to county government’s capacity, mitigation measures
           were not enough to mobilize county governments at the beginning of the project. This was
           resolved during implementation through implementing an incentive mechanism adopted from a
           previous Bank experience in India (ICR, paragraph 81).
          M&E arrangements. M&E featured a complex three tier implementation framework with a web-
           based M&E and MIS system to monitor activities, processes, inputs, and outputs to track
           achievements against targets.



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. The project
  design featured a clear and focused PDO, and CDD approach. Poverty, gender, and social development
  aspects were adequate. Environmental aspects were adequate, but fiduciary experienced
  challenges. M&E design featured a complex three tier implementation framework. The RF
  reflected adequate indicators to assess the PDO and track project activities. Overall, Quality at Entry is
  rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project was implemented under challenging conditions due to COVID-19 restrictions and
        a locust infestation. The Bank conducted 15 implementation support missions. The Bank missions
        benefited from sufficient resources and adequate expertise to assess the progress and provide
        technical assistance. The whole team was based in Nairobi, which according to the ICR (paragraph
        83) "facilitated an agile and timely implementation support to the client."
       Implementation also benefited from mobilizing CDD consultants with knowledge in similar CDD
        projects in India. The Bank also leveraged the capacity of the private sector to provide core
        trainings and implementation support when needed.
       The World Bank team worked with the national and county governments to turn around the project
        implementation after a slow start. The team identified the bottlenecks which needed to be
        addressed including: slow and inadequate disbursement of funds, procurement delays, inadequate
        human resource capacity, weak linkages between components, and slow review and approval of
        micro-projects and sub-projects.
       The project supervision benefited from the digitalization of the implementing and oversight
        structures. This enabled the team to rapidly address any constraints. This was demonstrated
        in supporting counties struggled in disbursing their funds compared to others (ICR, paragraph 84).

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank team engaged at all levels of
 implementation, which allowed the project to achieve most of its targets. The Bank's Task Team engaged
 different levels of government and addressed early shortcomings. The team also managed to mobilize buy-
 in at all levels of the program, community, county and national, where according to the ICR (paragraph 85)
 some key project approaches and infrastructure were now "anchored into the government strategy."
 However, the Bank team should have used the restructurings to adequately address M&E shortcomings.
 Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is
 rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
          time of appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
          project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and PDO outcomes in plausible causal chains.
          This Review reconstructed a ToC narrative for the each objective based on the detailed project
          description in the PAD (Annex 2) in combination with the ToC reported in the ICR.
         The PDO was composed of three objectives (see Section 2), which was assessed based on the
          following three PDO outcome indicators: 1. Direct project beneficiaries (number, and share of
          females): this was non-specific indicator to assess the scale of the reach of the project and its level
          of inclusivity; 2. Productivity Indicator: increase in productivity of selected agricultural commodities
          supported by the project (percent); and 3. Resilience Indicator: targeted beneficiaries (organized in
          CIGs/VMGs) who have adopted at least one of the technologies, innovations and management
          practices (TIMPs) promoted by the project (number), share of which female (percent). The
          resilience indicator served as a proxy for the second objective. It was dependent on the assumption
          that the adoption of TIMPs increases resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder
          farming and pastoral communities in Kenya.
         The stated outcome indicators were relevant, measurable and had reasonable targets. Assessing
          resilience was further informed by other intermediate results indicators (IRIs) including: Productive
          assets brought under TIMPs as a result of the project (head of livestock and total land area);
          farmers participating in on-farm TIMP trials, share of which female; TIMPs tested through on-farm
          trials, share of which validated; increased production of climate-smart agriculture inputs by seed
          and breed stock producers supported by the project; users receiving integrated agro-weather
          information and market information services, share of which female; and the number of Counties
          that were covered through either surveillance or control operations against the locust attack (this IRI
          also measured the third objective).
         The Results Framework (RF) included 14 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress
          of the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
          connected to the project activities.
         The RF adequately covered the first objective. The M&E design could have benefited from
          exploring other proxy measures for resilience to further strengthen the causality between project
          activities and increasing resilience. While an increase in productivity indicated increased
          resilience, a more multidimensional approach to resilience building could have helped strengthen
          the monitoring/assessment of resilience.
         Overall, M&E design was adequate to assess the PDO and track the project activities.




b. M&E Implementation


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



        A monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and management information system (MIS) was set up at the
         national and county levels. The institutional arrangements for M&E involved: the national
         level, county level, and community level.
        While the project implementation started in 2017, baselines were undertaken only in 2019. This
         reduced the amount of independent quantitative data available and reduced the effective period
         for evaluating impact (ICR, paragraph 61).
        The agro-observatory was evaluated based on the number of farmers reached using the number
         of text messages sent. Also, there was a risk of double counting of beneficiaries, but the ICR
         (paragraph 61) reported that this was corrected.
        Overall M&E implementation documented results throughout the project, with regular tracking of
         the MIS. Also a series of analytical reports using both qualitative and quantitative methodologies
         were produced to assess the performance of the project.



c. M&E Utilization
       Two reports from independent third parties were produced to analyze the impact of the project
         using both qualitative and quantitative analysis. These reports used data from the MIS, but also
         collected their own data, to enable the comparison with other wards/countries which did not
         benefit from the program. This allowed the use of propensity score and difference- in-difference
         methodologies to verify the difference made by KCSAP in the beneficiary counties and wards
         compared to areas which did not benefit from the project, allowing to assess the veracity of the
         program’s impact.
        The regular tracking of the results indicators was the basis for the incentive mechanism (county
         ranking) put in place during the project, with a scoring and reward mechanism enabling to
         compare the performance of counties and CIGs/VMGs.
        The grievance mechanism registered a total of 1057 grievances, of which 15 were escalated at
         Community Driven Development Committee, County Project Coordination Unit and the National
         Project Coordination Unit. In November 2023, 2 grievances were yet to be resolved (ICR,
         paragraph 62).

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design featured a complex three tier implementation
  framework. The RF reflected adequate indicators to in assess the PDO and track project activities. M&E
  implementation adequately documented results throughout the project. M&E utilization was mostly
  evident in using M&E data to incentivize and assess performance across counties. Overall, M&E Quality
  is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                  Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



          Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as environmental category B
           - Partial Assessment, given that no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts
           were anticipated. Three environmental and two social safeguards were triggered: Environmental
           Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Pest Management (OP 4.09);
           Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12); and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The GoK prepared an
           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework
           (RPF) and the Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework (VMGF). The ESMF, RPF, and
           VMGF were publicly disclosed in country on the MoALF Website on November 11, 2016 and at the
           World Bank InfoShop in Washington DC on November 14, 2016.
          Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 78)
           "KCSAP investments demonstrated environmental and social compliance to both agreed national
           regulatory laws and World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM benefited from the World Bank provided financial
           management support. This enhanced the capacity of the project accountants on bank financial
           management systems and reporting requirements. Overall, the project’s financial management was
           implemented satisfactorily except for some delays that resulted from administrative processes
           transferring the funds from the national to the county level (ICR, paragraph 23). At completion, FM
           performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory.
          Procurement. Procurement activities benefited from the World Bank provided procurement
           support. This included training procurement officers on Systematic Tracking of Exchange in
           Procurement (STEP) and other guidelines regarding the Bank and Government of Kenya
           procurement guidelines. At completion, procurement performance was rated Moderately
           Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included six lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Creating successful connections between the community and national levels is a critical
element of project design to ensure its success and longer-term impact. An important feature
of the KCSAP design was the combination of the community level component (component 1) and
the components serving the development of a national level ecosystem (component 2 and 3). This
approach not only allowed for an effective diffusion of nationally generated knowledge though local
level networks, but also to reach beneficiaries beyond the selected ward and counties and the
national strategy overall. It also created some foundational infrastructure at the national level which
now feature in the continuing National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project and the Food
Systems Resilience Program and which enable a more rapid scale up of the activities already
initiated under KCSAP. This includes the big data platform and the farmer registry.

2. An M&E design with a comprehensive set of indicators is key to better assess the
multidimensionality of resilience building and increase understanding of impact
pathways. While the M&E was based on large number of intermediate indicators which enabled the
tracking of the progress of the implementation of the project, more attention could have been given
to resilience indicators. The PDO outcome indicators rely on some core assumptions regarding the
impact of adoption of TIMPs on resilience. It would have been useful to more thoroughly articulate
the causality between the adoption of TIMPs and increase in resilience, and to explore if other proxy
measures for resilience could usefully have been adopted. While an increase in productivity is one
indicator of increased resilience, the project could have identified others to include so that there
could be a more multidimensional approach to resilience building to help strengthen the
monitoring/assessment of resilience.

3. A flexible and adaptable project design allows an adequate response in a changing
implementation environment and increases the efficacy of implementation. The experience of
KCSAP demonstrated that some small changes in the way the project was implemented allowed it to
vastly increase its reach and disbursement efficiency. Increasing the project reach benefited from
the training of lead farmers, which was a key feature adopted during project implementation. Also, to
address disbursement constraints in the context of the multiple layers created by the devolved
nature of the government, the World Bank team created a flow of fund framework. This approach is
applied in other World Bank projects not only in agriculture but also in other sectors. Similar
approaches could also be relevant in other countries with devolved governments.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE-Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was adequate to assess the project
         outcomes.
        Results Orientation. The ICR included a limited discussion (in the main text) on the achievement of the
         PDO as the discussion solely focused on the PDO outcome indicators. While more information was
         provided in the Annex section, it would have been useful to reflect a balanced discussion in the main
         text of the ICR.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes was adequate.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a concise coverage of project activities to the extent possible,
         and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the ToC lacked the critical assumptions that
         underpinned the achievement of the PDO.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included a limited assessment of the achievement of
the PDO in the main text as details were reported in the Annex. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant.
Most sections were concise and reflected relevant evidence. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial
with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 24
