     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



                                                                             Report Number: ICRR0024151

1. Project Data



 Project ID                             Project Name
 P093775                                INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL

 Country                                Practice Area(Lead)
 Romania                                Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-48730,IBRD-85970                  31-Dec-2013                                        118,839,696.89

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Oct-2007                            31-Dec-2023

                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       68,100,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                       118,228,014.55                                               0.00

 Actual                                   113,372,814.84                                               0.00




 Prepared by             Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl          Chikako Miwa                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P099528_TBL
 Project ID                             Project Name
 P099528                                INT. NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (GEF) ( P099528 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-58040                               31-Dec-2013                                            5466882.05

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Oct-2007                            31-May-2017

                                                                                              Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                     5,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                     5,466,882.05

 Actual                                                   0.00                                     5,466,882.05




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 11) the objective of the project was "to support the
   Government of Romania to meet the EU Nitrates Directive requirements by (a) reducing nutrient discharges to
   water bodies, (b) promoting behavioral change at the communal level, and (c) strengthening institutional and
   regulatory capacity”. According to the Financing Agreement of December 28, 2007 (p. 4) the objective of the
   project was “to reduce nutrient discharges into water bodies and to promote behavior change through
   strengthened institutional and regulatory capacity and demonstrated commune-based actions and, hence,
   support the Government of Romania to meet the EU requirements in the field of water protection”.

   When the project received Additional Financing (AF) in 2016 the objective was modified as stated in the
   Financing Agreement of April 14, 2016, “to support the Government of Romania towards meeting EU Nitrate
   Directive requirements at national scale”.

   This validation will use the objective as stated in the Financing Agreement of 2016 but will use three different
   areas (a) reducing nutrient discharges to water bodies, (b) promoting behavioral change at the communal
   level, and (c) strengthening institutional and regulatory capacity as stated in the original PAD objective to
   assess the achievement of the objective. Furthermore, this validation will not conduct a split rating since the
   essence of the objective was not changed and the revised PDO improved its outcome focus and reflected the
   increased scope and broader geographic coverage of the project



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Mar-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




d. Components
  The project included four components:

  Component 1: Investments in Local Communities for Reducing Nutrient Pollution (appraisal
  estimate US$57.8 million, AF US$36.1 million, actual US$88.0 million): This component was to finance
  a menu of investments focusing on the Nitrate Vulnerable Zone’s (NVZ’s) designated 91 communes in ten
  river basins. The menu of eligible investments from which communes were intended to prepare sub-project
  investments programs included the following activities: 1.1) communal storage and handling systems to
  promote better management of livestock and household waste; 1.2) planting of buffer strips and pastures’
  rehabilitation to protect against nutrient discharges; 1.3) water and sanitation activities to rehabilitate or
  extend small-scale sewage collection and treatment at two to three sites; 1.4) promotion of the Code of
  Good Agriculture Practices to encourage farmers to adopt good nutrient management practices; 1.5)
  feasibility studies for improving water and wastewater services.

  When the project received AF in 2016, the component was modified and activity 1.4) was moved under
  component 2.

  Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate US$7.4 million,
  AF US$6.6 million, actual US$13.0 million): This component was to build capacity within the Ministry of
  Environment and Sustainable Development (MESD) and their National Administration for Romanian Waters
  (ANAR), as well as other national, regional, and county agencies involved in implementing the Nitrates
  Directive (Le., Public Health, Agriculture, etc.). Specifically, the component was to finance the following
  activities: i) technical assistance to ensure that legislation was fully in line with EU regulations; ii) capacity
  building for ANAR, the designated lead for inter-agency working groups at the river basin and county levels
  for the Nitrates Directive, including coordinating efforts of the different agencies, and reporting to the
  European Union (EU) through MESD on progress; iii) training program for relevant national, regional, and
  county level agencies that are member of the Nitrates Working Groups focused on M&E and EU reporting
  requirements.

  When the project received AF in 2016, the overall scope of the component remained the same with a focus
  on capacity building and providing knowledge and training to farmers through facilitator and on-farm
  demonstrations with the support of farmer organizations.

  Component 3: Public Awareness and Information Support (appraisal estimate US$3.1 million, AF
  US$4.42 million, actual US$7.27 million): This component was to finance a broad public information
  campaign of the project’s activities and benefits at the local, river basin, national and regional levels to
  achieve replication of project interventions in other similar areas within Romania (NVZ-designated
  communes in non-focus counties) as well as other Black Sea riparian countries and EU candidate countries.

  When the project received AF in 2016, the component promoted replication of activities in other counties as
  well as in other Black Sea riparian countries and EU candidate countries.

  Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$5.3 million, AF US$5.27 million, actual
  US$10.57 million): This component was to finance the Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Ministry
  of Environment and Sustainable Development (MESD). The Water Basin Authority in each of the ten river




                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



  basins was to provide one or two dedicated staff for supervising and coordinating the implementation of
  project activities at the commune level.

  When the project received AF in 2016, the financing was increased to reflect the related increase in scope
  of activities under this component.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$73.6 million. The actual cost was US$118.8 million
  (including AF).

  Financing: The project was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$68.1 million (of which US$60.3
  million disbursed), an IBRD loan in the amount of US$52.4 million (of which US$53.0 million disbursed), and
  a Trust Fund (TF-58040) in the amount of US$5.5 million (of which US$5.4 million disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: According to the PAD (p. 1-2) the National Administrator for Romanian Waters
  (ANAR) was to contribute US$1.1 million, local communities were to contribute US$4.7 million, and local
  governments were to contribute US$1.6 million.

  Dates: The project was restructured eight times:

        On July 13, 2012, the project was restructured (level 2) to: i) expand the number of villages receiving
           wastewater investments, reduce the number of communal waste platforms being constructed, and
           cancel feasibility studies; ii) revise the Results Framework to reflect these changes; iii) reallocate
           financing between components in accordance with the modification of activities.
          On August 5, 2013, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the closing date by 23 months to
           November 30, 2015, to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to a
           substantially reduced budget allocation by the government due to budget scarcity.
          On September 8, 2015, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the project’s closing date by
           18 months to May 31, 2017, to prepare the scale up of project activities related to the upcoming
           Additional Financing (AF).
          On March 28, 2016, the project was restructured (level 1) to receive AF in the amount of US$52.4
           million to increase the geographic scope of the project; ii) revise the PDO to “support the
           Government of Romania towards meeting EU Nitrate Directive requirements at a national scale”;
           and iii) revise the Results Framework to reflect this increase.
          On November 3, 2016, the project was restructured (level 2) to reallocate funds between
           disbursement categories.
          On October 15, 2019, the project was restructured (level 2) to the project was restructured (level 2)
           to add a new safeguard policy OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) that was triggered.
          On October 22, 2021, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the closing date by 15 months
           to June 30, 2023, to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to the
           COVID-19 pandemic.
          On March 20, 2023, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the closing date by six months to
           December 31, 2023, to ensure that the loan was fully disbursed and allow for a smooth transition to
           the project’s follow-on operation.


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



   The project was approved on October 30, 2007, and only became effective on December 8, 2008, due to
   government changes and the implementation of a new policy on salaries which resulted in the departure of
   most Project Management Unit (PMU) staff. In January 2016, an interim ICR was authored before the AF
   was approved in March 2016.

   In total, the project was extended by 62 months resulting in an overall implementation period of 16 years
   and two months. The original closing date was December 31, 2013, and the actual closing date was
   December 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country/region and sector context. Over the past decades, the Black Sea experienced severe
environmental damage due to eutrophication, resulting from increased nutrient runoff from agriculture,
coastal erosion, insufficiently treated sewage, and inadequate resource management which resulted in
long-term ecological deterioration. Romania had the largest land drainage area of the 13 countries
comprising the Danube Basin (29 percent) and the largest population share (27 percent). The
country’s location at the bottom of the Basin presented special challenges in terms of managing waterways
with pollutant waste loads from upstream countries. Also, it meant that Romania’s land-based actions,
particularly for nutrient management, had the most direct effects on the Black Sea. Therefore, actions
taken in Romania to stem nutrient pollution flow into the Danube and the Black Sea were critically important
and were to result in benefits to other riparian states.

According to the PAD (para. 4), historically, rural water supply and sanitation were low priorities for the
government. In 2007, at the time of project appraisal, water and wastewater service
provision in Romania was low compared with other European countries. Of the 10 million people
living in rural areas, approximately 33 percent had access to a piped water system. It was presumed that
even fewer than 33 percent of rural population benefited from such service, as many systems did not
function properly due to poor maintenance and/or lack of funds. Approximately half the rural
population was served by public or private wells and the remaining 17 percent were served by public
standpipes with varying travel distances to obtain potable drinking water. Many water systems did not
comply with the European Commission Drinking Water Directive.

The combination of underdeveloped sanitation, poor livestock management, and a large number of small
farms resulted in significant nitrate and microbial contamination of shallow groundwater, which was the
main source of potable water in rural areas.

Alignment with the Government strategy. According to the PAD (para. 6), Romania had progressively
started to invest in improved environment infrastructure with the support of European Union (EU) pre-
accession funds. The government put in place strategies that supported solid waste service regionalization
at the county level with transfer stations eventually extending out to reach the rural areas recognized as
most significant to achieving targets for lowering organic content in the national waste stream. Also, the
government strategy for water and sewerage provision emphasized regionalization as a priority to improve
cost effectiveness and service quality.


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



               However, environment investments require extensive capacity for inter-governmental coordination. The
               Romania Water Authority through its River Basins (Romania is divided into 11 separate river basins and
               watershed areas) was the designated leader to coordinate the Nitrates Directive implementation and
               reporting at both the River Basin and County levels through inter-agency working groups. In order to
               support rural areas to comply with the EU Nitrate Directive requirements, Romania needed further
               investments as well as strengthen its policies, regulations, administrative structures, services and
               competencies at the national, regional and local levels in the country.

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY19-23) for Romania and its overarching goal of improving
               public service delivery by strengthening national and local institutional and regulatory capacity and its three
               focus areas. Focus area 1 “ensure equal opportunities for all” (by improving knowledge transfer and
               preventing and reducing rural pollution by which the poor are particularly affected) and focus area 3
               “building resilience to shocks” (by supporting farmers to improve farming and nutrient management
               practices and positively impacting climate change mitigation and adoption). Furthermore, the objective of
               the project was in line with the CPF (FY24-28), which is currently being prepared. The new CPF aims to
               “improve human capital outcomes, enhanced environment for more and better jobs, increase resilience and
               accelerate the green transition while enhancing institutions to serve all people and businesses as a cross-
               cutting theme.”

               The objective addressed a critical development problem and was pitched at the appropriate level.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the Government of Romania towards meeting EU Nitrate Directive requirements at national scale.

                             Rationale
                             a) Reducing nutrient discharges to water bodies.

                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that inputs/activities such as developing communal
                             manure storage and handling systems, planting plantation of buffer strips and rehabilitating pastures, as well
                             as promoting the code of good agricultural practices and conducting feasibility studies for improving water
                             and wastewater services were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include platforms for
                             improved management of livestock and household waste being completed, vegetative buffer strips and water
                             bodies being protected, and studies to leverage EU investment funds being completed. These outputs were
                             to result in the outcome of nutrient discharge into water bodies being reduced.


                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      The percentage of cropped area in the project communes under relevant nutrient reduction measures
       increased from 9 percent in 2009 to 75.8 percent in 2023, exceeding the original target of 30 percent
       and the revised target of 60 percent.
      174 platforms for animal waste management and storage were completed, exceeding the original
       target of 86 platforms and the revised target of 150 platforms.
      86.23 percent of households, in targeted villages receiving sewage investments, had access and were
       connected to sewage systems, exceeding the original target of 30 percent and the revised target of 60
       percent.
      The number of ground water quality monitoring sites and sample analysis for the Nitrate Directive
       increased from a density of 7.50 groundwater stations per 1,000 km2 in 2015 to 8.12 groundwater
       stations per 1,000 km2 in 2023, achieving the target of 8 ground water stations per 1,000 km2.

Outcomes:

      70.1 percent of targeted project areas showed 10 percent reduction in nitrates discharge to water
       bodies, not achieving the original target of 80 percent of the targeted project areas but achieving the
       revised target of 70 percent of targeted project areas. When the project received AF in 2016, the
       target was revised to reflect the change of geographic scale, moving from just Nitrate Vulnerable
       Zones (NVZs) to the whole country.
      In 2022, the nutrient load reduction achieved under the project was 698.68 tons per year, exceeding
       the original target of 300 tons per year and the revised target of 600 tons per year.
      The European Commission’s Report to the Council and the European Parliament on the
       implementation of the Council Directive 91/676/EEF concerning the protection of waters against
       pollution caused by nitrates from agricultural sources based on Member States reports was disclosed
       in 2020 (for the period 2016-2019) and stated the achievements of the project through investments as
       well as awareness, education, training and support provided to farmers. While it seems that the EU
       assessment was favorable, it is not clear if progress towards meeting the EU Nitrates Directive was
       acknowledged and how “progress” was defined. The ICR (para. 48) stated that there are still specific
       hotspots with pollution level exceeding the quality of standard of 50mg/I (underground water) through
       GD no. 53/2009. However, the percentage of monitoring points above the threshold decreased
       substantially throughout the project’s implementation period (from 25.21 percent in 2009 to 11.43
       percent in 2022 across the same areas with historically intensive agricultural practices). Overall,
       progress was acknowledged through EU comments on the 2020 report, therefore, the target of a
       favorable EU assessment of Romania’s progress towards meeting the EU Nitrates Directive, was
       achieved.

b) Promoting behavioral change at the communal level.

Theory of Change: The theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as developing a public
awareness and replication strategy were to result in a broad public information campaign being conducted
and project interventions were to be replicated in other counties and riparian states. These outputs were to
result in behavioral change at the communal level being promoted. The theory of change had a logical gap


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



and assumed that promoting the code of good agricultural practices was to result in farmers being willing to
apply the code.

Outputs:

      6,504 farmers were trained by knowledge and training providers on Code of Good Agricultural
         Practices for three days, exceeding the target of 6,000 farmers. Of those farmers, 2,827 farmers were
         female, not achieving the target of 3,000 farmers. Also, out of the total number of farmers, 253
         farmers received a fourth day of training on nitrogen pollution.
        The percentage of farmers penalized by APIA for non-compliance with the Nitrate Directive decreased
         from 50 percent in 2015 to 14.47 percent in 2023, thereby overachieving the target of 25 percent.
        48,300 land users adopted sustainable land management practices as a result of the project,
         exceeding the target of 30,000 land users.
        202 project communes implemented at least one of the following nutrient reduction measures:
         communal platforms, pasture rehabilitation, or tree planting, exceeding the original target of 68 project
         communes and achieving the revised target of 200 project communes.
        43,756 hectares of land area adopted sustainable land management practices as a result of the
         project, exceeding the original target of 18,000 hectares and the revised target of 38,000 hectares.
        250 meetings /pubic consultations/workshops (at regional level as communal level) were organized,
         exceeding the target of 100 meetings/ public consultations/ workshops. In addition, over 369
         discussion groups took place, supported by about 243 champion farmers, and 76 communal platforms
         hosted demonstrations of good practices for using manure for fertilizing land

Outcomes:

      The percentage of population in the project area adopting preventive and remedial measures to
         reduce nutrient discharge increased from 3 percent in 2009 to 76.5 percent in 2023, exceeding the
         original target of 50 percent and the revised target of 75 percent.

c) Strengthening institutional and regulatory capacity.

Theory of Change: The theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as institutional
strengthening and capacity building at MESD, ANAR, and relevant national, regional and county level
agencies members of the Nitrate Working Group were to result in outputs such as legislation being in line with
EU Nitrates Directive regulations and selected measures under Water Framework Directives as well as
members of the inter-agency Nitrates Working Group being trained and the NWG being operational. These
outputs were to result in the outcome of institutional and regulatory capacity being strengthened.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      Working Groups at Water Basin and County levels were functioning effectively to support EU reporting
         and coordinate other agencies' actions, achieving the target of doings. However, the project would
         have benefitted from defining “effectively” to allow for a proper assessment of achievement of the
         output.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




                                  709 technical staff (ANAR, EA, Health Directorates) were trained in water quality monitoring, achieving
                                   the target of 700 staff.
                                  All questions, comments or complaints relevant to the project that were received and addressed within
                                   30 days, achieving the target of 100 percent of questions comments or complaints being addressed.
                                  Three surveys (baseline, mid-term and final survey) were conducted to collect feedback of about
                                   3,750 households across 100 communes in the project area and report back the results to the
                                   communities, achieving the target of three surveys.

                            Outcomes:

                                  Inter-governmental coordination and capacity to assess, monitor and report on progress with
                                    implementation of the EU Nitrates Directive improved. According to the ICR (p. 40), the Inter-
                                    Ministerial Committee (IC) was functional throughout implementation and conducted regular meetings.
                                    During these meetings, the PMU actively participated in technical discussions and played an important
                                    role in developing the updated version of the Code of Good Agricultural Practices. However, this is an
                                    inadequate indicator to measure the achievement of this objective since it was not defined how
                                    “improved” would be measured. Also, the ICR did not provide sufficient evidence to allow for an
                                    assessment.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to contribute to several key achievements such as in nutrient load reduction, increase
                            the percentage of population in the project area adopting preventive and remedial measures to reduce
                            nutrient discharge. Also, while progress was acknowledged through EU comments on the 2020 report and the
                            target of a favorable EU assessment of Romania’s progress towards meeting the EU Nitrates Directive was
                            achieved, the PDO indicator could have been more specific with respect to the favorable assessment.

                            The overall efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                            Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (para. 64) conducted a cost-effectiveness analysis since it was not possible to quantify the project
benefits. The analysis focused on determining reductions of nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorous) leakage into
the environment that was achieved as a result of improved manure management and other agricultural
practices, including afforestation, nutrient and grazing management, crop rotations, vegetation strips, etc. Cost
effectiveness (CE) ratios were then calculated, as the ratio of total monetary cost of reduced leakages, over the
total amount of nutrient reductions achieved. The costs taken into account included capital investment costs,
maintenance and operation costs, and project management costs.

The estimated CE ratios/kg for Livestock and Household Waste Management and Afforestation varied between
US$10/kg and US$40/kg. The analysis compared these ratios with those achieved in the Chesapeake Basin of
the USA and with similar unit costs achieved in EU countries and concluded that investments were cost-
effective.

For water and sanitation interventions, the cost effectiveness considered investment costs per capita. As such, it
was expected that communes with at least 4,000 people were likely to be cost effective, as per capita costs in
smaller communes were to be excessively high, and affordability and willingness of the consumers to meet the
operational and maintenance costs unlikely.

In 2016, when the project received AF, a benefit-cost analysis was conducted, which compiled data and
information from the technical literature related to the economic impacts of nutrient pollution. Reduction of the
nutrient pollution resulted in corresponding benefits that were quantified in the analysis. The analysis included
the project portfolio of 80 manure management platforms and 20 composting, packing/ pellets stations, 20 sets
of animal waste collection equipment, and 4 sewage plants. Applying a discount rate of 5 percent, the Net
Present Value (NPV) was calculated at US$72 million, and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) at 22 percent. This
analysis indicated that the project was a worthwhile investment.

At project closure, no updated benefit-cost analysis was conducted. A cost-effectiveness analysis showed that
the expected cost per kg of nutrient discharge ranged from US$6-12 for a single platform and US$20-39 against
the total cost of all physical investments financed by component 1, which was lower than the estimated US$10
to US$40/kg at appraisal.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced several implementation delays. First, the original loan and the AF took over a year to
become effective. In 2007/2008, the delay was a result of changes in the government and the implementation of
a new salary policy, which resulted in 90 percent of PMU staff leaving. In 2016, the delay was related to the
lengthy period for ratification and the summer recess of the parliament, as well as preparation and campaigning
for the general elections. According to the ICR (para. 79), the project also experienced delays due to long and
cumbersome internal approval procedures, austerity measures, slow permit approvals, and changes in permit
requirements throughout the implementation period. In total, the project’s closing date for the original loan and
AF was extended by 62 months.

Given the lack of a traditional economic analysis at appraisal and closing and the significant implementation
delays, the overall efficiency of the project is rated Modest.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the World Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework. Efficacy was Substantial with moderate shortcomings and Efficiency was Modest. The overall
outcome rating is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk to the project’s development outcome is related to technical capacity. According to the ICR
(para. 100) there is a risk of insufficient capacity to ensure the continued use of the manure platforms on the
commune level since there is no formal enforcement and no entity in place which is being held accountable.
There will be a need for continued monitoring and reporting of the operational use of the platforms against
performance indicators.

Furthermore, it will be critical to sustain and cultivate the adoption of good agricultural practices on the farm
level, especially since the project experienced resistance to adopting new agricultural management
practices. Therefore, it will be critical to continue to conduct outreach activities through knowledge
management networks (e.g., farmers' organizations) to raise awareness of the importance of adopting good
agricultural practices.

This risk will be addressed through the World Bank’s follow-on preparation (Romania Rural Pollution
Prevention and Reduction Project (RAPID), P179786, US$63 million) which was approved in March 2023
and aims to strengthen the institutional capacity of selected public entities to monitor pollution from

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



agriculture, and to transfer knowledge on agricultural pollution reduction. Also, Romania’s National Recovery
and Resilience Plan (financed by the EU) aims to double the number of community-managed manure
platforms in the country.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 73), the project design was built on analytical work, a preliminary pilot phase,
  as well as lessons learned from a previous World Bank project (Agricultural Pollution Control Project
  (APCP) that had been implemented in Romania. The lessons learned included: i) importance of engaging
  local stakeholders to observe tangible results from mitigation measures to reduce nutrient discharge to
  ensure adoption and sustainability; ii) importance of raising awareness and disseminating information to
  the widespread adoption of new technologies and practices; and iii) importance of customizing project
  activities to local context to achieve sustainable outcomes. According to the ICR (para. 74), early and
  continuous engagement with local administrations and communities during project preparation and
  implementation was key for ensuring ownership.

  According to the PAD (p. 19), the World Bank team identified relevant risks and rated the following as
  Substantial: i) widespread corruption; ii) project pre-financing by the Borrower not being ensured
  appropriately; and iii) elderly, who comprised a large part of the rural population unwilling or unable to
  change former practices. Mitigation measures included a tighter internal control framework, borrower
  ensuring pre-financing in the legal covenant of the project, and including the elderly in all public
  participation activities. The mitigation efforts were adequate. However, the World Bank team did not
  identify several risks including: i) ongoing reforms in agriculture advisory services; ii) delays in project
  effectiveness; iii) weak implementation capacity due to high government staff turnover; iv) lack of farmer
  participation on communal waste management and unwillingness to adopt the Code of Agricultural
  Practices; and v) complex and lengthy permit approval processes. All these challenges resulted in
  significant implementation delays.

  The project’s Results Framework had some shortcomings such as some indicators not being sufficiently
  defined (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the World Bank team (August 7, 2024), the World Bank team conducted a total of 32
 supervision missions.

 The World Bank team restructured the project eight times to address capacity constraints and accelerate
 slow disbursement during the initial phase of project implementation. Also, the World Bank team received

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



 AF to increase the scope of the project. According to the ICR (Annex 4, para. 6), the decision was made to
 proceed with an AF restructuring rather than prepare a new project as the development outcome was
 identical and implementation built on the previous project. Also, this allowed for the PMU to stay in place
 and continue and develop its technical skills and managerial capacity.According to the ICR (para. 81), the
 World Bank team provided candid reporting to management. However, while the indicators included in the
 Results Framework were updated following the mid-term review held in March 2011, these modifications
 were not reflected in the 2012 restructuring paper.

 Also, the World Bank team developed regular action plans to address implementation bottlenecks and
 provided training to PMU staff in different areas such as financing, accounting, procurement, monitoring
 and evaluation and safeguards.

 Overall, the Bank performance at Supervision is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Both the original and revised objectives were clearly specified. The theory of change and how key activities
 were to result in the intended outcome were sound and reflected in the Results Framework. Most of the
 selected indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable, achievable, relevant and timebound. However,
 the definitions of PDO indicator 3 (Improved inter-governmental coordination and capacity to assess,
 monitor and report on progress with implementation of the EU Nitrates Directive) and PDO indicator 4
 (Favorable EU assessment of Romania’s progress towards meeting EU Nitrates Directive) as well as
 intermediate outcome indicator 4 (Water groups at Water Basin and County levels functioning effectively
 and all staff working on the Nitrates Directive fully operational) were not specific making the assessment of
 the targets challenging.

 According to the ICR (para. 86), when the project received AF in 2016, new PDO indicators were added to
 the Results Framework and several modifications were made to better link project activities to outputs and
 outcomes.

 However, the Results Framework included two PDO indicators (“downward trend of nitrates concentration
 in waters” and “nutrient load reduction (Nitrogen (N)) achieved under the project”) whose achievements
 cannot solely be attributed to the project’s activities.

 The PMU was responsible for the project’s M&E activities, which had gained experience from implementing
 a previous World Bank project.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 87), the project’s M&E system was based on survey and administrative data
  sources. Also, data was also collected from ANAR to analyze water quality and estimate nutrient
  concentrations in water bodies. Beneficiary related data were collected using baseline, mid-term and end-
  of year project surveys.

  The ICR (para. 88) stated that in 2019, the PMU introduced ex-post monitoring. Activities included on-site
  visits and monitoring. Furthermore, the project conducted a comprehensive final evaluation.

  During project implementation, the Results Framework was modified twice to allow for a better monitoring
  of implementation progress towards achieving the objective.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 90), M&E utilization was slow during the initial phase of project
  implementation. The M&E data showed slow implementation progress. For example, during the
  implementation of individual farm platforms, M&E data found that excessive customization resulted in
  delays of the installation of manure platforms, resulting in a reduced number of beneficiaries being
  reached. The project team addressed this issue by working with the government to shift the focus from
  individual farm level platforms to communal level platforms to accelerate implementation. This resulted
  in a more streamlined approach, prioritizing communal-level platforms to ensure a more efficient and
  effective implementation process.

  Overall, the quality of the M&E is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered, at appraisal, the World Bank’s safeguard policies
   OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways). When the
   project received AF in 2016, OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) was triggered as a result of a new safeguard
   analysis and taking into account the environmental conditions and specific measures included in the permits
   issued by the local environmental protection authorities for each new instrument (ICR para. 92).

   According to the ICR (para. 92), site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) were
   prepared for each sub-project. Also, the PMU distributed and prepared guidelines or the participating
   communes on ESMP structure and content. Furthermore, the PMU and World Bank environmental


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)



  consultant developed ESMP review checklists that were applied to evaluate the quality and completeness of
  site-specific ESMP prepared by local beneficiaries.

  The ICR (para. 92) stated that the project’s compliance with the World Bank’s safeguards was Satisfactory
  throughout implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 94), the project’s financial management was mostly Satisfactory throughout
  implementation. The audit reports had a clean audit opinion and were submitted on a timely basis. Also,
  semi-annual Interim Financial Reports were submitted to the World Bank as per the agreed timeline.
  Furthermore, adequate accounting procedures and systems as well as internal controls were in place
  during implementation. However, the project experienced some Financial Management related
  implementation delays due to changes in the PMU’s financial management function, high staff turnover,
  legislative and operational constraints, as well as insufficient and/or delayed budget allocations to pre-
  finance the planned expenditures. According to the World Bank team (August 7, 2024), these challenges
  were eventually overcome through the government's commitment to provide adequate budget for the
  completion of the project implementation.

  When the project closed, Financial Management was rated Satisfactory.

  Procurement

  According to the ICR (para. 78), until 2016, the project encountered several procurement related delays
  due to long and complex internal approval procedures, changes in government, austerity measures, slow
  permit approvals, as well as changes in permit requirements throughout project implementation. In 2016,
  the requirement to obtain internal procurement approval was removed, improving the project’s
  procurement performance. However, the project experienced an additional delay of six months in preparing
  the communities’ investments when the project received AF. The ICR (para. 93) stated that even though
  procurement encountered several delays during the first half of project implementation, the institutional
  arrangements or procurement were continuously assessed as Satisfactory. Also, the project’s Procurement
  manager kept a fully functional filing system throughout implementation and the procurement documents
  were continuously assessed adequate. Furthermore, necessary measures were taken to ensure project
  compliance with the World Bank procurement rules.

  When the project closed, procurement was rated Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




d. Other
   NA



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               There is no disconnect. The
                                                                               main text of the ICR rates the
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               outcome as Moderately
                                                                               Satisfactory.
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 36-37) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Using standardized templates for investments in manure management or similar
       agricultural practices can ensure adequate quality. In this project, the original project
       used a standard template to control the design and technical specifications of the manure
       platforms. The AF changed the approach to a customized design to fit the needs and
       geography of each individual commune which resulted in poor quality designs and a lot of
       pressure on the PMU to support the communes in the preparation of technical designs,
       procurement documents, and to verify disbursement linked construction.
      Including performance indicators and reporting requirements can stimulate
       beneficiaries to engage strongly in project activities. In this project, beneficiaries and
       communes’ officials, were not sufficiently incentivized to engage with farmers after the
       platforms were built resulting in an underutilization of the platforms. To address this issue,
       the PMU imposed contractual performance indicators on all beneficiaries and established an
       online reporting tool to periodically submit reports to the PMU.
      The combination of raising awareness as well as implementing an incentive system
       can positively impact farmer’s resistance to implement sustainable farming practices.
       This project raised awareness through a Knowledge Transfer Network that allowed for
       building capacity and exchanging information and best practices among farmers and local
       communities. Also, payments to farmers incentivized compliance with sustainable farming
       practices. However, this was not sufficient and more direct involvement by e.g. a Social
       Development Specialist would have been needed to move from awareness to adoption of
       SLM practices at a higher level.




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       INTEG NUTRIENT POLLUTION CONTROL (P093775)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It was also internally
consistent and relatively concise. The lessons learned included were useful for future operations in this area.
The ICR lacked a traditional economic analysis since it was not done at appraisal. The overall quality of the ICR
was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
