     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024090

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P178989                                   Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sudan                                     Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B9071                                 30-Jun-2023                                        100,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Jul-2022                              30-Sep-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00

 Actual                                      100,000,000.00                                  100,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Salim J. Habayeb            Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.1) and the Financing Agreement of July 21, 2022 (p. 6)
   the objective of the project was “to provide cash transfers and food support to food insecure households in
   selected project areas of Sudan”.

   The operation was an emergency intervention designed for a 1-year implementation period from mid-2022 to
   mid-2023. Area targeting was based on the severity of food insecurity and on World Food Program (WFP)
   field presence (PAD, p. 26). The design was informed by existing data of the WFP, including the most recent

                                                                                                Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



   data collected in the first quarter of 2022. WFP was responsible for project implementation and its M&E and
   WFP was the recipient of the grant.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included two components:

   Component 1: Safety Net Transfers (appraisal estimate US$76.40 million, actual US$81.40 million):
   This component was to finance two sub-components:

   Sub-component 1.1: Unconditional Cash Transfers: This sub-component was to finance the following
   activities: i) unconditional cash transfers to the most food insecure people (based on the WFP food
   insecurity assessment findings) covering about two million beneficiaries (50 percent female) and a cash
   transfer amount of US$7 per individual in 12 target states.; ii) fees for payment service providers supporting
   digital cash transfer implementation, mostly two mobile network providers and two banking institutions.

   Sub-component 1.2: Unconditional Food Transfers: This sub-component was to finance in kind food
   transfers to food insecure households in Gadrarif, Red Sea and Blue Nile states. These states were
   selected due to their poorly functioning food markets. The sub-component was also to finance food-transfer
   related costs and targeted 100,000 beneficiaries (50 percent female).

   Component 2: Delivery Systems, Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning, and Project Management
   (appraisal estimate US$23.6 million, actual US$18.6 million): This component was to finance three sub-
   components:

   Sub-component 2.1: Delivery Systems: This sub-component was to finance costs associated with project
   delivery systems including outreach and communication, targeting, enrollment, payments, management
   information system (MIS), M&E, Grievance redress, and social accountability.

   Sub-component 2.2: M&E and Learning: This sub-component was to finance: i) informing the operational
   plan for project rollout; ii) improving efficiency and effectiveness of the project, and iii) undertaking process
   evaluation and beneficiary satisfaction surveys to learn future lessons.

   Sub-component 2.3: Project Management: This sub-component was to finance costs incurred by the
   recipient in implementing the project including WFP staff costs, logistics, vehicles, fuels, and computers.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$100 million which was also the actual cost.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



   Financing: The project was financed by a World Bank grant in the amount of US$100 million, which
   completely disbursed.

   Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Client to make any contribution.

   Dates: The project was approved on July 15, 2022, and became effective on July 21, 2022. The project’s
   original closing date was June 30, 2023, and the actual closing date was September 30, 2023. The project
   was briefly suspended on April 16, 2023, due to the armed conflict.

   On June 29, 2023 the project was restructured to: i) change the closing date from June 30, 2023 to
   September 30, 2023 to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to the
   armed conflict; ii) increase the target for PDO indicator “number of beneficiaries of safety net programs, in-
   kind transfers” from 100,000 beneficiaries to 300,000 beneficiaries (due to more funding being available for
   certain project states since the number of project states had to be reduced due to the security situation);
   and iii) adapt the implementation schedule to reflect these changes.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. After a 30-year rule, the government of President Omar al-Bashir was
deposed in April 2019 and a transitional government came into power. The transition government aimed to
stabilize the pressing macroeconomic and fiscal deficit challenges by developing an ambitious plan to
tackle inflation, reform energy and commodity subsidies, and adopt policies to ease doing business and
incentivize foreign direct investment. These measures resulted in an exchange rate liberalization in
February 2021 and to some extent reallocation of public resources away from commodity subsidies and tax
exemptions toward social and development needs. However, in October 2021, the military took over the
government, and brought the transition to a sudden end and a de facto government, by a new Sovereign
Council with contested legitimacy by the public, and an acting Council of Minsters was in power. As a result,
the World Bank triggered Operational Policy (OP) 7.30 (Dealings with De Facto Governments), which
paused disbursements to the government in all its operations in Sudan and stopped processing new
operations. The military takeover resulted in an economic and security crisis as well as a political deadlock
between stakeholders that continued until April 2023, when an armed conflict broke out.

As a result of the conflict within the country, a poor 2020/2021 harvest together with substantial declines in
national cereal production, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the war in the Ukraine (and a
reduction in global wheat production), Sudan’s socioeconomic situation deteriorated even further. The
increase in food prices had negative food security implications, pushing many households deeper into
poverty. According to the Humanitarian Needs Overview for 2022, 14.3 million people required
humanitarian assistance, which was the highest number in the past decade. Furthermore, according to the
ICR (para. 8) the World Bank High Frequency Survey showed that nearly 40 percent of households were
not able to access essential food items during June to August 2022 and 60percent of households that
experienced price increases for food and non-food items decided to reduce consumption of these items,
which was a notable increase compared to the previous year.



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



               Therefore, through the support of donors under the World Bank administered Sudan Transition and
               Recovery Support Trust Fund (STARS), a grant of US$100 million was provided through the Sudan
               Emergency Safety Nets Project (SESNP) to help address the immediate food security needs of the most
               vulnerable Sudanese population. The World Food Program (WFP) was the direct recipient of the World
               Bank’s grant funding and acted as a third-party implementing agency given its experience in delivering cash
               and food assistance in fragile contexts. The WFP had also been supporting previous social protection
               interventions financed by the World Bank and Developing Partners and had staff on the ground.

               Alignment with the government strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the transition
               government’s “Sudan Economic Revival Program, 2019-2021” (SERP), which was developed before the
               military takeover. The SERP was to undertake reforms in ten priority areas such as improving welfare and
               expanding social protection.

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               Country Engagement Note for Sudan (FY21-FY22) and its objective 1.2. “mitigating the impact of economic
               reforms and Covid-19“, and objective 2.1 “strengthening the government’s institutional capacity and
               accountability”. Furthermore, the objective of the project was in line with the STARS’ focus areas 1 “social
               protection” and the STARS’ overall objective of supporting Sudan’s economic and peacebuilding transition.
               Finally, the objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and
               Violence (FVC) (2020-2025) which emphasizes the importance to remain engaged during conflict and crisis
               situations to preserve hard-won development gains and mitigate the spillovers of FCV to support countries
               and the most vulnerable population.

               The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development problem.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide cash transfers and food support to food insecure households in selected project areas of Sudan

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities, including delivering
                             unconditional cash and food transfers to population with food insecurity, developing and implementing
                             communications strategy and outreach activities, and building local capacity in implementing digital and/or
                             cash payments systems were to result in the following outputs: beneficiaries receiving cash or food support,
                             communication campaigns being implemented as well as digital and/or cash payments systems being in



                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



place. These outputs would plausibly contribute to food insecure households in selected areas in Sudan
being provided with cash transfers and food support.

The project states were selected based on existing food security data indicating that they experienced high
levels of food insecurity as well as on WFP local presence. The most food insecure states included West,
Darfur, Central Darfur, North Darfur and North Kordofan. Those states hosted 67 percent of cash transfer
beneficiaries. The remaining balance was allocated to eight states with a moderate prevalence of
food insecurity including Blue Nile, South Darfur, Red Sea, South Kordofan, East Darfur, Gadarif, West
Kordofan, and Kassala.

Outputs:

Cash transfers:

      On average, it took two days for funds to reach beneficiaries paid by commercial banks, better than
         the target of 15 days.
      99 percent of enrolled beneficiaries were paid by commercial banks, exceeding the target of 20
         percent of enrolled beneficiaries being paid by commercial banks.
      The number of days between generation of payroll and fund transfer to payment service providers was
       reduced from eight days to three days, better than the target of five days.
      Six percent of beneficiaries were enrolled in mobile money, not achieving the target of 10 percent.

Six percent of beneficiaries enrolled in mobile money, not achieving the target of 10 percent.

Food transfers:

      On average it took seven days for food transfers to reach beneficiaries from Cooperating Partner
         Warehouses, better than the target of 15 days.

Delivery system:

      1,377,101 newly registered/verified beneficiaries were enrolled by the WFP using biometric
         registration, not achieving the target of 1.5 million beneficiaries.
        A hybrid system for tracking enquiries, complaints, and grievances (GRM) was established, achieving
         the target of such a system being implemented.
        84 percent of complaints were resolved in 30 days or less through the GRM, exceeding the target of
         80 percent of complaints being resolved in 30 days.
        A Monitoring Evaluation and Learning impact evaluation baseline and follow-up survey was conducted
         which focused on: i) informing the operational plan of project roll-out; ii) improving efficiency and
         effectiveness of the project; and iii) measuring beneficiary satisfaction of the project.
        A report was developed that contained lessons drawn from the project.
        According to the World Bank team (May 30, 2024), communication campaigns, stakeholders’
         consultations, and sensitization sessions were conducted. Over 85 focus group discussions and direct
         dialogues with local authorities and community leaders were held, around 237 sensitization sessions
         (reaching over 140,000 people in over 20 localities) were conducted, and 25,000 information,



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



                                   education, and communication (IEC) materials developed, translated, and distributed in strategic
                                   locations. These outputs did not have a target.

                            Reported outcomes:

                            Cash transfers:

                                  1,984,759 beneficiaries received unconditional cash transfers, exceeding the target of 1.9 million
                                   beneficiaries receiving these transfers.
                                  62 percent of those beneficiaries were female heads of households, exceeding the target of 50
                                   percent.

                            Food transfers:

                                  672,679 beneficiaries received in kind/food support, exceeding the target of 300,000 beneficiaries.
                                   According to the ICR (para. 29) food transfers were provided to beneficiaries in targeted states with
                                   poorly functioning food markets: Blue Nile (50 percent of total beneficiaries), Gadarif (30 percent) and
                                   Red Sea (20 percent). These food insecurity prevalence rates (varying between 28 percent and 47
                                   percent) with poorly functioning food markets.
                                  57 percent of those beneficiaries were female heads of households, exceeding the target of 50
                                   percent.

                            Social safety nets (cash and food transfers):

                                  2,657,438 beneficiaries benefited from social safety net programs, exceeding the target of 2.2 million
                                   beneficiaries.
                                  1,457,642 beneficiaries were female, exceeding the target of 1 million being female.
                                  94 percent of beneficiaries were satisfied with the delivery of cash/food transfers, exceeding the target
                                   of 80 percent.
                                  92.5 percent of female heads of beneficiaries’ households were satisfied with the delivery of cash/food
                                   transfers, exceeding the target of 80 percent.

                            The project was able to achieve and exceed the majority of its targets, reflecting the intended provision of
                            cash transfers and food support to food insecure households in selected project areas of Sudan. It was not
                            able to achieve the target for newly registered/verified beneficiaries being enrolled by the WFP using
                            biometric registration, and the target of beneficiaries enrolled in mobile money. Overall, the achievement of
                            the objective was Substantial with the caveat that the effectiveness of cash transfers and food support is not
                            known.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)




  OVERALL EFFICACY
  Rationale
  The achievement of the objective was Substantial but marginally so achieving and exceeding a majority of its
  targets, reflecting the intended provision of cash transfers and food support to food insecure households in
  selected project areas of Sudan. The project was not able to achieve the target for newly registered/verified
  beneficiaries being enrolled by the WFP using biometric registration, and the target of beneficiaries enrolled in
  mobile money. The extent to which the food support had an impact on household welfare in terms of
  maintaining a minimal acceptable diet and income is also unknown.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

Both the PAD and the ICR did not include traditional measures of efficiency due to data collection constraints
given the country’s highly volatile security situation and the pressing need, during project preparation, to provide
assistance quickly.

Operational efficiency:

According to the ICR (para. 40), the World Bank team negotiated a lower rate for WFP services fees (6.5
percent). The project’s overall administrative costs (10 percent of total financing) were comparable to similar
projects in the region. The project’s implementation period was extended once by three months as a result of the
escalating security situation in Sudan. Furthermore, the project did not experience a high turnover of World Bank
staff with the same co-Task Team Leaders (TTLs) throughout project preparation and implementation, allowing
for continuity.

Given the volatile security situation in the country and since the project was able to achieve its stated objective
within the defined budget, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial in view of the efficient harnessing and use
of WFP capacities and processes.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the World Bank’s most recent Country
Engagement Note for Sudan (FY21-22) and its responsiveness to a significant emergency in the country.
Efficacy and efficiency were Substantial. The overall outcome rating of the project is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political/Financing: Long-term political instability and the ongoing conflict resulted in a worsening
economic, security and social situation with millions of people being at risk of catastrophic hunger. Without
financing from development partners, Sudan, which also experienced five years of recession, will not be able
to maintain the achieved project results. According to the ICR (para. 70), there is a chance that the project
supported systems such as biometric registration, Management Information System, and the Grievance
Redress Mechanism might be used in the future once the conflict has been resolved.

According to the World Bank team (May 30, 2024), the World Bank is currently preparing a follow-on project
(Sudan Emergency Crisis Response Safety Net Project (P505963); financing amount US$100 million) which
aims to provide Emergency Safety Nets support to vulnerable and food insecure populations in selected
areas of Sudan.

Also, a regional communication on 12 September, 2024, highlighted the efforts being undertaken by the
World Bank Team with partners to address the significant challenges facing M&E and supervision in the
fragile context of Sudan. Building on the experience of SESNP, the Task Team is working to hire an expert to
carry out robust supervision for the operation under preparation. The regional communication also noted that
efforts are being made not only to further address important compliance issues and operational processes,
but also to promote learning and assessment aspects through surveys where possible.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



  The World Bank team prepared the project within five weeks to address the food emergency in Sudan.
  According to the ICR (para. 64) the World Bank closely cooperated with the Sudan Transition and
  Recovery Support (STARS) development partners (Canada, the European Union, Finland, France,
  Germany, Ireland, Italy, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, the State and
  Peace-Building Trust Fund of the World Bank, Sweden, and the United Kingdom) and the WFP as the
  third-party implementing agency.

  The project design was kept appropriately simple and only included one component to allow for a rapid
  response. Also, the project design was built on the WFP’s extensive experience in implementing
  emergency food transfer programs within Sudan and other countries around the world.

  According to the PAD (para. 90) the World Bank team identified relevant risks with the political and
  governance risks rated High due to military takeovers, political instability, and civil unrest in the country.
  To mitigate these risks the WFP and its implementing partners were to ensure that the project was
  apolitical in form, content, and practice. Also mitigation measures included conducting communication
  campaigns and education on project eligibility criteria, expected benefits, benefits access mechanisms,
  transparency and accountability and dispute handling mechanisms. In addition, the macroeconomic risk
  was rated High due to the country’s weak economic performance as well as the sector strategies and
  policies risk as a result of an unstable policy environment for social matters. The World Bank mitigated
  these risks by providing continuous policy dialogue. While the mitigation measures were appropriate,
  project implementation was suspended for two weeks in April 2023 due to the armed conflict and the
  death of three WFP employees and four staff of the Blue Nile Mashreg Bank working on the project.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 67) the World Bank team, in cooperation with the WFP, conducted two in-
 country and one virtual support mission throughout the project’s 18 months implementation period. The
 Implementation Support Reports were sufficiently candid and identified key implementation challenges and
 solutions to move implementation ahead. Data in the Results Framework were updated appropriately and
 the World Bank team provided continuous technical assistance to the WFP in key areas including fiduciary,
 safeguards, MIS, beneficiaries verification etc.

 During the armed conflict in April 2023, the World Bank team ensured that it continued project supervision
 despite the evacuation of the World Bank office in Khartoum. The World Bank team restructured the
 implementation period to allow for the completion of project activities and focus on targets states that were
 accessible given the security situation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified and the selected indicators encompassed the elements of
 the PDO statement. They were sufficiently specific, measurable, relevant, and had baselines and targets.
 Overall, the Results Framework was simple and consistent with the FCV environment and limited local
 capacity. However, the project would have benefitted from including better indicators to measure
 implementation efficiency.

 Due to the emergency nature of the project and the lack of data, the Results Framework did not measure
 interim level outcomes of project interventions. The ICR (para. 19-20) stated that this was mainly due to the
 emergency nature and the imperative for swift action during project inception, coupled with the uncertainty
 surrounding feasible ground-level data collection, conveying that it was difficult to gauge from the results
 framework indicators the extent to which the project had an impact on household welfare in terms of
 maintaining a minimal acceptable diet/income over the project period. Feedback gathered from
 beneficiaries highlighted the issue of insufficiency of support and minimal living standards improvement due
 to the low cash transfer value given the rising prices of basic needs, acute food shortages, and massive
 displacement amid escalating conflict. At appraisal the cash transfer amount was set at US$7 per individual
 household member and was expected to provide a half ration of the caloric requirements per day per
 person (that is 1,000 kilocalories).

 The M&E function was implemented by WFP by leveraging their current systems, processes, and staff.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 55) the WFP had an M&E specialist who implemented the M&E plan for
  regular data collection, monitoring and reporting on project activities and indicators. The project
  conducted a beneficiary survey to assess project results. Also, the project used the project’s call center,
  GPS enabled devises, geo-tagging of project sites, and social media platforms to obtain data and real
  time updates on implementation challenges and to monitor non-compliance by service providers. This
  allowed for a fast identification of implementation bottlenecks.

  The project’s M&E system built on the already existing MIS and was able to strengthen it by avoiding
  fragmentation of data collection and allow for consolidation of the system. The WFP verified and
  monitored project activities on a quarterly basis. Also, according to the World Bank team (May 30, 2024)
  the monitoring system entailed frequent data collection from the field, with the use of digital technology
  when possible, collecting and reporting on stories from the field and, establishing grievance redress
  procedures, and through regular visits by the WFP.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 56) M&E data were used to inform project planning and resource distribution
  as well as decision making such as the project restructuring in 2023. The project also collected
  information from beneficiaries which allowed the project team to address payment delays, long lines at
  registration and payment sites, and challenges to access payments by vulnerable beneficiaries.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any of the World Bank’s safeguard policies and overall Safeguard compliance
   was Blank (not rated in the ISRs).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement:

   The project was implemented by the WFP and followed its procurement procedures as Alternative
   Procurement Arrangements allowed by the World Bank’s Procurement Policy under Section
   III.F. According to the ICR (para. 62) the World Bank team assessed the project’s procurement
   arrangements during project appraisal and rated the procurement risk as High due to the country’s security
   situation. The World Bank team and the WFP discussed risk mitigation measures before the start of project
   implementation. Measures included detailed procurement and contract monitoring as part of the quarterly
   progress reporting by the WFP, and continuous World Bank supervision and assistance from the World
   Bank procurement team. The Implementation Status Report (ISR) ratings for Procurement were
   Satisfactory.

   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 22) the WFP maintained appropriate accounting capacity, systems, and
   procedures. Quarterly Interim Financial Reports were submitted on a timely basis and were of adequate
   quality. The World Bank grant was fully disbursed, and the project did not face any significant financial
   management related issues. Minor issues such as documenting expenses were corrected. The ISR ratings
   for Financial Management were Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA


                                                                                                Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Intended project outcomes such
                                                                                 as the effectiveness of cash
Quality of M&E                   High                  Substantial               transfers and targeting of food
                                                                                 support to food insecure
                                                                                 households were not assessed.
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 24-25) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

        Taking advantage of operational flexibilities such as third-party implementation allows
         the World Bank to remain engaged in the FCV contexts and ensure continued support
         to vulnerable populations. In this project, the World Bank stayed engaged in Sudan despite
         operating under OP 7.30, which allowed for providing financing to the most vulnerable
         population in Sudan during particularly challenging times.
        A simple and flexible project design can positively impact project implementation in a
         FCV environment. This project was able to shift its financing from states that were impacted
         by the outbreak of an armed conflict in April 2023 that resulted in vast displacement of
         vulnerable people to other states.
        Providing a platform for coordinated efforts to respond to the urgent needs of a
         country’s vulnerable population while also building a foundation for a more strategic
         approach can facilitate sustainable development.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sudan Emergency Safety Nets Project (P178989)



The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, it was sufficiently
results driven, internally consistent, and concise. Furthermore, the ICR provided useful lessons learned that can
be applied to future World Bank-assisted operations in this area. The overall quality of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
