     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024194

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P172567                                 Honduras Cat DDO

 Country                                 Practice Area (Lead)
 Honduras                                Urban, Resilience and Land



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-65930                               30-Jun-2023                                        119,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Apr-2020                             30-Jun-2023

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                       119,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                        119,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                    119,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Chikako Miwa              Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Development Policy Financing with a Catastrophe
Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) was "to strengthen Honduras’ institutional and financial
framework to manage the risk of adverse natural events including disease outbreaks" (Program
Document (PD), page 3).


                                                                                               Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation consisted of four pillars.

Pillar A: Improving public financial management and fiscal resilience against disaster risk.

Pillar B: Enhancing the institutional framework for improved disaster risk management (DRM).

Pillar C: Strengthening health emergency preparedness and response capacities.

Pillar D: Enhancing water resources governance and climate resilience.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost. The Cat DDO was a single tranche operation in the amount of US$119 million.

Financing. An International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$119 million financed the operation. The
total credit amount was fully disbursed on completion and verification of prior actions.

Dates. The operation was approved by the Bank’s Board on April 10, 2020, and became effective on April 29,
2020. On May 1, 2020, the Government requested the activation of the Cat DDO, based on the State of
Emergency due to the COVID-19 pandemic (Decree PCM-023-2020 dated March 20, 2020, and published in the
Official Gazette on March 21, 2020). The disbursement of the entire amount of the loan was effective on May 6,
2020. The operation closed as scheduled on June 30, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country Context. Honduras was highly vulnerable to climate disasters, with institutional weaknesses
 hindering effective water disaster management due to fragmented responsibilities across agencies. The Dry
 Corridor, where many of the country’s poor resided, frequently experienced drought and flooding, affecting
 agriculture and infrastructure. SINAGER improved in natural disaster response but remained weak in health
 emergency response, as shown by the recurrent epidemics in the past decade of Dengue, Zika, Chikungunya,
 and the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID‐19), as well as low capacity for managing public health risks.
 Honduras was also behind in financial protection against natural disasters, starting only in 2020 to develop a
 Disaster Risk Financing Strategy to improve its fiscal resilience and disaster response. Additionally, Honduras'
 vulnerability to disasters was heightened by chronic institutional weaknesses such as inadequate water
 governance, inefficient water use, and limited access to water resources, leading to environmental
 degradation.

 Relevance to Government Strategies. The PDO was aligned with the country’s objective of enhancing
 resilience to disaster, as articulated in the Government’s National Plan (Plan Nación) 2010‐2022 and Strategic
 Development Plan (Visión de País) 2010‐2038. The policy actions were based on Honduras’s long-term

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



development priorities and aimed at better integrating disaster and climate risk into core elements of public
policies. The operation also provided a dedicated line of contingent financing to enable the Government to
respond quickly to eligible declared disasters, including shocks driven from climate- and health‐related factors.

Relevance to the World Bank’s Assistance Strategies. The PDO was aligned with the call for
“strengthening prevention and disaster risks management” by the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
Update 2022. The PDO was relevant to addressing a main obstacle to inclusive and sustainable growth
identified in the SCD that consisted of a gap in investments for strengthening the resilience of infrastructure
and services through programs aimed at improving risk assessments of public assets and services, enhancing
the resilience standards and norms for public assets (both green and gray infrastructure), and improving their
enforcement (SCD, page 35). The PDO was in line with the CPF FY23-27. The program aimed to support the
CPF’s HLO 2 (Inclusive Economic Development and Job Creation) and HLO 3 (Strengthened Resilience to
Natural Hazards). Specifically, the program supported, CPF Objective 5 (Improved Infrastructure) and CPF
Objective 8 (Strengthened Institutional and Financial Framework for Risk Management).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Pillar A: Improving public financial management and fiscal resilience against disaster risk.

      Prior Action (PA) 1: The Recipient has strengthened the Ministry of Finance’s (SEFIN: Secretaría de
       Finanzas) disaster risk financing capacity by establishing responsibilities and guidelines to improve
       financial resilience associated with climate and disaster risks; as evidenced by the Recipient’s
       Ministerial Agreement No. 195‐2020, dated February 4, 2020 and published in the Official Gazette on
       February 25, 2020.

SEFIN lacked a comprehensive strategy or institutional framework for managing fiscal risks from natural
disasters, leading to a disjointed and makeshift approach to disaster risk financing. While SEFIN took steps to
improve, such as establishing a Fiscal Contingency Unit in 2014 and reforming budget laws for better fiscal risk
management, coordination issues persisted, resulting in inconsistent outcomes (PD, para 45). Additionally, the
National Fund for Preparedness and Response (FONAPRE) lacked dedicated emergency funding and SEFIN's
budget system was not equipped to track disaster risk management (DRM) expenditures, which could delay the
allocation of funds during disasters due to poor intra-institutional coordination (PD, para 46).

PA 1 aimed to support granting legal authorities to SEFIN’s Fiscal Contingency Unit to identify and quantify
contingent liabilities from disaster risk and climate change and the General Directorate of Public Credit to
design and implement a Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS) to build fiscal resilience.

The PA was based on the following analytical underpinnings, which provided insights on designing effective
disaster risk financing strategies: Ghesquiere, Francis, and Oliver Mahul. 2010. Financial Protection of the State
Against Natural Disasters; and OECD (Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development). 2017.
Recommendation on Disaster Risk Financing Strategies (PD, para 71). The PA directly supported and made a
major contribution to the achievement of the PDO. Thus, the relevance of the PA is satisfactory.

Pillar B: Enhancing the institutional framework for improved DRM.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



      PA 2: The Recipient has strengthened its institutional DRM capacity by establishing the Ministry of
       Disaster Risk Management and National Contingencies (Secretaría de Estado en los Despachos de
       Gestión de Riesgos y Contingencias Nacionales) and subjecting National Disaster Risk Management
       Agency (COPECO: Comisión Permanente de Contingencias) to said institution’s administrative
       jurisdiction; as evidenced by the Recipient’s Executive Decree No. PCM‐057‐2019, dated September
       11, 2019 and published in the Official Gazette on September 12, 2019.

The Government's strategy documents (Plan Nación 2010‐2022 and Visión de País 2010‐2038) highlighted
DRM and Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) as essential for sustainable growth and poverty reduction, while
the Government acknowledged institutional weaknesses in DRM (PD, para 49). Past experiences and
assessments indicated the need for a systemic, intersectoral approach to DRM, leading to the creation of the
National Disaster Risk Management System (SINAGER: Sistema Nacional de Gestión del Riesgo de
Desastres) with a broad mandate beyond disaster response, including prevention and reduction of disaster
risks (PD, para 50).

PA 2 aimed to support upgrading COPECO to a ministerial‐level institution, the Ministry of Disaster Risk
Management and National Contingencies, to oversee the country’s DRM programmatic agenda including the
SINAGER system and enhance the coordination of national and subnational preparedness and emergency
response.

The PA was based on the following analytical underpinnings, which provided insights to develop and implement
a systematic DRM approach in line with the country’s risk profile: United Nations Office for Disaster Risk
Reduction. 2015‐2030. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030; and World Bank and Global
Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). 2010. GFDRR Country Note Honduras (PD, para 71).
The PA made a major contribution and had a direct causal link to the achievement of the PDO. Thus, the
relevance of the PA is satisfactory.

      PA 3: The Recipient has strengthened DRM and CCA at the municipal level by defining responsibilities
       for the formulation and adoption of local emergency plans that contribute to prevent and address climate
       risks; as evidenced by Art. 210 of the Recipient’s Legislative Decree No. 171‐2019, dated December
       12, 2019 and published in the Official Gazette on December 31, 2019.

In alignment with the Sendai Framework 2015‐2030, the Government recognized the need for local
governments to manage disaster risks, but only a small percentage of Honduran municipalities integrated risk
planning into their territorial plans. Despite efforts over the past decade to integrate DRM into local
development, few plans were formally approved or used as tools for resilient development, with obstacles
including the dissolution of the Ministry of Planning (SEPLAN: Secretaría de Planificación), lack of legal
mandates, and complex guidelines.

PA 3 aimed to support establishing the legal mandate to require all municipalities to elaborate local emergency
plans to reduce and respond to climate risk. This legal mandate also included responsibilities for COPECO,
SEFIN, the National Association of Municipalities (AMHON), and the Ministry of Interior and Justice (Secretaría
de Estado en los Despachos de Gobernación, Descentralización y Justicia) to support municipalities to
formulate and implement their plans.

The PA was based on the following analytical underpinning, which provided insights regarding the need to
integrate climate and disaster resilience at the local level as a key strategy for sustainability: World Bank. 2013.
Building Resilience: Integrating Disaster and Climate Resilience into Development (PD, para 71). The PA made

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



a major contribution and had a direct causal link to the achievement of the PDO. Thus, the relevance of the PA
is satisfactory.

Pillar C: Strengthening health emergency preparedness and response capacities.

      PA 4: The Recipient has strengthened its preparedness and response capacities for pandemics,
       epidemics and health emergencies by approving the National Pandemic, Epidemic and Health
       Emergency Response Plan; as evidenced by the Recipient’s Ministerial Agreement No. 020‐2020,
       dated January 15, 2020 and published in the Official Gazette on February 29, 2020.

Honduras lacked a comprehensive framework for preparing and responding to health emergencies, which had
historically led to inefficient and disorganized responses to epidemics and natural disasters such as Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) in 2003 or swine flu (H1N1) in 2009 (PD, para 60).

PA 4 aimed to support the approval of the National Pandemic, Epidemic and Health Emergency Response
Plan, which presented a structured approach for health sector preparedness and response and clarified cross-
sectoral responsibilities and procedures. The national plan enhanced the SINAGER system by defining health-
specific alert criteria, decision-making processes, and coordination mechanisms, while also mandating the
creation of local contingency plans to maintain healthcare network functionality during emergencies (PD, para
61).

The PA was based on the following analytical underpinnings, which provided insights on the cost‐effectiveness
of investing in health emergency preparedness: World Bank. 2017. From panic and neglect to investing in
health security: financing pandemic preparedness at a national level; and World Health Organization (WHO).
2016. A Strategic Framework for Emergency Preparedness (PD, para 71). The PA made a major contribution
and had a direct causal link to the achievement of the PDO. Thus, the relevance of the PA is satisfactory.

      PA 5: The Recipient has strengthened its health surveillance system by adopting best international
       practices on early detection, monitoring and response to epidemics and disease outbreaks; as
       evidenced by the agreement set forth in paragraph 5 under the fourth point of the Minutes No. 2 of the
       meeting of the Directive Council of SINAGER, dated February 26, 2020.

The country's health surveillance system was inadequate, with incomplete data, slow reporting, and governance
issues that impeded analysis and disconnected surveillance from response (PD, para 63).

PA 5 aimed to support the Government to update the surveillance standards in line with World Health
Organization (WHO)’s Surveillance Standards and Vector Surveillance and Control at Ports, Airports, and
Ground Crossings, as well as to systematize the collection of complete and timely epidemiological data.

The PA was based on the following analytical underpinnings, which provided insights on the country’s capacity
to identify and address public health risks and emergencies and the importance of preparedness: WHO. 2017.
Honduras International Health Regulations State Party Self‐Assessment Annual Report; and Adam Crosier,
Dominic McVey, and Jeff French. 2015. ‘By failing to prepare you are preparing to fail’: lessons from the 2009
H1N1 ‘swine flu’ pandemic (PD, para 71). The PA made a major contribution and had a direct causal link to the
achievement of the relevant PDO. Thus, the relevance of the PA is satisfactory.

Pillar D: Enhancing water resources governance and climate resilience.



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



       PA 6: The Recipient has improved its national and local water management capacities, including DRM
         and CCA, through the adoption of a Special Regulation on Water Basin Organizations; as evidenced
         by the Recipient’s Ministerial Agreement No. 0840‐2019, dated September 27, 2019, and published in
         the Official Gazette on December 6, 2019.

 The country’s institutional capacity for water management was limited. The Ministry of Environment's unit
 responsible for water resources (i.e., Directorate General of Water Resources (DGRH: Secretaría General de
 Recursos Hídricos)) was constrained by inadequate technical and financial resources, resulting in no water
 cadaster and poor management and planning capabilities. This had led to volatility in water supply and demand,
 and an inability to respond to water-related natural disasters, compounded by a lack of local governance and
 coordination in water basin management. To address the issue, the Government approved the General Water
 Law in 2009 to create the National Water Authority (ANA: Autoridad Nacional del Agua) at the national level and
 the water basin organizations at the local level. In 2019, the Government approved a comprehensive Water
 Security Strategy for the Dry Corridor, which aimed to elaborate watershed management plans, establish the
 Water Basin Councils, and strengthen the ANA.

 PA 6 aimed to promote the participation of public and private sector in water administration and compliance and
 strengthen local capacities to prevent environmental degradation, deforestation, and occupation of disaster-
 prone areas within the water basins.

 The PA was based on the following analytical underpinning, which provided insights and recommendations
 regarding the key constraints of water resources management in the Dry Corridor: World Bank. 2019. Water
 Security Strategy in the Dry Corridor of Honduras (PD, para 71). The description of the results chain linking the
 PA to achievement of the PDO was convincing. Thus, the relevance of the PA is satisfactory.

 The relevance of all PAs is rated satisfactory (score: 5), leading to an overall relevance of PAs rating of
 satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Pillar A: Improving public financial management and fiscal resilience against disaster risk.

       Results Indicator (RI) 1: New financial instruments implemented to manage disaster risk and
         emergencies in accordance with the Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS) (number).

RI 1 was mostly adequate to measure the impact of PA 1 on progress toward achievement of the
objective. In line with the responsibilities of and the guidelines for SEFIN to improve its disaster risk
financing capacity that were explicitly established by PA 1, this indicator measured the number of financial
instruments that SEFIN implemented to manage disaster risk and emergencies. On the other hand, the

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



indicator’s target (i.e., one financial instrument implemented) was low, considering the robust actions
required to achieve the PDO (ICR, para 32). Thus, the relevance of RI 1 is rated moderately
satisfactory.

Pillar B: Enhancing the institutional framework for improved DRM.

      RI 2: New or updated Sistema Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos (SINAGER) DRM instruments
       formulated and approved by the new Ministry of Disaster Risk Management and National
       Contingencies (COPECO) (number).

RI 2 was not an adequate measure of the impact of PA 2 and was partly relevant to achievement of the
PDO. It was insufficient that COPECO approved the SINAGER DRM instruments, as the Congress
needed to approve the new SINAGER Law to operationalize the national DRM system. A better RI would
have also measured an approval status of the SINAGER Law by the Congress. Hence, the relevance of
RI 2 is moderately unsatisfactory.

      RI 3: Municipalities that have formulated or updated and formally approved their local emergency
       plans in accordance with the new operational guidelines (percent).

RI 3 adequately measured the impact of PA 3 on progress toward achievement of the objective. The local
emergency plans were updated annually and approved by the Government. Municipalities received
budget and national funds if they had local emergency plans in place, which was a good incentive (ICR,
para 34). The indicator was measurable and verifiable. The relevance of RI 3 is satisfactory.

Pillar C: Strengthening health emergency preparedness and response capacities.

      RI 4: Health regions with a Regional Pandemic, Epidemic and Health Emergency Response Plan
       adopted by the Ministry of Health (SESAL: Secretaría de Salud) (percent).

RI 4 was mostly adequate to measure the impact of PA 4 on progress toward achievement of the
objective. The National Pandemic, Epidemic and Health Emergency Response Plan (PA 4) set the
framework for developing sub‐national operational plans for all the 20 health regions. The regional plans
were tailored to each region, approved by SESAL, and refined annually (Meeting with the TTL/ICR team
held on September 4, 2024; hereafter, TTL meeting). The indicator was measurable and verifiable.
Hence, the relevance of RI 4 is satisfactory.

      RI 5: Weekly epidemiological reports of mandatory notifiable conditions, produced and
       disseminated following international standards (number).

RI 5 adequately measured the impact of PA 5 on progress toward achievement of the objective. Using the
health surveillance system established under PA 5, SESAL published weekly epidemiological reports,
which enabled remote regions (e.g., the northern regions vulnerable to climate shocks) to take swift
actions to better respond to and prepare for epidemics and disease outbreaks (TTL meeting). The
indicator was measurable and verifiable. The relevance of RI 5 is satisfactory.

Pillar D: Enhancing water resources governance and climate resilience.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



      RI 6a: Water Basin Councils created and operating to reduce water‐related risks, in the Dry
       Corridor region in line with the Water Security Strategy (number).

RI 6a was partially adequate to measure the impact of PA 6 on progress toward achievement of the
objective. The indicator was relevant to measure the strengthened local capacity for water resources
governance at appraisal. On the other hand, the RI’s relevance decreased during implementation due to
the change in Government after the national elections of November 2021. The new Government reversed
its aim to decentralize water resources governance (TTL meeting). The relevance of RI 6a is moderately
unsatisfactory.

      RI 6b: A National Water Authority established and operational (Yes/No).

RI 6b inadequately measured the impact of the PA 6 on progress toward achievement of PDO. First, the
relevance of the RI decreased after the 2021 national elections, when the new Government shifted its
focus towards bolstering the capacity of the General Directorate of Water Resources of the Ministry of
Environment (SERNA: Secretaría de Recursos Naturales y Ambiente) to conduct the functions that would
have been entrusted to the National Water Authority (ICR, page 28). Second, the RI’s verification
methodology was unclear. According to the PD (para 69), the 2009 General Water Law created the
National Water Authority. The program documentation did not explicitly explain what conditions were
required to be fulfilled for the National Water Authority to be considered as “established” and “operational.”
The relevance of RI 6b is unsatisfactory.

Of the seven results indicators, three were rated satisfactory (score: 5), one was rated moderately
satisfactory (score: 4), two were rated moderately unsatisfactory (score: 3), and one was rated
unsatisfactory (score: 2), leading to a total average rating of 3.86, and an overall relevance of indicators
rating of moderately satisfactory.

Table 1. Results Indicators (RIs), the Prior Actions (PAs), baseline, target values, actual change in
RI relative to target and RI achievement rating.

                                                                                 Actual
                                                                    Actual       Change in RI
                 Associated RI
RI Description                            Baseline    Target        Value as of RI Relative Achievement
                 PA(s)         Relevance
                                                                    Target Date to Targeted Rating
                                                                                 Change
PDO: To strengthen Honduras's institutional and financial framework to manage the risk of adverse
natural events including disease outbreaks.
Pillar A: Improving public financial management and fiscal resilience against disaster risk.
RI 1. New        PA 1          MS         0 (2020)    1 (2023)      6 (2023)     Over 100    High
financial                                                                        percent of
instruments                                                                      targeted
implemented to                                                                   change
manage
disaster risk
and
emergencies in
accordance
with the

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



Disaster Risk
Financing
Strategy
(DRFS)
(number)
Pillar B: Enhancing the institutional framework for improved DRM.
RI 2. New or
updated
Sistema
Nacional de
Gestión de
Riesgos
(SINAGER)
DRM
instruments                                                                  100 percent
formulated and PA 2           MU           0 (2020)     3 (2023)  3 (2023)   of targeted Modest
approved by                                                                  change
the new
Ministry of
Disaster Risk
Management
and National
Contingencies
(COPECO)
(number)
RI 3.
Municipalities
that have
formulated or
updated and
formally
                                                                             Over 100
approved their
                                           6 percent 40 percent 84 percent percent of
local            PA 3         S                                                          High
                                           (2020)       (2023)    (2023)     targeted
emergency
                                                                             change
plans in
accordance
with the new
operational
guidelines
(percent)
Pillar C: Strengthening health emergency preparedness and response capacities.
RI 4. Health     PA 4         S            0 (2020)     95 (2023) 100 (2023) Over 100    High
regions with a                                                               percent of
Regional                                                                     targeted
Pandemic,                                                                    change
Epidemic and
Health


                                                                                             Page 9 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



               Emergency
               Response Plan
               adopted by the
               Ministry of
               Health
               (percent)
               RI 5. Weekly
               epidemiologica
               l reports of
               mandatory
               notifiable
                                                                                            100 percent
               conditions,
                                 PA 5      S           0 (2020)    52 (2023) 52 (2023)      of targeted High
               produced and
                                                                                            change
               disseminated
               following
               international
               standards
               (number)
               Pillar D: Enhancing water resources governance and climate resilience.
               RI 6a. Water
               Basin Councils
               created and
               operating to
               reduce water-
                                                                                            80 percent
               related risks, in
                                 PA 6      MU          0 (2020)    5 (2023)      4 (2023)   of targeted Modest
               the Dry
                                                                                            change
               Corridor region
               in line with the
               Water Security
               Strategy
               (number)
               RI 6b. A
               National Water
               Authority                                                                    0 percent of
               established       PA 6      U           No (2020) Yes (2023) No (2023)       targeted     Negligible
               and                                                                          change
               operational
               (Yes/No)

   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                             Page 10 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)




Objective
To strengthen Honduras's institutional and financial framework to manage the risk of adverse natural events
including disease outbreaks. PAs 1-6. RIs 1-6b.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): The ICR (Figure 1, page 11) provides the operation’s ToC that was developed ex
post, based on the information provided in the Program Document and Legal Agreement. The ToC postulated
that policy reforms for strengthening disaster risk financing accessibilities, establishing a new ministry
specialized in disaster risk management (DRM), and expanding authorities of municipal governments to
address local emergencies would result in outputs such as financial and technical instruments to enhance
DRM at the national and municipal governments (RIs 1-3). These outputs were postulated to contribute to the
outcome that fiscal and institutional resilience for DRM strengthened. The ToC also postulated that policy
reforms for establishing health emergency response plans, enhancing early warning systems, and
establishing water resource management authorities at the national and local levels would result in outputs
such as plans and systems for health emergency preparedness and water resource management established
(RIs 4-6b). These outputs were postulated to contribute to the outcome that DRM mainstreamed in the public
health and water resources governance systems. In the long-term, these outcomes were postulated to
contribute to the increased resilience against natural hazards and climate change.

Critical assumptions of the ToC included: (i) The Government is fully committed to strengthening its DRM
Program by improving regulatory and institutional frameworks; (ii) The adoption and implementation of the
Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS) lays the groundwork for the Government to handle fiscal risks
resulting from natural hazards; and (iii) Through technical assistance and supervision of this operation, the
World Bank maintain an effective DRM policy dialogue with the Government to ensure that DRM actions
complement each other and enhance resilience of public assets, populations, and the economy against
external shocks.

The ToC was sound and causal chains were logically connected. On the other hand, the RIs were designed
to measure outputs or intermediate outcomes at best. This resulted in an ambiguity in achievements of
outcomes and their attribution to this operation.

Finance

      RI 1: 6 new financial instruments were implemented to manage disaster risk and emergencies in
       accordance with the Disaster Risk Financing Strategy (DRFS), increasing from the baseline of 0 and
       exceeding the target of 1. The 6 financial instruments developed were: (i) national and external budget
       reallocations to support emergencies; (ii) the activation of the Contingency Emergency Response
       Component (CERC) to support the response to COVID-19, as well as reallocation of other external
       funds to support response efforts; (iii) external investment projects for the recovery to Eta and Iota
       (including WB operation); (iv) non reimbursable cooperation; (v) placement of bonds in the national
       market; and (vi) a contingent line of credit from Inter-American Development Bank to prepare for
       future disaster, climate, or health shocks (ICR, annex 1, page 24). Examples of implementations of the
       financial instruments were as follows. In June 2020, in response to the COVID-19 emergency, the
       Government reallocated national and external funds and activated the Disaster Risk Management
       Project’s CERC and the Rural Competitiveness Project Additional Financing’s Immediate Response
       Mechanism for a total of US$2.7 million (ICR, page 17). In addition, after the devastating impact of



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



         tropical storms Eta and Iota in November 2020, SEFIN obtained an approval of a new US$150 million
         Emergency Recovery Project in December 2020 (ICR, page 17).

DRM

       RI 2: 3 new or updated Sistema Nacional de Gestión de Riesgos (SINAGER) DRM instruments were
        formulated and approved by the new Ministry of Disaster Risk Management and National
        Contingencies (COPECO), increasing from the baseline of 0 and meeting the target of 3. The 3 DRM
        instruments approved by COPECO were: (i) the new SINAGER Law to strengthen the national legal
        framework for DRM; (ii) the Index for Risk Management (INFORM) to assess the risk of humanitarian
        crises and disasters; and (iii) a Geographic Information System (GIS) platform called the Geoportal de
        Riesgos de COPECO to serve as a centralized repository for all digital cartographic information
        available in the country (ICR, table 2, page 15). COPECO improved and strengthened the use of risk
        data and tools to manage disasters; for instance, COPECO applied the INFORM Index at the
        municipal level to target its response to the Eta and Iota emergencies (ICR, page 17). On the other
        hand, the SINAGER Law is pending Congress approval at the time of the ICR Review, presenting a
        critical risk to sustainability of development outcomes, as described in section 7 (ICR, annex 1, page
        25 and TTL meeting).
       RI 3: 83 percent of municipalities that have formulated or updated and formally approved their local
        emergency plans in accordance with the new operational guidelines, increasing from the baseline of 6
        percent and exceeding the target of 40 percent. In 2022-2023, COPECO approved 248 local
        emergency plans (PEMs) out of the total 298 municipalities (ICR, table 2, page 15). PEMs are
        updated every year and include assessments of the topography, hydrography, geology, and
        geotechnical conditions of the municipal and local territories to improve organization and coordination
        for recovery at the local level. The PEMs were successfully implemented because municipalities
        received budget and national funds if they had a PEM in place, which was a good incentive (ICR,
        page 17).

Health

       RI 4: 100 percent of Regional Pandemic, Epidemic and Health Emergency Response Plans
        developed by health regions were adopted by the Ministry of Health (SESAL), increasing from the
        baseline of 0 percent and exceeding the target of 95 percent. Regional Plans were developed in a
        participatory manner to ensure ownership at local level and refined annually to maximize effectiveness
        of implementation, although the depth of annual refinement varied across regions based on their
        capacities (ICR, page 17 and TTL meeting). SESAL reported these plans facilitated effective inter-
        institutional coordination through a structured methodology, enabling the design of timely and
        appropriate diagnostics in emergency situations, and the implementation of a prompt response
        tailored to the needs of the affected population (ICR, page 17).
       RI 5: 52 weekly epidemiological reports of mandatory notifiable conditions were produced and
        disseminated following international standards, increasing from the baseline of 0 and meeting the
        target of 52. These reports were published in SESAL’s official website and served as a valuable
        resource for monitoring and analyzing public health trends (ICR, table 2, page 16).

Water




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)




                            RI 6a: 4 Water Basin Councils were created and operating to reduce water‐related risks, in the Dry
                             Corridor region in line with the Water Security Strategy, increasing from the baseline of 0 and
                             almost meeting the target of 5. SERNA formed and trained four Sub-Basin Councils in the Dry
                             Corridor region (ICR, table 2, page 16). The creation of the Water Basin Councils of Nacaome,
                             Sampile, Goascorán, and the lower Choluteca basins, strengthened local capacities to prevent
                             environmental degradation and respond to hydroclimatic shocks that threaten livelihoods and
                             productions systems, while improving the dialogue between local and national actors of the water
                             management sector (ICR, page 18). The process of establishing the Motagua Water Basin Council
                             was stalled with the transition of Government and was not achieved at closing (ICR, page 18).
                             Moreover, the ICR (para 53) mentioned that the insufficient budgets and incentives to establish the
                             Water Basin Councils and the Micro-basin councils might lead to sustainability risks in terms of
                             managing water resources and preventing potential conflicts, as described in section 7.
                            RI 6b: A National Water Authority was not established and operational, not meeting the target. At
                             program closing, the new Government had no immediate plans to establish the National Water
                             Authority due to the lack of fiscal resources and the overall new Government’s objective of institutional
                             consolidation and strengthening the capacity of the Directorate General of Water Resources (DGRH:
                             Secretaría General de Recursos Hídricos) of the Ministry of Environment (SERNA: Secretaría de
                             Recursos Naturales y Ambiente) instead of the National Water Authority (ICR, para 31).

                      Of the seven RIs, four RIs were highly achieved, while achievements of two RIs were modest and an
                      achievement of one RI was negligible. The Government’s institutional resilience to respond to climate and
                      health shocks were improved, in terms of its financial resilience, surveillance and monitoring, and
                      preparedness at the local level to address climate- and health-related shocks. On the other hand, the political
                      transition in 2021 changed the priorities of the Government, resulting in the pending approval of the legal
                      framework by the Congress to operationalize the National Disaster Risk Management System (SINAGER)
                      and the halts in establishing the water resources authorities at the national and local levels. Overall, the
                      achievement of the objective is rated moderately satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

As described above, the achievement of the objective was moderately satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



6. Outcome

Rationale

The overall outcome is rated moderately satisfactory, based on the satisfactory rating for the relevance of PAs
and the moderately satisfactory rating for the efficacy. The outcome rating was brought down by the low
outcome achievements in terms of the operationalization of the national DRM system and the water resources
governance.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. There is a potential risk that the new SINAGER Law, developed as one of the three SINAGER
DRM instruments in May 2022 (Result Indicator 2), might be further delayed being approved by the
Congress due to the change in the vision of the Government (ICR, para 51). During the program task team’s
last supervision mission, the Government indicated that the Law was going to be revised again by initiating a
new process of public consultations (ICR, para 51). The Law is not approved as of September 2024,
negatively affecting the implementation of the succeeding operation, the second Cat DDO (TTL meeting). To
mitigate the risk, the project task team is following up with the counterpart in a monthly basis (TTL meeting).

Institutional capacity risk. There is a potential risk that the Ministry of Health (SESAL) might still not have
sufficient capacity to respond to emergencies at project closing. In June 2023, SESAL highlighted ongoing
challenges caused by frequent personnel turnover and insufficient training, affecting both new recruits and
experienced staff (ICR, para 52).

Government commitment risk. There is a potential risk that the Government might not provide adequate
financial resources and governance framework for water resources management. The insufficient budgets
and incentives to establish the Water Basin Councils and the Micro-basin councils, could result in
undermining their engagement and effectiveness in managing the country's water resources (ICR, para
53). Additionally, the absence of a solid governance framework and sectoral coordination not only caused
risks to the sustainability of water sector initiatives, but also to potential conflicts (ICR, para 53). To mitigate
the risk, the World Bank requested the Government to provide their plans to develop the capacity of the
DGRH to manage water resources effectively (ICR, para 53).


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale



                                                                                                          Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



The design of the operation was informed by and complemented preceding operations and technical
assistance related to DRM, including the Honduras DRM Project (P131094) (ICR, para 42). The proposed
policy actions were based on Honduras’s long-term development priorities and the World Bank’s
assistance strategies, as described in section 3.a. The operation was also aligned with the Central
American Policy for DRM (PCGIR), which aimed at strengthening disaster risk, and the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015-2030), which acknowledged the need for local governments to have the
capacity to manage their own disaster risks governance (ICR, paras 14 and 45). The World Bank
evaluated the various types and degrees of risks associated with this operation and established risk
mitigation strategies within the operation's Monitoring and Evaluation systems (ICR, para 46). On the other
hand, the risk mitigation measures were not fully adequate to mitigate the institutional capacity risk, as the
operation’s needs for inter-institutional coordination and the multi-sectoral engagements posed
implementation challenges and a risk regarding the institutional capacity of SESAL that remained at
closing (ICR, para 52 and TTL meeting). The Results Indicators were mostly linked to the PAs and the
policy reforms supported by this operation; however, some indicators had shortfalls in verifying the
effectiveness of operationalization of the policies and instruments, as described in sections 4 and 5.

Overall, the World Bank’s performance for design is rated moderately satisfactory.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The World Bank provided key technical support including a total of four implementation support missions in line
with the policy reforms included in the policy matrix (ICR, para 48). The WB fostered effective collaboration with
Government teams, which contributed to the identification of unexpected emerging needs and the timely
response to those needs (ICR, para 49). Although the Cat DDO was fully disbursed early during
implementation, the World Bank provided technical assistance throughout the three years of project
implementation, which enabled adequate project implementation and contributed to the advancement of the
reform agenda (ICR, paras 50 and 57). On the other hand, the changed circumstances during implementation
such as the pending approval of the SINAGER Law by the Congress were not adequately reflected in the
design of the second Cat DDO (TTL meeting).

Overall, the World Bank’s performance for implementation is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)




Rationale

The Bank performance in design is rated moderately satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings in designing
the risk mitigation measures and the RIs. The Bank performance in implementation is rated satisfactory.
Hence, the overall Bank performance is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR did not report impacts.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not report impacts.



c. Gender

The ICR did not report impacts.



d. Other

The ICR did not report impacts but commented that this Cat DDO contributed to strengthening the health sector
by facilitating collaboration between the World Bank’s Health Global Practice and the Government that had been
stagnant for a decade. The collaboration led to the development of the Restoring Essential Services for Health
and Advancing Preparedness for Emergencies Project (P176532) approved in 2022 (ICR, para 41).




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale



                                                                                               Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



The ICR presents a coherent account of the program that flows logically. The quality of analysis is adequate.
The lessons in the ICR are supported by the evidence and findings presented. The ICR does not specifically
identify actual observed impacts on the social, poverty, environmental, and gender aspects in comparison to
the potential impacts identified in the program documents. The ICR presents insufficient evidence on the
effectiveness of the PAs (as measured by the RIs) that was later supplemented by the information provided
during the meeting with the TTL/ICR team held on September 4, 2024. The ICR’s quality, overall, is substantial.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                               The Bank performance in design
                                                                               is rated moderately
                                                                               satisfactory due to moderate
                                                                               shortcomings in designing the
                                                                               risk mitigation measures and the
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               RIs. The Bank performance in
                                                                               implementation is rated
                                                                               satisfactory. Hence, the overall
                                                                               Bank performance is rated
                                                                               moderately satisfactory.
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (paras 55-58) and the TTL meeting provided a number of lessons. Four lessons are presented below
with rephrasing.

The Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) can disburse funds faster than the Contingency
Emergency Response Component (CERC), as demonstrated by this Cat DDO’s quick turnaround during
the COVID-19 pandemic. This Cat DDO was approved about three weeks after the country’s COVID-19 State
of Emergency declaration, followed by the full disbursement within the next four weeks (ICR, para 55). In
contrast, the CERC activation processes in the Honduras DRM project was significantly slower, taking five to
seven months for disbursements in responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and tropical cyclones (ICR, para 55).

The full withdrawal of the Cat DDO funds early in implementation may limit the Cat DDO’s potential to
support countries to respond to multiple emergencies during implementation. This Cat DDO was fully

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Honduras Cat DDO (P172567)



withdrawn immediately after its approval by Congress to address the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in no more
funds available during the three-year implementation period in which the country suffered two consecutive
tropical storms Eta and Iota (ICR, para 56).

Government transitions, such as the one following the November 2021 national elections, can
significantly affect the implementation of sector reforms. In the country’s water sector, this Cat DDO
needed close dialogue with the new administration to maintain support for the existing reform agenda and to
safeguard the delivery of the results framework and reform program (ICR, para 58).

Maintaining close dialogue with a new government following elections is crucial to mitigate risks to
project implementation and the achievement of result indicators. The change in Government after the
national elections of November 2021 had a significant impact on the implementation of the reforms in the water
sector (ICR, para 58). It is essential to engage the incoming administration to secure continued support for
existing reform agendas and to minimize disruptions in the delivery of the results framework and reform
program.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
