     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024178

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P177726                                    Indonesia Fiscal DPL

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-93840                                 30-Jun-2023                                         752,919,940.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jun-2022                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            750,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        752,919,940.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Jennifer L. Keller          Judyth L. Twigg              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) as stated in the program document (PAD) (p. 3) and ICR (p. 1)
were to: (i) increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system; and (ii) strengthen institutions for
planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives against which achievements are measured are:

      PDO1: Increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system;
      PDO2: Strengthen institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The pillars/policy areas corresponded to the PDOs as follows:

      Increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system
      Strengthen institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan of USD 750 million was a single-
tranche operation based on six prior actions (PAs). It was approved on June 17, 2022, with USD 752,919,940
disbursed by the intended closing date of June 30, 2023. The difference between approved and disbursed
amounts is explained by exchange rate fluctuations.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Alignment to Indonesia’s Country Context and Government Vision:

 The Indonesia Fiscal DPO was designed at a time when Indonesia was recovering from impacts of the
 COVID-19 pandemic. Prior to the pandemic, the Government of Indonesia (GoI) had recently embarked on an
 ambitious agenda of actions under its Golden 2045 Vision (launched in 2017), which aimed for Indonesia to
 reach high-income status and reduce poverty to nearly zero by 2045 through significant improvements in (and
 spending increases toward) human capital, social protection, and infrastructure. The pandemic triggered a
 major economic downturn in Indonesia (with gross domestic product [GDP] declining more than 2 percent over
 2020 [ICR, p. 4]), and Indonesia’s progress in closing human capital and infrastructure gaps slowed, in part
 because of the reallocation of spending toward COVID-related support.

 The objectives of increasing tax revenues and tax system equity, as well as strengthening the institutions for
 planning, budgeting, and fiscal transfers, were highly relevant to country needs, although it should be noted
 that the objective of “strengthened institutions for planning, budgeting and fiscal transfers” would have been
 better expressed in terms of specific spending efficiency/effectiveness outcomes. The GoI’s 2045 vision
 agenda required sizeable spending increases and a large portion of that spending to take place at the
 subnational level, making increased revenue mobilization and improvements in spending efficiency (including
 at the subnational level) highly relevant. At the time of loan approval, central government revenue collection
 (tax and non-tax) had declined considerably over the prior two decades (from 17.2 percent of GDP in 2001 to
 12.4 percent in 2019), placing Indonesia’s revenue mobilization at less than half the emerging market average
 of 27 percent of GDP [ICR, p. 5]. A large share of tax revenue came from natural resources, subject to sharp

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



commodity price volatility. Tax revenue was particularly low, amounting to just 9.1 percent of GDP in 2021
(about 7 percent points below the estimated tax potential of 16 percent [ICR, p. 5]).

The DPO objectives supported Indonesia’s Golden 2045 Vision and fell within the key objectives of the
Ministry of Finance’s Strategic Plan 2020-2024, which comprised five policy directions: 1) sound and
sustainable fiscal management; 2) optimum state revenues; 3) management of quality state expenditures; 4)
management of treasury, state assets, and accountable and productive financing with controllable risks; and 5)
an agile, effective, and efficient bureaucracy and public services.

Alignment to the World Bank Group’s (WBG) Country Strategy in Indonesia and prior work in the
sector:

The PDOs aligned closely with the WBG’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at the time of approval
(FY21-25) and addressed key objectives under Engagement Area 1: Strengthening Economic
Competitiveness and Resilience. PDO1 (increasing tax revenues and tax system equity) supported CPF
Objective 1.1: Attaining higher revenue collection and fiscal and debt sustainability, as well as CPF Objective
1.2: Increasing efficiency, equity and effectiveness of public spending (with equity advances supported through
PA1’s rationalization of VAT exemptions and PA2’s creation of a new income tax bracket for highest income
individuals). PDO2 (strengthening institutions for planning, budgeting and fiscal transfers) also supported CPF
Objective 1.1 (through PA4’s improvements to the equity of subnational transfers) as well as CPF Objective
1.2. Through the introduction of a carbon tax (PA3), PDO1 also aligned to CPF Objective 2.2: Transition to
Low Carbon Energy and Attain Universal Access to Reliable and Sustainable Energy, under Engagement
Area 2: Improving Infrastructure.

The DPO followed up an earlier WB programmatic Fiscal Reform DPO series (of 3 operations between 2016
and 2019). Although in the relevant ICRR, IEG rated the Fiscal Reform DPO series moderately satisfactory for
overall outcome, key results related to tax revenue mobilization and subnational fiscal management were not
substantiated. In the case of tax revenue mobilization, results from the Fiscal Reform DPO series only
confirmed the achievement of administrative and policy aspects of tax reform, rather than increased revenues
linked to the adoption of the program’s actions. With regard to subnational fiscal management, the Fiscal
Reform DPO series resulted in policy actions to increase subnational spending on infrastructure (among other
actions), but the program did not address (or measure) aspects of subnational spending efficiency in
infrastructure. The objectives of this DPO were relevant to continued actions on both tax revenue mobilization
and subnational fiscal spending efficiency building.

Given the WB’s experience with programmatic DPOs in Indonesia, which suggested that “a programmatic
development policy loan series is not an appropriate tool to incentivize politically sensitive reforms in a pre-
determined sequence” (Indonesia Fiscal DPL Concept Note), a stand-alone DPO was a more appropriate
instrument for engagement. Specifically, given the election cycle, it was considered too risky to undertake a
DPO series, with limited time for the second in the series to be processed (risking sustainability of the
operation). However, the budget and planning reforms initiated under Objective 2 might have been better
supported through a PforR, which would have linked achievements to program results. Based on lessons
learned from earlier DPOs that the preparation of DPLs should start after key legislation has been approved by
parliament, preparation of the Fiscal DPO began after parliament had approved the Tax Harmonization Law
(THL) and the Law on Intergovernmental Finance.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)




Rationale

The Indonesia Fiscal DPL consisted of six PAs, with three PAs corresponding to each objective.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Indonesia Fiscal DPL

 Objective 1: Increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system
 PA1: To increase VAT revenue and improve its efficiency, the Borrower has (a) increased the statutory VAT
 rate (effective from April 1, 2022) to 11 percent, and (b) adopted a legal framework to remove the statutory VAT
 exemption status of several goods and services, including those for mining and drilling products taken directly
 from their sources, as evidenced by the Tax Harmonization Law 7/2021.
 PA2: To increase personal income tax revenue from high-income earning individuals, the Borrower has added
 a new personal income tax bracket for individuals with annual incomes higher than five billion Indonesian
 Rupiah, as evidenced by the Tax Harmonization Law 7/ 2021.
 PA3: To limit greenhouse gas emissions, the Borrower has introduced a carbon tax regime initially applicable to
 the coal-fired power plants sector, as evidenced by the Tax Harmonization Law 7/2021.
 Objective 2: Strengthen institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers
 PA4: To allocate fund transfers more equitably across subnational entities, the Borrower has adopted a legal
 framework for allocating the General Allocation Fund based on the per unit fiscal needs and potential revenues
 of subnational governments, as evidenced by the Law Concerning Financial Relationship Between the Central
 Government and Subnational Governments No. 1/2022.
 PA5: To increase spending efficiency and effectiveness, the Borrower, through BAPPENAS and the MOF
 jointly, has provided the guidelines for strengthening the link between planning and budgeting, as evidenced by
 the Joint Letter No. S-122/MK.2/2020 and B-517/M.PPN/D.8/PP.04.03/05/2020 jointly issued by BAPPENAS
 and the MOF.
 PA6: To improve its budget execution, the Borrower, through BAPPENAS and the MOF jointly, has directed the
 budget allocating ministry or institution to consolidate the spending units that are regional/vertical offices or
 regional government offices/work units, in each case, receiving budget allocations from different Echelon I units
 but within the same ministry or institution, as evidenced by the Joint Letter No. S-353/MK.02/2022 and B.301
 /M.PPN/D.8/PP.04.02/04/2022 jointly issued by BAPPENAS and the MOF.

Objective 1: Increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system

PA1 aimed to increase revenue through an increase in the Value Added Tax (VAT) rate and through the
removal of various VAT exemptions. Prior to the adoption of the PA, while the VAT was the second largest
source of tax revenues (behind the Corporate Income Tax [CIT]), collections had been declining, a result of a
low statutory rate (10 percent, compared with a global VAT average of 15 percent), a high eligibility threshold
(reducing the number subject to the tax), wide-ranging exemptions (with benefits primarily accruing to wealthier
households), and low compliance (in part the result of poor tax administration). Through the PA, the standard
VAT increased from 10 percent to 11 percent. In addition, VAT exemptions were removed for several goods
and services, including mining products, basic necessities (rice, grain, eggs, and salt), and medical, social,
education, and transportation services, with the potential to bolster tax revenue in the longer term. The increase
in the VAT rate was estimated to result in an increase in tax revenues of 0.3 percent of GDP. The removal of
VAT exemptions, however, was expected to have negligible impact on revenues (or equity) over the course of
the loan, since it only resulted in VAT-exempt items being reclassified as "VAT payable," without being
collected (zero collection). The reclassification would allow for more easily broadening the tax base in the

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



future, though it would not directly contribute to the objective of increased revenue generation over the life of
the project. Because of the importance of the increase in the VAT rate, the relevance of the PA is rated
satisfactory. Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory (S).

PA2 sought to increase revenues by adding a new personal income tax bracket for high income earners and
broadening the tax bracket for the lowest income earners. Prior to the adoption of the PA (promulgated under
the Tax Harmonization Law), the highest marginal bracket was 30 percent and applied to taxpayers with taxable
income above IDR 500 million (approximately US$33,000). The PA introduced a new marginal personal income
tax (PIT) rate of 35 percent for those with taxable income greater than IDR 5 billion (approximately
US$330,000). The PA was expected to increase the proportion of income tax revenue generated from
individuals with taxable income greater than IDR 5 billion from 15.9 percent of total PIT revenue to 18 percent.
Revenues were expected to increase further over the medium term as Indonesia’s ultra-high-net-worth
individuals were projected to grow by 67 percent (ICR, p. 22) over the next five years. While not part of the PA,
the Tax Harmonization Law also expanded the income range for the lowest tax bracket (from IDR 0 to 50
million, to IDR 0 to 60 million), which could further make the tax system more progressive. Relevance of PA2:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3 sought to reduce greenhouse gas emissions through the introduction of a carbon tax regime. The Tax
Harmonization Law of 2021 introduced a carbon tax regime, with the tax designed to act as a tax penalty for
firms whose emissions exceeded their "emissions cap." The carbon tax was designed to work in tandem with
an Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), which would give entities permits for greenhouse gas emissions and
allow them to buy extra permits from other entities. The carbon tax reflected an important reform from the
standpoint of Indonesia’s climate commitments, although to be effective, it would require the tax to be applied
(the PA only resulted in the institutionalization of a carbon tax regime, with the implementation of the tax
expected in the future [but not required]). Because the tax was not actually applied (as discussed in the
efficacy section), the expected revenues would be zero over the medium term, although once the tax was
applied, it had the potential to yield significant revenue in the future. Relevance of PA3: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU).

Objective 2: Strengthen institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers

PA4 aimed to improve the equity of fiscal transfers to subnational government (SNGs) through reform to the
system for subnational allocations. Prior to the adoption of PA4, Indonesia’s fiscal transfer system did not
equitably target transfers to SNGs, and the system disincentivized SNG revenue mobilization. Resources
allocated to SNGs under the General Allocation Grant (Dana Alokasi Umum, or DAU) favored less populated
districts; in 2018, the least populous 20 percent of districts received about five times more revenues per citizen
than the most populous 20 percent (PD, p. 24). Moreover, the formula for allocations was based on “fiscal
capacity," which disincentivized SNGs to collect their own source revenues in favor of transfers. PA4 addressed
this discrepancy through the adoption of the Law on Intergovernmental Finance, which reformed DAU
allocations to be based on “per client” fiscal needs measures and adjusting for differences in service delivery
costs per client (for example, with remote areas compensated for higher delivery costs per client). The reform
was to be implemented in phases, with a five-year “hold harmless” period where DAU allocations would not be
reduced below baseline levels for any SNGs, reducing negative impacts that could occur through transfer
reductions. Although with the phased change in allocations, the impacts would not be fully realized for several
years, the PA addressed a central and foundational constraint to effective spending by equalizing total
revenues per capita through revised subnational allocations. Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).




                                                                                                      Page 5 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



 PA5 sought to improve spending efficiency and effectiveness of spending by strengthening the link between
 planning and budgeting. Prior to the Redesign of Planning and Budgeting Systems (RSPP) reform, which was
 concretized through PA5’s issuance of joint guidelines by the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Planning,
 Bappenas, there was significant disconnect between the planning and budgeting processes, in part because
 budgets for programs and activities were aligned with the organizational structure of each ministry. This “money
 follows function” principle meant programs were often arranged based online items (details of expenditures),
 not in the form of output-oriented activities, making it difficult to see the results chain between the outputs
 produced by budget expenditure and outcomes envisaged in the plan. The PA aimed to strengthen the link
 between planning and budgeting (and thereby improve budget efficiency and effectiveness) through a joint
 decree and guidelines by the MoF and Bappenas that restructured planning and budget classification
 structures, establishing a more programmatic classification that cuts across administrative/organizational
 boundaries (moving to a "money follows program” structure). The decree and guidelines established actions
 taken by both ministries/agencies to harmonize classifications of programs and activities, which might better
 integrate budget expenditure and planned outcomes, supporting higher accountability. The PA would in
 principle improve budget efficacy by ensuring that what is in the plan is financed by the budget, and that the
 budget cannot add programs that are not part of the plan. Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory (S).

 PA6 aimed to improve spending efficiency particularly for capital spending by consolidating spending units
 within ministries. Prior to the adoption of PA6, capital budget execution was low, with only 82 percent of the
 capital budget allocated in 2019 spent (and in which 25 percent was spent in December). A joint WB and MOF
 study, Institutional Diagnostic of Low and Slow Capital Budget Execution in Indonesia (2019-2020), determined
 that in addition to other factors, fragmentation of capital expenditure by spending units was a binding constraint
 to more efficient and effective execution of the capital expenditure budget. As part of the reform,
 MOF set criteria for line ministries to establish spending units that have the authority to execute state budget
 transactions (which includes limiting the number of spending units that manage different central government
 ministry programs at a particular district and city location, among others). The PA would likely result in a
 reduction in the number of spending units, specifically consolidating regional/vertical offices or regional
 government offices/work units, resulting in lower echelon units’ capex budgets being consolidated to a higher
 level. By addressing an identified constraint to greater spending efficiency, the PA was expected to result in
 streamlined procurement, improved accountability, and ultimately improved budget execution efficiency.
 Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory (S).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



                                                                                         As % of RI
                              Associated RI        Baseline Target          Actual
Results Indicator                                                                        targeted achievement
                              PAs        Relevance (year)   (year)          (year)
                                                                                         change rating
Objective 1: Increasing tax revenues and improving equity in the tax system
RI1: Value-added tax and                           3.2
                                                            3.4 percent 3.7 percent
luxury goods sales tax         PA1      S          percent                          250%          High
                                                            (2023)      (2023)
revenue (percent of GDP)                           (2021)
RI2: Personal income tax
revenue collected from
                                                   15.9                 18.8
individuals with income over                                18 percent
                               PA2      S          percent              percent     138%          High
five billion Indonesian Rupiah                              (2023)
                                                   (2020)               (2022)
as a share of total PIT
revenue
RI3: Percent of total
emissions from grid-
connected coal powerplants
                               PA3      S          0 (2021) 75 (2021) 0             0%            Negligible
that is accounted for by
powerplants that are subject
to a carbon tax
Objective 2: Strengthening institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers
RI4: Ratio of national median
revenues per capita over the                       2.07
                               PA4      S                   2.02 (2023) 2.02 (2022) 100%          High
most populous district                             (2020)
quintile
                                                   More
RI5: Number of programs in                                  Fewer than
                               PA5      U          than 600             102 (2023) 104%           [High]
the budget                                                  120 (2023)
                                                   (2020)
RI6: Number of spending                            100
                                                            54 percent 80 percent
units in districts and cities  PA6      MU         percent                          43%           Modest
                                                            (2023)      (2023)
(percent share of 2021)                            (2021)

Note: (i) Achievement ratings in [ ] reflect an MS or lower RI Relevance rating, resulting in a downgraded
assessment of RI achievement for purposes of determining the efficacy rating in Section 5.

RI1 aimed to capture the change in VAT revenues stemming from the change in the standard VAT rate
and from the removal of several statutory exemptions. The RI—VAT and Luxury Goods Sales Tax
revenue as a share of GDP—captured the direct outcome expected from the higher VAT rate adopted
under PA1. In the absence of other changes to the VAT system (for example, changes that could impact
compliance), the indicator was relatively strong for capturing the impact of the PA. Moreover, given the
simultaneous changes in the personal income tax (under PA2) that would also impact overall tax
revenues, it was logical to evaluate the change in VAT revenues as a share of GDP, rather than as a
share of tax revenue (despite the limitation that the VAT/GDP ratio would be impacted by exogenous
changes in the GDP growth rate, through changes in consumption patterns). It should be noted that the
indicator only captured the impact of the increase in the standard VAT rate, as the removal of statutory
exemptions only resulted in a change of classification, with no immediate expected impact on VAT
revenues). Relevance of RI1: Satisfactory (S).


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



RI2 aimed to capture the impact of the PA2’s addition of a new income tax bracket (35 percent) for high-
income earners (above IDR 5 billion per year) toward increased revenues, by measuring the change in
the PIT revenue collected from high-income earners as a share of total PIT revenue. In this way, it directly
measured the enhanced revenue collection from increasing the PIT rate for highest-income earners, while
controlling for the factors that would raise total personal income tax revenue overall. At the time of project
approval, the RI target year for achievement was 2023, but at the time of the ICR writing, data were only
available through 2022. Although a shortcoming of the indicator, the 2022 data would nonetheless capture
the impact of the implementation of the PA over a full fiscal year. The THL was approved in 2021, and
Article 17 (concerning the addition of the new tax bracket) came into effect January 2022. The reported
2022 data (January-December) would therefore capture the impact for the full tax year. Relevance of
RI2: Satisfactory (S).

RI3 aimed to capture the impact of PA3’s introduction of a carbon tax. Because the carbon tax rate had
not been determined, no revenue impact was expected over the DPO implementation period. By focusing
on the percent of grid-connected coal powerplant emissions (coal-fired power plants were the first batch of
cap-and-trade participants under the ETS) that were subject to the carbon tax (regardless of the rate), the
measure was relevant for capturing the impact of the PA toward potential increased revenues. Relevance
of RI3: Satisfactory (S).

RI4 aimed to capture the impact of adopting new laws on DAU allocations based on per unit fiscal needs,
toward the goal of strengthened planning, budgeting, and fiscal transfers. The RI, measuring the ratio of
national median revenues per capita (revenues per capita of the 50th percentile) over the revenues per
capita of the most populous district quintile, could be expected to capture the convergence of revenue per
capita among districts that would come from equalizing per capita DAU allocations (which would be
expected to increase the revenues per capita of more populated districts relative to less populated
districts). While the indicator would capture improvements in equalizing allocations per capita, the
measure could also be impacted by changes in revenue raising at the district level (and not related to
DAU allocations). However, any changes in revenue raising at the district level would also change the
DAU allocation (since the formula takes into consideration own-source revenue raising), and the impact of
changes in local revenue capacity on the indicator would be expected to be modest. Relevance of RI4:
Satisfactory (S).

RI5 sought to measure the impact of the adoption of a joint decree and guidelines (from both MOF and
Bappenas), which established a more programmatic planning and budget classification toward greater
spending efficiency. Although the indicator, measuring the reduction in the number of programs, captured
one potential output of the reform, it was at best a partial indicator of increased efficiency of budget
execution, which was the ultimate objective of the reform—an objective that would take longer to
materialize. Moreover, the target value of the indicator had already been achieved at the time of approval,
making it an inadequate indicator for verifying achievement related to the reform. The team might have
considered additional indicators to complement RI5 (and thus more comprehensively capture the impacts
of the strengthened coordination between planning and budgeting), such as the deviation between the
medium-term plan and the annual budget, or a process-oriented RI. Relevance of RI5: Unsatisfactory
(U).

RI6 sought to measure the impact of consolidating spending units toward greater spending accountability
and efficiency under PA6. The indicator, measuring the reduction in spending units in districts and cities,
captured one potential impact of the spending unit consolidation under PA6, but the indicator was not
adequate for measuring the ultimate objective of the reform (strengthened budgeting and planning, or

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 16
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



               effectiveness of capital expenditure), and other factors would impact the number of spending units beyond
               the PA. Indeed, as noted in the ICR, between 2022 and 2023, there was an actual increase in spending
               units despite the reform, a result of the addition of a new Line Ministry and Institution. Further, a smaller
               number of spending units, in and of itself, is not a good gauge for spending efficiency. As noted in the
               ICR, “a central government program deployed at the sub-national level may require the creation of more
               spending units, both for reasons of accountability and practicality, particularly in a geographically
               expansive country like Indonesia.” Relevance of RI6: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Increase tax revenues and improve equity in the tax system



                Rationale
                Three RIs measured progress toward the achievement of Objective 1.

                RI1: PA1’s increase in the statutory VAT rate (and removal of VAT exemptions) resulted in an increase
                in VAT tax revenues (as a percent of GDP) from 3.2 percent in 2021 to 3.7 percent in 2023, exceeding the
                target of for RI1 of 3.4 percent. Achievement rating: High.

                RI2: PA2’s creation of a new personal income tax bracket (from 30 to 35 percent) for highest-income earners
                earning over 5 billion Indonesian rupiah resulted in an increase in the PIT revenues collected from highest-
                income earners as a share of total PIT revenues from 15.9 percent in 2020 to 18.8 percent in 2022,
                exceeding the RI2 target of 18.0 percent. Achievement rating: High.

                RI3: PA3’s introduction of a carbon tax was expected to result in an increase in the emissions generated by
                grid-connected coal powerplants subject to the tax, from 0 percent in 2020 to 75 percent in 2023. While the
                implementation of the ETS started and covered most grid-connected power plants, the carbon tax has not
                been applied, which the ICR attributed to the challenging global economic environment and delayed
                preparation of the implementing regulations. With the carbon tax not yet applied, (it was originally expected to
                be applied in 2022, but has since been delayed until 2025), the actual emissions subject to the tax remained
                0. The ICR notes that the pilot ETS became operational in 2021, with mandatory participation since February
                2023, covering approximately 80 percent of greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired grid-connected power
                plants. Despite this positive step forward, it is unclear if the trading scheme will have notable impact on
                revenues. Indonesia’s emission intensity ceilings have been set to match typical performance, which would
                shield a large share of emissions from any carbon charges to begin with {S&P Global: “Indonesia’s "cap-and-




                                                                                                                   Page 9 of 16
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



                      trade-and-tax" carbon pricing scheme: only a light touch on the power market," October 2023}. Achievement
                      rating: Negligible.

                      With at least half of RI targets rated modest or above and fewer than one-third of RI targets rated negligible,
                      the efficacy rating for Objective 1 is assessed as Moderately Satisfactory



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      Strengthen institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers

                      Rationale
                      Three RIs measured progress toward the achievement of Objective 2.

                      RI4: PA4’s change in allocation of funds from the DAU based on fiscal needs per unit resulted in a reduction
                      in the ratio of national median revenues per capita over the revenues of the most populous district quintile
                      from 2.07 in 2020 to 2.02 in 2022, meeting RI4’s target value. Achievement rating: High.

                      RI5: PA5’s joint decree toward strengthening the link between budget and planning resulted in a reduction in
                      the number of programs in the budget from over 600 in 2020 to 102 in 2023, exceeding the target of 120.
                      However, with the relevance of the RI rated unsatisfactory (in part because the outcome had already been
                      achieved at the time of the loan approval), the achievement rating is downgraded. Achievement rating:
                      Negligible. Interviews with the team suggest that there is limited additional evidence verifying achievement of
                      the objective. For example, in analyzing the deviation between the medium-term plan and budget for three
                      ministries (health, education, and public works), there was no clear-cut reduction across ministries.

                      RI6: PA6’s consolidation of spending units toward greater budget efficiency resulted in a reduction in
                      spending units in districts and cities (from their 2021 amount) from 100 percent in 2021 to 80 percent, falling
                      short of RI6’s targeted reduction to 54 percent. The ICR notes that the pace of spending unit consolidation
                      was delayed due to reorganization within the line ministries. With the relevance of RI6 assessed as
                      moderately unsatisfactory, the achievement rating for RI6 is downgraded. Achievement rating: Modest.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale


                                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



With the efficacy rating for Objective 1 assessed as moderately satisfactory and the efficacy rating for Objective 2
assessed as moderately unsatisfactory, the overall efficacy rating is assessed as moderately satisfactory.

The DPO was more effective in achieving desired outcomes under Objective 1 (increasing tax revenue and tax
system equity) than under Objective 2 (strengthening institutions for planning and budgeting and fiscal transfers).
In general, efficacy scores were higher for "stroke of the pen" reforms (raising the VAT rate, creating a new tax
bracket, changing the DAU allocation formula for subnational fiscal transfers) than reforms that entailed many
(and complex) implementation steps (strengthening budget/planning links, consolidating interministerial spending
units).



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated satisfactory and the overall efficacy rating assessed as moderately satisfactory,
the outcome rating is moderately satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Maintaining the more equitable distribution of DAU allocations, made possible through PA4, is at risk of
backsliding due to recent policy reversal. While the reform was implemented with an initial "hold
harmless" policy (ensuring no district would have their DAU allocation cut), in 2023, the outcome of
parliamentary discussion suggested that all regions would receive a minimum three percent increase in DAU
allocation. That would jeopardize achieving the target of all cities receiving transfers based on their
operational needs by 2027. To mitigate this risk, the WB is supporting a new, more equitable DAU formula
through the SINERGIS Program for Results operation, which includes a new adjustment factor in the DAU
formula that captures interregional cost differences more comprehensively and which supports transitioning
to the new formula at the fastest politically feasible pace.

Several actions require continued commitment from the incoming government that will take office in October
2024. The implementation of a carbon tax (which was not realized over the DPO cycle) was postponed
several times, and though it is projected to be implemented in 2025, the timing puts implementation of a
reform agenda with significant vested interests in the hands of the next government. Further, while the VAT
rate increase (PA1) is unlikely to be reversed, further planned increases in the VAT rate (to 12 percent)




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



likewise depend on continued reform commitment, which could be threatened should Indonesia confront
challenging economic conditions.

Reforms toward budget strengthening through greater linking planning and budget (PA6) and spending unit
consolidation (PA6) require continued actions.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


In the context of Indonesia’s plans for significantly ramping up capital expenditure to meet its development
goals, the DPL addressed two core challenges impeding Indonesia’s ability to sustainably augment and
ensure efficient and effective spending. First, the DPL tackled key challenges in revenue generation, which
impact the government’s ability to devote sufficient funds to its priorities. With tax revenue generation
sharply below emerging market peers [IMF, Article IV 2023], the DPL outlined an agenda that improved tax
buoyancy through changes to the VAT and personal income tax for high-income individuals. Second, the
DPL tackled the challenge of spending efficiency, which was dragged by both insufficient integration of
medium-term planning and the budget process (limiting spending efficiency and accountability for
outcomes) as well as fragmentation of capital expenditure (reducing capital spending efficiency).

The design of the PAs supporting the operation was underpinned by significant analytical work and
technical assistance (stretching over more than a decade of WB support). Actions under the revenue pillar
(Objective 1) were informed by: WB Support for Enhanced Macro and Fiscal Policy Analysis (2012 –
2016), the Programmatic Macro and Fiscal Policy Engagement (2012-2020), the Fiscal Programmatic
PASA (2020-2024), and the Knowledge-based Solutions for Poverty Reduction & Mobility in Indonesia
PASA (2020-2023), in addition to two flagship reports [the Public Expenditure Review (2020) and the
Commitment to Equity (2020)] and technical assistance to the MOF. Technical assistance to the MOF also
facilitated reforms under Objective 2, including the redesign of planning and budgeting system (RSPP).
The Subnational Finance and Management for Results (SEMAR, 2020 -2025) project and its predecessor
Decentralization that Delivers PASA offered extensive support to MOF on subnational fiscal relations and
financial management (PA4).

Nearly all of the PAs made meaningful contributions to addressing key constraints toward the operation’s
objectives. Three out of six PAs were rated highly satisfactory for relevance, with two rated satisfactory.
PA3 more aptly served the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions than revenue enhancement,
though the carbon tax has the potential to generate substantial revenue in the medium to long term,
depending upon the emissions caps and carbon tax rate set.

The DPO integrated lessons from the previous Fiscal Reform DPO series to mitigate risks associated with
the operation. Importantly, the DPO noted the finding from the ICRR that several politically sensitive PAs
(related to the Income Tax Law, Value-Added Tax Law, and Fiscal Decentralization Law) had to be
dropped ahead of the 2019 presidential elections. A key lesson learned from the DPL series and adopted



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



in the Fiscal DPO was to prepare the DPL after key legislation has been approved by parliament, so that
the operation can focus on supporting implementation.

The choice of instrument (a stand-alone DPO) was based on prior experience with DPOs in Indonesia,
which suggested that “a programmatic development policy loan series is not an appropriate tool to
incentivize politically sensitive reforms in a pre-determined sequence” (Indonesia Fiscal DPL Concept
Note). While this may be true, PA3 in particular (the institutionalization of a carbon tax regime) suffered
from no follow-on actions that would have resulted in the application of a carbon tax (the tax was supposed
to be implemented in 2022, but its application has been delayed until 2025). Budget and planning reforms
initiated under Objective 2, meanwhile, might have been better supported through a PforR, which would
have linked achievements to program results.

Two RIs were imperfect, and as a result, the outcomes ostensibly “achieved” could not be fully verified. For
example, the RI chosen to assess the impact of the consolidation of spending units within ministries (PA6)
was deficient for measuring the impact of the PA (and indeed, the number of spending units increased
between 2022 and 2023 with the addition of a new Line Ministry/Institution). A broader set of RIs
(particularly with regard to strengthened budget and planning institutions) would have allowed for better
measurement of achievements.

The reform agenda benefited from prior close consultations, both between the government and
development partners/internal agencies during the design stage, and between the WB and stakeholders.
Prior to their Parliamentary approval, the government dedicated meetings with external stakeholders to
discuss the Tax Harmonization Law and the Law on Intergovernmental Finance, and PAs were
substantially informed by these consultations. For example, the Indonesia Consumers Association, the
main consumers’ advisory body, stated that the 1 percentage point VAT rate would not impact
consumption, especially in the middle-income group, and considered the time lag between enactment of
the THL and its implementation to be sufficient (Program Document, p. 31). As a key activity under the
FY21-25 CPF, the DPL was also informed by extensive CPF consultations by the WB with the government,
the private sector, civil society, and development partners.

The program documentation provided a candid analysis of major risks and social and environmental
impacts. The substantial nature of risks stemming from changes to macroeconomic conditions, institutional
capacity, and stakeholder and social responses was noted. The PD discussion of risks highlighted
additional WB support (either through other operations or through technical discussions) to mitigate those
risks. For example, in discussing the risks of social pushback from the VAT increase, the PD noted the
importance of using part of the revenue increase to compensate the poor, and highlighted the advice the
WB was providing to MOF in both estimating the impacts on the poor and potential mechanisms for
compensation. In discussing the risks from stakeholder pushback on spending unit consolidation (PA6),
the document noted WB support to MOF to help the affected ministries and spending units reorganize in a
way that preserved their authority in procurement and financial management. The mitigation measures
stipulated within the PD were implemented.



Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring of the stand-alone DPO was appropriate. The WB continued to provide technical assistance in areas
supported by the DPO and closely supervised its implementation. For example, the Fiscal PASA facilitated
public dialogue and provided analytical evidence on how fiscal policies can support long term growth, and
delved deeper on the factors that cause the low revenue collection from three elements: policy design,
compliance/administrative, and structure of the economy (ICR, p. 28). Other assistance areas
contemporaneous with the Fiscal DPO include the SINERGIS Program (toward tracking progress in total per
capita revenue equalization for the most populous district quintile) and the WB’s Partnership for Market
Implementation (supporting the implementation of carbon pricing policies). The ICR noted the implementation
delay of the carbon tax and the time needed for some reforms to generate tangible results.



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With both design and Implementation assessed as Satisfactory, overall Bank Performance is assessed as
Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The immediate positive social impact of the DPO was the improvement in allocation of resources to more
populous regions, which benefits populations with higher proportions of the poor. Other impacts are expected
but not yet observed.



b. Environmental




                                                                                                Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



Although the DPO would be expected to positively impact the environment through the introduction of the carbon
tax (PA3), the carbon tax rate had not been determined, which is the incentive mechanism for the reduction in
emissions.



c. Gender

No definitive gender impacts expected from the DPO.



d. Other

None identified.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR covered issues well. It presented a coherent narrative of program design and the lessons learned from
prior experience in the sector. While a theory of change was not presented, the ICR clearly linked PAs toward
the intended objectives and provided a robust evidence base that validated the relevance of the actions
undertaken. The ICR provided a candid assessment of weaknesses, particularly regarding the implementation
of the carbon tax (which has not yet been applied), as well as a thorough assessment of risks to sustaining
development outcomes achieved. With regard to other impacts, in an effort to be comprehensive, the ICR at
times speculated on potential impacts that could not be directly linked to the operation (for example, the
potential use of increased fiscal revenues toward activities that would improve gender equity).



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
                               Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                               ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Fiscal DPL (P177726)



Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified three lessons, two of which this validation broadly endorses. The ICRR offers a third lesson
regarding RIs.

Deep technical partnerships (in this case in the fiscal/PFM space) allow the WB to support the most
relevant actions, appropriately prioritized and sequenced, and that appropriately account for fiscal and
social considerations. The extensive partnership with the GoI (including through long-standing multi-donor
trust funded technical support) allowed the WB to support an important, logical agenda of reforms.

Effective communication of policy reforms that explains benefits of the reforms as well as
compensation by the government for those adversely affected is essential for ensuring public
understanding and support. Despite advanced announcements and intentions to implement reforms during
the COVID recovery period, public concerns about the reforms' impact, particularly on increasing revenue
collection, have led to additional price pressures.

RIs should aim to reflect the outcomes sought rather than potential outputs toward the objectives. In the
area of budget strengthening, several outcomes expected were not achieved, in part because the RIs were
oriented toward administrative changes (changes in number of spending units, changes in number of
programs) rather than actual changes in budget efficiency or effectiveness. A broader set of RIs (particularly
with regard to strengthened budget and planning institutions) may have provided greater evidence of
achievements.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
