     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024094

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157055                                    CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                              Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59990                                  31-Dec-2022                                       284,796,084.44

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Mar-2017                                30-Sep-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          325,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           271,763,426.25                                              0.00

 Actual                                       284,796,599.99                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Gouthami Padam              Fernando Manibog             Ramachandra Jammi             IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) for the Electricity Transmission and Access Project (ETAP) as
   stated in the PAD (Page 7) and in the Financing Agreement (Page 6) was “to contribute to the
   improvement of the efficiency and reliability of electricity supply and increased access to electricity in
   Côte d'Ivoire”

   This IEG ICR Review will assess the following two objectives:


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



          To contribute to the improvement of the efficiency and reliability of electricity supply in Côte d’Ivoire.
          To contribute to increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project, as approved in March 2017, included these four components:

   Component 1: Reinforcement of Transmission Systems (amount at approval of US$115.6 million
   equivalent, estimated actual amount of US$119.9 million).

   The three sub-components at approval were as follows:

          The construction of a new substation (225kV/90kV) at Gagnoa, about one kilometer (km) of 225kV
           and five km of 90kV transmission lines from the substation to reduce the load on the existing
           substation,
          The upgrade of three existing 90kV Substations to 225kV (Youpougon 1, Bia-Sud, and Treichville)
           toward improving the dynamic behavior of the electricity network in Abidjan,
          The improvement of quality and reliability of supply in selected 225kV/90kV substations and 10 High
           Voltage (HV)/Medium Voltage (MV) substations in selected towns through financing the supply and
           installation of HV/MV transformers in selected overloaded HV substations of Abobo, Taabo, Kossou,
           Man, and Ferke. This sub-component was also to finance transformers to improve reliability of
           supply (n-1), and reduce technical losses in 10 substations, namely Agboville, Attakro, Ayamé 2,
           Bongo, Bouake 1, Daloa, Danané, Dimbokro, Abengourou, and Dabou.

   Component 2: Rehabilitation, Reinforcement, and Extension of Distribution Systems in Abidjan and
   Selected Regional Capital Cities (amount at approval of US$95.4 million equivalent, estimated actual
   amount of US$64.9 million).

   The three subcomponents at approval were as follows:

          The Rehabilitation, Reinforcement, and Extension of Distribution Systems in selected Regional
           Capitals aimed at financing the rehabilitation, reinforcement, and extension of distribution systems in
           the towns of Gagnoa, Man, Soubré, Duekoue, Guiglo, Seguela, Odienne, Katiola, Sassandra, and
           Touba.
          The Replacement of Overhead MV Lines with Underground Lines in Abidjan of about 460km of the
           existing overhead conductors by underground cables.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



        The upgrade of MV Cables by replacing Impregnated Paper Insulation Cables with Synthetic
         Insulation Cables (CIS) in Abidjan of around 120 km of the existing overloaded and aged paper
         insulated MV cables with cables covered by synthetic insulation in Abidjan.

  Component 3: Rural Electrification and Support to Electricity for All Program (amount at approval of
  US$100.6 million equivalent, estimated actual amount of US$81.5 million).

  The two subcomponents at approval were as follows:

        Improvement of Rural Electrification by funding for the MV and Low Voltage (LV) networks required
         to electrify 201 villages in selected rural areas in the regions of Gboklè, Haut-Sassandra, Nawa, and
         San Pedro.
        Support to Electricity for All Program. Funds under this sub-component were to be used to set up the
         transitional revolving fund to help finance household connection costs (including internal house
         wiring) to obtain grid supply in the above mentioned 201 villages and in 10 regional capital cities for
         low-income households.

  Component 4: Strengthening Institutional Capacity of the Electricity Sector and Project Management
  (amount at approval of US$13.4 million equivalent, estimated actual amount of US$18.5 million).

  The three subcomponents at appraisal were as follows:

        Capacity Building aimed to finance the training plan of the State-owned Energy Asset Holding
         Company (CI-Energies) staff and other energy sector entities in the areas of project management,
         power distribution and rural electrification, electricity transmission, procurement, finance and
         accounting, and environmental and social safeguards, and the monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
         system to track the performance of the power sector, as well as support to inclusive and equal
         access to electricity services for men and women.
        Services of two engineering firms to supervise and control the quality of the implementation of
         engineering works financed under the project.
        Project Management to cover the cost of managing the project, including remuneration of key
         experts to be hired under the project to support the project implementation unit. Key experts will
         include a project coordinator, an accountant, a procurement specialist, and a social and gender
         development specialist.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The original appraised cost was US$325 million. This amount was revised to US$271.76
  million. The actual amount disbursed was US$ 284.79 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by IDA Credit.

  Borrower contribution. There was no borrower contribution.

  Dates. The project was approved on Mar 30, 2017, became effective on July 14, 2017. A midterm review
  was conducted on October 22, 2021. The project and was initially scheduled to close on December 31,


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



2022. It was extended twice, first on October 26, 2022 (for 6 months) and again on May 11, 2023 (for 3
months), i.e., a total extension of 9 months. The final closing date was September 30, 2023.

Other changes. The project was restructured four times on June 11, 2020; October 26, 2022; May 11,
2023; and on September 27, 2023. The PDO remained unchanged during the restructurings, but there were
some changes in the PDO and output indicators. The specific changes are described below.

First Restructuring: During the restructuring of June 11, 2020, the following changes were made:

    1. Addition of 420 new localities (later removed during the 2nd restructuring) having 12,948 households
       to be electrified in the scope of the rural electrification activities under ‘Component 3
    2. Addition of 77,478 new connections under the Electricity for All Program activities under ‘Component
       3
    3. Revision of the Results Framework to reflect the above additions to the project scope.
    4. Some reallocations were made between disbursement categories with decrease in category 1 and
       increase in category 2 following the changes of the costs of components.
    5. Economic and financial analyses were updated to reflect the changes

Second Restructuring: During the restructuring approved on October 26, 2022, the PDO remained
unchanged, but the following changes were made:

    1. The 420 new localities identified in the first restructuring could not be electrified because some were
       already electrified by the government, with its own funds, prior to the elections in 2021
    2. The high targets of the Results Framework (RF) were revised downward to reflect the reduced
       scope of the project. For example, the target for number of villages/localities to be electrified was
       reduced to 120, compared to a target of 621 localities after the first restructuring (i.e., 201 localities
       as appraised and 420 added at the first restructuring, hence the new target level of 120 is 60 percent
       of the appraised target and 19 percent of the target set at the first restructuring). In addition,
       other indicators were revised accordingly under the rural electrification sub-component.
    3. Savings under Component 1 led to the decision to acquire 33 transformers. Two regions (San Pedro
       and Gbokle) faced delays due to the revision of the list of localities to be electrified and the
       environmental and social works.
    4. Extension of the Project closing date from December 31, 2022, to June 30, 2023, and an update of
       the disbursement estimates and the implementation schedule.

Third Restructuring: During the third restructuring of May 11, 2023, the PDO remained unchanged, but
following changes were made:

    1. There was a large uncommitted balance, and CI-Energies and the World Bank considered additional
       activities to use that balance, but by the current project closing date, about US$45.7 million would
       not be disbursed. Thus, the restructuring cancelled US$40 million of funds under Credit IDA-59990.
    2. The Project closing date was extended from June 30, 2023, to September 30, 2023.

Fourth Restructuring: During the fourth restructuring of September 27, 2023, an amount of US$12.7
million, which was undisbursed, was canceled and returned to the country’s IDA allocation. Following
cancellation, the components cost, the amounts under the respective categories and disbursement were
revised.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



   Split rating. Yes. A split assessment is being undertaken as the project went through a revision of the
   targets in the results framework. During the first restructuring of June 2020, the scope of the project was
   increased and the associated indicators and targets were revised upwards. However, during the second
   revision of October 2022, the scope of the project was revised and reduced. Although, a split assessment is
   not required if the scope of the project is increased, a subsequent restructuring made major revisions, while
   nearly 44% of the project’s resources had been deployed by the first restructuring (June 2020). In addition,
   the targets set during that June 2020 restructuring were mostly revised backward in the second
   restructuring (October 2022) to somewhat align with the original scope. Hence, to ensure that the originally
   appraised targets, based on an actual demand assessment in the field and approved by the government by
   a legally binding Financial Agreement, are considered, this ICRR will carry out split assessments for both
   the restructurings where the project scope and targets were revised. Therefore, two split assessments will
   be carried out starting from the originally appraised targets: (1) without and with the targets set during the
   restructuring of 2020, and (2) without and with the targets set during the restructuring of 2022.

   Disbursement Percentages: The following disbursement percentages will be used in deriving the weights
   to be applied to the assessment of original and revised objectives in Outcome rating. The disbursed
   amounts are taken from the “Restructuring and/or Additional Financing” table on page 6 of the ICR.

   Table 1

                                                              Disbursement
   Project Objective Period            Disbursed Amount
                                                              Percentage
   Original Period                     US$ 124.21 million     44%
   First Revision Period after June
                                       US$ 113.94 million     40%
   2020
   Second Revision after October
                                       US$ 46.64 million      16%
   2022
   Total                               US$ 284.79 million     100%




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context:

Since the late 1990’s, Côte d'Ivoire has faced several crises, including a political crisis and war in the North
and West of the country from 2002 to 2010, followed by a post-election crisis and armed conflict from 2010
to 2011. During this period, the country’s electricity sector remained resilient, but the negative impact
stayed on beyond the 2011 political settlement. Electricity access was poor outside major urban
centers with only 26 percent of households connected. This was significantly lower than what it was two
decades ago and compared to countries with similar GDP. Urban power distribution systems faced strain
from aging infrastructure and high demand that surpassed capacity. To avoid hindering economic growth,
increased energy sector investments were crucial. Limited natural gas discoveries led to the sector

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



becoming increasingly reliant on costly fuel imports, straining finances and requiring budget subsidies to
cover operational expenses. With the Government’s reluctance to increase tariffs to reflect costs, this heavy
reliance on subsidies was not a commercially viable option. Despite all challenges faced by the sector, the
involvement of the private sector in the energy supply chain helped mitigate a more severe decline during
the crisis years by maintaining payment discipline throughout the supply chain (PAD, para 4; ICR, para 2).

The country relied heavily on domestic gas, but had substantial untapped hydro potential. Gas accounted
for 79 percent of power generation capacity, hydropower accounted for 16 percent and the remaining 5
percent was from liquid fuels. Expected growth in domestic gas production was 200 percent, and
hydropower capacity was estimated at over 1,900 MW, with the first 275 MW hydropower plant on the
Sassandra River Soubré) under construction. The main sector challenges included financial sustainability,
insufficient network investments, and low household access. During the political crises, tariffs were not
revised to reflect costs and the overall transmission and distribution network deteriorated. As a result, the
sector struggled with high transmission losses and a low access rate of 29%. To address these issues, the
Government aimed to optimize gas supply, add to electricity grid capacity to match with the demand, and
reduce losses while maintaining high levels of billing collection.

Alignment with Government strategy:

ETAP aligned with the country's priorities both at appraisal and at project closure. The Government’s
Programme National de Développement (PND) for 2021-2025 aimed to foster structural transformation for
an emerging economy. Pillar 3 of the PND focused on private sector development and investment to
improve economic competitiveness. The project's objectives of eliminating major bottlenecks in the
electricity transmission and distribution system and expanding access to electricity will boost economic
activity and provide households and industries with modern energy. This initiative also supports the
Government’s aim of becoming an industrialized economy by 2040. (PAD, para 19; ICR, para 18). In
addition to this, the project’s PDO on expanding access to electricity also aligned with the Government’s
Programme National d’ électrification rurale (PRONER), which was launched in 2014 and aimed to increase
the penetration rate of electricity to 80 percent by 2020 and the coverage rate to about 100 percent of the
population. As part of this initiative, the Government had committed to electrify all localities with over 500
inhabitants in the coming years and maintain an annual rate of electrification of 500 new localities until
2020. (PAD, para 17)

Alignment with Bank strategy:

The PDOs aligned with the World Bank’s strategies in Côte d’Ivoire, and were consistent with the WBG’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY23-FY27 and the previous FY18-FY22 period. The CPF’s
fourth objective aimed to expand connectivity through quality climate-resilient infrastructure, crucial for Côte
d'Ivoire's continued rapid economic growth. Ensuring affordable, reliable, and resilient energy and digital
services is essential for improving quality of life, productivity, and entrepreneurship. ETAP’s focus on
access expansion also helped foster inclusive growth, especially in lagging regions. (ICR, para 19)

Previous World Bank Experience:

Prior to ETAP, the World Bank engaged with the energy sector of through the Urgent Electricity
Rehabilitation Project (P112573) (2009-2014). This project, which was the World Bank's re-engagement in
the sector after a significant time gap, focused on rehabilitating distribution systems and providing electricity
to underserved areas of Abidjan after the conflict. The World Bank's contribution was notable as it


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



               recognized the transmission and distribution networks as a public asset requiring public investments for
               their expansion. These public investments eventually paved the way for private sector involvement in power
               generation and distribution management, thereby creating opportunities for further development and
               innovation in the sector. (PAD, para 21). This experience and engagement in the sector helped with the
               design and development of the ETAP. In addition to this, the rural electrification component of ETAP was
               also able to incorporate lessons from World Bank interventions in similar projects in countries like Peru and
               Vietnam, which emphasized the importance of including user connections in program design, setting
               affordable initial connection fees, and allowing long-term recovery of connection charges through tariffs to
               keep costs manageable for low-income users (ICR, para 44).

               Level of the PDO:

               The PDO’s were directly relevant to the past and current strategies of the Bank and the Government and
               were pitched at a level where they would be able to capture the broader development outcome for the
               electricity sector in Côte d’Ivoire. The Theory of Change (TOC) in the ICR showed the causal linkages
               between the PDO and the long-term impacts of improved of the efficiency and reliability of electricity supply
               and increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire. However, there were some shortcomings in the project’s
               implementation readiness, particularly in safeguards compliance and procurement expertise. The TOC and
               project design indicated a strong alignment with the longer-term strategies for the country and the WB.
               Hence, on balance, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the improvement of the Efficiency and Reliability of Electricity Supply in Côte d’Ivoire

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The Theory of Change (TOC) for the project was not included in the PAD, but it was developed
                             retrospectively for the ICR. It showed the causal linkages from inputs (activities) to outputs and how they
                             eventually lead to the achievement of the overall PDO and longer-term development outcomes. ETAP aimed
                             to improve the efficiency and reliability of electricity supply and increase access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire
                             by upgrading the electricity transmission and distribution networks, focusing on rural electrification, and
                             through institutional and capacity development in the sector. Specifically, on Objective 1, which relates to the
                             improvement of the efficiency and reliability of the electricity supply, the project financed key activities that
                             included reinforcement of transmission systems; rehabilitation, strengthening and expansion of distribution
                             systems in Abidjan and selected regional capital cities; construction and rehabilitation of MV and LV

                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



networks; and capacity building and project management activities. Expected outputs included increased
number of new and reinforced HV substations; increased bulk supply capacity in the project area; increased
length of distribution lines and cables installed or upgraded in project areas; and improved capacity of
electricity sector institutions through an increase in the number of staff trained in the electricity utility and
improved project management. This was expected to lead to the outcomes of reduced duration of power
outages per year in rehabilitated substations and reduced electricity losses per year. The longer-term
outcomes included higher reliability and efficiency of energy service and improved performance in the
electricity sector and energy utility in Côte d’Ivoire.

Overall, the TOC of the project was straightforward, the causal pathways from inputs to outcomes were valid,
and the indicators identified for the outputs and outcomes were logical. However, there was a shortcoming in
the selection and measurement of the outcome indicator for electricity losses, which was measured at the
national level as described in the ICR and was not easily measurable at the project level. The project was
restructured, and the overall scope of the project changed during two of the restructurings. However, these
restructurings were not related to Objective 1.

The critical assumptions, which apply to both Objectives, were well identified. Mobilization of adequate
financial resources was essential to ensure a continued maintenance of the new transmission and distribution
infrastructure. In addition, pursuit of the electricity sector policy coordination and rationalization agenda, an
increased dialogue among the key stakeholders to establish an optimal energy mix, and a financial
equilibrium in the electricity sector were essential. However, while there may have been initial coordination
among stakeholders, evidence of a sustained collaboration was lacking. The project's scope increased in the
first restructuring of 2020 to electrify 420 new localities but was scaled back within two years during the
second restructuring in 2022 as these areas were electrified as part of government and other donor projects
(Restructuring Paper, Paras 21 and 22). Key stakeholders failed to foresee that the additional scope
approved in 2020 would be addressed by the government and hence this assumption did not hold.

Outputs

      Average power outage duration in reinforced substations reduced to 12 hrs, as against the target of 20
         hours and a baseline of 26.5 hours. Target was exceeded.
        Average time of outages in Abidjan reduced to 7.18 hours, as against the target of 20 hours and a
         baseline of 23.3 hours. Target was exceeded.
        Average time of outages in 10 capital cities went down to 5.32 hours from a baseline of 14.2 hours.
         Target was 5 hours. Target was almost achieved.
        Bulk supply capacity in the project area increased to 1,264,000 Kilovolt-Amperes (KVA), lower than
         the target of 1,908,000.00. Target was partially achieved. (66%)
        A total of 15 HV substations were reinforced, as against the target of 18. Target was partially achieved
         (83%). The ICR reported that the work in the remaining three substations could not be completed
         following difficulties encountered by the service provider Grid Solutions, and the pollution encountered
         at the Bia Sud site. The work in the remaining three substations was only partially completed - Ferké
         (85%), Man (79%) and Bia Sud (57%)
        One new high voltage substation (Gagnoa) was constructed, as targeted.
        Distribution MV lines constructed under the project in urban areas was 400 km as opposed to a target
         of 778 km. Target partially achieved. (51%)
        Distribution LV lines constructed under the project in urban areas was 963.7 km, exceeding the target
         of 903 km

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




      Distribution MV lines rehabilitated under the project in urban areas went up to 472.9 kms, exceeding
       the target of 458 km
      Distribution LV lines rehabilitated under the project in urban areas went up to 190, exceeding the
       target of 113.00 km

The following outputs on capacity and institutions pertain to both PDOs

      Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey was completed as planned, achieving the target.
      182 people were trained in aspects of safeguards as well as 3 people in World Bank procurement
       procedures and 3 people trained in the use of lab trucks acquired as part of the project, exceeding the
       target of 100 staff being trained.
      Around 91.9 project-related grievances were registered and addressed under the project Grievance
       Redress Mechanism (GRM), as against the target of 100. Target was mostly achieved.

Outcomes:

      The cumulative duration of power outages per year in substations rehabilitated by the project was
       reduced to 737 hours, as opposed to the target of 3207 hours and a baseline of 3773 hours. Target
       was exceeded. The ICR reports that the commissioning and installation of the project's transformers
       made it possible to ensure there were no longer any power outages due to the unavailability of a
       transformer in the substations of the project area (ICR, Annex1 Page 34).
      Electricity losses per year in the project area went down to 14.11% from a baseline of 15%, as
       opposed to a target of 12.5%. Target achievement rate was 36%. The ICR indicates that the
       percentage of electricity losses, defined as the ratio of electricity generated and electricity available for
       distribution irrespective of the zone, was the national rate (beyond the project area). It acknowledges
       that quantifying the project's impact on reducing losses in the project area was challenging, even
       though both the grid operator, CIE, and CI-Energies acknowledged its positive effect (ICR, para 25).
       However, the definition of this indicator differs from what was originally proposed in the PAD at the
       initiation stage. According to the PAD, this indicator was to be calculated by “dividing total electricity
       losses by the total net injected generation in the project area.” Reduction of losses in financed
       substations was be added to reduction of losses in rehabilitated distribution network and the baseline
       would be the actual electricity losses in the project area at the beginning of the project” (PAD, Annex
       1, page 29)

With regard to the improvement of the efficiency and reliability of electricity supply in Côte d’Ivoire, the
targeted outcome for a reduction in power outages was exceeded. This was also confirmed by a beneficiary
survey (ICR, para 27). However, the reduction in electricity losses was only partially achieved. As noted
above, the ICR reports that there were indications of reduced losses from the utility, but it was difficult to
quantify the impact at the project level as this indicator was calculated at the national level. However, the
definition for calculating electricity losses at closing, as described in the ICR, differed from what was proposed
in the PAD, which (if used) would have been able to better measure the project level impact of electricity
losses. The ICR does not give an explanation on why the definition was revised and why it was not able to
correctly measure loss reduction at the project level. Regarding outputs, most of the targets were achieved or
exceeded except for the increase in bulk supply capacity, reinforcement of HV substations, and km of
distribution MV lines constructed in urban areas, which were only partially achieved. All the targets for



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



capacity and institutional indicators were achieved. Hence, on balance, the overall efficacy for Objective 1 is
Substantial, with shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to the improvement of the Efficiency and Reliability of Electricity Supply in Côte d’Ivoire.

There was no change in the PDO and targets

Revised Rationale
While there was a change in the scope of the project and its results framework, and cancellation and
reallocation of resources, the original theory of change was not affected. Hence, the TOC presented under
Objective 1 (original) applies here as well.

The output and outcome indicators and their targets remained the same as in the original project for Objective
1. Hence the rating remains Substantial, with shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To contribute to the improvement of the Efficiency and Reliability of Electricity Supply in Côte d’Ivoire.

There was no change in the PDO and targets


Revised Rationale
As mentioned above, there was a change in the scope of the project and its results framework related to
Objective 1. Hence, the TOC presented under Objective 1 (original) applies here as well.

The output and outcome indicators and their targets remained the same as in the original project for Objective
1. Hence the rating remains Substantial, with shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute to increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The overall TOC provided under Objective 1 is mostly relevant under Objective 2. Specifically, on Objective 2,
which focuses on increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire, the key activities financed included some of
the activities included under Objective 1, especially on capacity development and strengthening, and
expansion of distribution systems. In addition, the project was to finance specific activities related to
expanding rural electrification and supporting the Electricity for All Program, which would focus on household
connections and help finance up-front connection costs for low-income households. This was to lead to the
outputs of an increase in the number of villages electrified in the San Pedro, Nawa, Gbople and Haut
Sassandra Regions as well as an increase in the number of households provided with an electricity
connection. The expected outcome was an increased number of people provided with new or improved
electricity service (grid or off-grid). The longer-term outcome was that the population of Cote d'Ivoire would
have more and better access to electricity.

The assumptions described under Objective 1 (original) hold in this case as well.

The scope of this objective was changed twice during the course of the project. During the first restructuring,
the scope was increased to electrify additional villages and the results framework was revised to reflect this
increase. During the second restructuring, this increase was scaled back. Table 2 below lists the indicators
that were revised during the two restructurings and the changes in their targets values.

Table 2: Objective 2 - Revised Indicators and Targets



                                                   Original     Revised 2020       Revised 2022
                                      Baseline
                                                   target                                           Actual
Indicator                                                       Source: 1st        Source: 2nd
                                      Source:
                                                   Source:      Restructuring      Restructuring    Source: ICR
                                      PAD
                                                   PAD          Paper              Paper
PDO Indicators
People provided with new or
improved electricity service –
People provided with access to
electricity under the project by    0              623,316      737,254            225,000          1,073,278
household connections (grid or off-
grid) (number) (Corporate Results
Indicator)
PDO Intermediate Indicators
Villages electrified (number)         0            201          621                120              132

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




Households provided with an
electricity connection in rural areas 0           85,153        98,101            18,957           191,776
under the project (number)
                                                                                  454
Distribution MV lines constructed
                                      0           1,522         2,348                              451.2
under the project in rural areas (km)
Distribution LV lines constructed
                                      0           1,763         2,330             451              1,089.8
under the project in rural areas (km)

Outputs

According to the ICR,

      Urban areas: A total of 72,316 households were provided with an electricity connection against the
       target of 18,773. Target exceeded.
      Rural Areas: 132 Villages were electrified, as against a target of 201. Target partially achieved (66
       percent).
      A total of 191,776 households were provided with an electricity connection under the project. This
       comprises 6,776 households in localities electrified by the project (against a target of 85,153
       households) and 185,000 connections financed under the Electricity for All Program (PEPT) to
       households in areas outside the project perimeter (ICR, Page 19, Table 5) for which no target was
       reported.

 Note: While the main ICR report reported 191,776 households connected under the project (ICR, page 19
and Table 5), Annex 1 lists 6,776 households (ICR, Page 41). It appears that the numbers in the Results
Framework did not include the 185,000 PEPT connections. Similarly, there is a discrepancy in the actual
achievement numbers between the main ICR report and Annex 1 – Results Framework. The main report
(ICR, para 29 and Table 5) lists 1,073,278 people, while Annex 1 lists 1,373,278 people (ICR, Page 34).

Both the PAD and the ICR indicate that PEPT is a national program funded by government budget funds and
multiple donors including the World Bank.

In response to IEG’s ICR review draft (through its email dated 06/29/2024 and meeting dated 09/16/2024) the
project team clarified that due to slow progress in electrifying villages, it was decided to use savings from the
project components to finance connection costs for beneficiaries under PEPT. This was regularized during
the second restructuring (Report dated March 30, 2017) as follows: “Originally, the financing envisioned was
EUR 25 million, with an additional EUR 17.9 million reallocated after a project restructuring in June 2020 (see
“rationale for restructuring”). These funds have enabled 185,000 new connections. Since the localities under
ETAP were not electrified yet, these new connections are mostly in urban areas with low risk of
reimbursement default. Resources collected by CIE from clients who have already benefited from the PEPT
financed by the Bank amount to EUR 16.8 million (as of June 2022). As some ETAP localities are now
electrified, GoCI is implementing the PEPT in such localities covered by the rural electrification
component.” The project team added that the 185,000 connections under PEPT were fully financed from
savings in other project components (without other donor participation) so they can be attributed to the
project.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




      Distribution MV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 451 km as opposed to a target
       of 1,522 km. Target was barely achieved (29 percent)
      Distribution LV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 1,089 km, as opposed to a target
       (2020 revision) of 1,763 km. Target was partially achieved (61 percent)

Outcomes:

A total of 1,073,278 people were provided with new or improved electricity service (grid or off-grid), exceeding
the target of 623,316 people. As noted above, a large share of beneficiaries were outside the project area and
were provided electricity connections through the PEPT program.

The ICR does not specify any activities or results for off-grid electrification and only includes people
connected to grid electricity service. The project team informed IEG that no off-grid activities were financed by
the project. However, this should have been clearly stated in the ICR, explaining why the off-grid activities
detailed in the PAD were not pursued.

The outcome target for number of households electrified was exceeded in both urban and rural areas with the
inclusion of PEPT connections. However, the output targets for the number of villages electrified and
construction of LV and MV lines in rural areas were under-achieved. The overall efficacy for Objective 2 is
rated Substantial, with shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To contribute to increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire.

There was no change in the PDO, but the scope of the project increased and PDO indicator targets were
revised upward

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change:

Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 2, Original Project.

The assessment of the output and outcomes based on the revised targets is as follows:

Outputs

      A total of 72,316 households were provided with an electricity connection in urban areas under the
       project, as against the target of 18,773. Target exceeded.
      132 Villages were electrified, as against a revised target (2020 revision) of 621. Target was barely
       achieved (21 percent)


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




      A total of 191,776 households were provided with an electricity connection in rural areas under the
       project (This includes 6,776 households in localities electrified by the project and 185,000 connections
       provided under the Electricity for All Program (PEPT) to households in areas outside the project
       perimeter (ICR, Page 19, Table 5 and was also confirmed by the project team)). The revised target
       was 98,101 households (2020 revision). Target was exceeded. However, as indicated above under
       Objective 2 (original), it is unclear from the ICR whether the 185,000 connections under PEPT can be
       fully attributed to the project.
      Distribution MV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 451 km as opposed to a revised
       target of 2,358 km (2020 revision). Target was barely achieved (19 percent)
      Distribution LV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 1,089 km, as opposed to a
       revised target (2020 revision) of 2,330 km. Target was partially achieved (47 percent)

Outcomes:

A total of 1,073,278 people were provided with new or improved electricity service, exceeding the revised
target (2020 revision) of 737,254 people. As noted above, a large share of beneficiaries were outside the
project area and were provided electricity connections through the PEPT program.

However, the output targets for number of villages electrified and construction of LV and MV lines in rural
areas were under-achieved. The overall efficacy for Objective 2 is Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To contribute to increased access to electricity in Côte d’Ivoire.

There was no change in the PDO, but the PDO indicator targets were revised downwards


Revised Rationale
Theory of Change:

Please see the discussion of the TOC under Objective 2, Original Project.

The assessment of the output and outcomes based on the revised targets is as follows:

Outputs:

      A total of 72,316 households were provided with an electricity connection in urban areas under the
       project, as against the target of 18,773. Target exceeded. (Indicator not revised)
      132 Villages were electrified, as against the revised target of 120 (2022 revision). Target was
       exceeded.


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




                                  191,776 households were provided with an electricity connection in rural areas under the project.
                                   (Including 6,776 connections to households in localities electrified by the project and 185,000
                                   connections under the Electricity for All Program (PEPT) to households in areas outside the project
                                   perimeter. As mentioned before, the attribution of PEPT households to project areas is unclear from
                                   the ICR). However, the revised target of 18,957 households (2022 restructuring) was exceeded.
                                  Distribution MV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 451 km as opposed to a revised
                                   target of 454 km. Target almost achieved.
                                  Distribution LV lines constructed under the project in rural areas was 1,089 km, as opposed to a
                                   revised target of 451 km. Target exceeded.

                            Outcomes:

                                  1,073,278 people were provided with new or improved electricity service (grid or off grid) compared to
                                   a revised target of 225,000 people. Target exceeded.
                                  In addition, the ICR notes that there was evidence of broader social and economic impact. A
                                   beneficiary survey showed that 12 percent of households connected to the electricity network had at
                                   least one member who has developed a new economic activity because of access to electricity. Out of
                                   the 301 households surveyed, 37 new economic activities were initiated as a result of gaining access
                                   to electricity through the project's resources.

                            After the restructuring, the outcome target of overall number of people provided with new or improved
                            electricity service largely exceeded the revised target. It must be noted, however, that the revised targets for
                            all output and outcome indicators were particularly low. This is especially true for the intermediate indicator for
                            ‘households provided with electricity connection in rural areas under the project’ and also for the outcome
                            indicator of ‘people provided with new or improved electricity service’ where the actual achievement far
                            exceeded the revised targets. In addition, as mentioned earlier, given the low village electrification rate and
                            the minimal achievement of the MV and LV lines, it is unclear if the large number of overall beneficiaries can
                            be fully attributed to the project.

                            Despite this, given that most of the targets (both for outputs and outcomes) were either achieved or
                            exceeded, the overall efficacy for Objective 2 is rated as Substantial.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy based on the original targets before restructuring was Substantial, with shortcomings for
                            both Objective 1 and Objective 2. Hence, the overall efficacy is rated Substantial with shortcomings.




                                                                                                                                Page 15 of 25
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         As described, the project’s efficacy based on the 2020 restructuring was Substantial, with shortcomings for
         Objective 1 and Modest for Objective 2 given the partial achievement of some of the output targets. The
         overall efficacy is rated Substantial with shortcomings.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Following the project's restructuring in 2022, it was able to achieve or exceed most of its output targets and
         also its outcome target. Efficacy was rated Substantial, with shortcomings for both Objective 1 and
         Substantial for Objective 2. Hence, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Operational and administrative efficiency

The project's launch was delayed due to limited implementation readiness, and its implementation was delayed
initially due to insufficient expertise in safeguards compliance and complex procurement processes. Inefficient
handling of savings reallocation led to an expansion of the project scope in June 2020 of electrifying additional
villages, which had to be reversed in November 2022. This was mainly because most of these villages had
already been electrified under a government financed electrification campaign. However, despite initial setbacks,
the Bank team was able to proactively address other safeguards issues faced by the project, even though the
allocated budget for strengthening institutional and project implementation support was exceeded by 25.4
percent. Some of the safeguards issues that were addressed included ones that were not identified at appraisal,
such as the depollution of the Bia Sud substation. There were disruptions due to COVID-19 and the Russia-
Ukraine conflict which impacted the global supply chain and caused travel restrictions. Once restrictions were
lifted, procurement procedures were finalized and the Project Management Unit (PMU) team was able to ensure
proper implementation achieving most project goals within nine months of the original closing date.



                                                                                                            Page 16 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



Economic efficiency

At appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted and anticipated benefits included improved electricity
reliability (through reduced technical losses, reduced outages), increased electricity supply to meet existing
suppressed demand and demand growth (also through loss reduction and improvements in delivery capacity),
and expanded access to new consumers in peri-urban and rural areas. This analysis estimated an EIRR of 10.8
percent and an NPV of USD 154.6 million at a 6 percent discount rate (ICR, para 34).

At completion, an updated cost-benefit analysis for components 1 and 2 (both accounting for 65% of actual
costs) was carried out using actual investment cash flows and estimated projected benefits from the original
appraisal as a reasonable representation of what had and was to occur over the expected economic life. The
analysis used estimated benefits from appraisal mainly because it was difficult to identify early indications of the
project-level impact given the integrated nature of power systems. It was especially difficult to quantify project-
level impacts for electricity losses and reductions in outages. The updated economic analysis found Component
1 marginally viable with an EIRR of 4.6 percent and an NPV of minus USD 11.5 million. Component 2 showed
strong viability with an EIRR of 22.2 percent and an NPV of USD 138.6 million. The updated economic analysis
for Component 3 estimated an EIRR of 17 percent and an NPV of USD 222.9 million. Overall, the combined
EIRR for all three components was estimated at 15.4 percent, with an NPV of USD 350 million (ICR, para 35)

Annex 4 (Efficiency Analysis) does not sufficiently lay out the PAD assumptions, the ICR assumptions, whether
they are comparable, and if not what had changed. The figures in the main ICR report do not match with those
in Annex 4, with the numbers presented in the Annex being much lower. The project team initially informed IEG
that the Annex numbers were not updated and numbers in the main text (quoted above) were correct
(correspondence dated 06/25/2024).

In an email dated 08/29/2024 (which responded to the IEG’s ICR Review draft) the project team provided a
revised excel sheet to IEG to show how the revised numbers in the main text were calculated and also
confirmed that “EIRR calculation for Component 3 accounts for the 185,000 connections in rural areas outside
of the 132 localities covered by the rural electrification activities”. In addition, the project team claimed that “to
account for the benefits of these connections (estimated based on the customers’ willingness to pay, which was
adjusted downward to better align with the actual consumption and tariffs), the economic analysis also accounts
for the full cost of the supply chain, from generation to transmission, distribution, and connection, to bring these
benefits of access to electricity to customers. These are the costs and benefits of Component 3, which
increased significantly thanks to these additional connections” (Correspondence dated 08/29/2024). Based on
the additional details provided by the team, the higher figures in the main ICR report are used for the review.

Overall, given the revised explanation provided by the project team, the project’s efficiency in terms of economic
returns is rated Substantial with shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                        Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                 10.80
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              15.40
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Assessment against the original outcome targets: Relevance of Objectives is rated substantial, and
Efficacy and Efficiency were both rated Substantial. Based on this, the original Outcome is rated Satisfactory

Assessment against the revised outcome targets (2020): Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial.
Efficacy and Efficiency were rated Substantial. However, as per the ICRR Guidelines, since one of the
objectives contributing to the overall efficacy was rated Modest, the revised Outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory

Assessment against the revised outcome targets (2022): Relevance of Objectives was rated Substantial.
Efficacy and Efficiency were also rated Substantial. Based on this, the revised Outcome is rated Satisfactory

A split rating is applied based on the disbursement shares on the baseline, project restructuring after 2020, and
after the project restructuring in 2022. Table 3 below provides the details.

The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.

Table 3



                                                           First Revision
                             Original Objectives                                Second Revision (2022)
                                                           (2020)
Relevance of Objectives      Substantial
Efficacy
Objective 1                  Substantial                   Substantial          Substantial
Objective 2                  Substantial                   Modest               Substantial
Overall Efficacy             Substantial                   Substantial          Substantial
Efficiency                   Substantial
                                                           Moderately
Outcome Rating               Satisfactory                                       Satisfactory
                                                           Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)     5                             4                    5
Amount Disbursed (US$
                             US$124.21 million             US$113.94 million 46.64 million
million)
Disbursement (%) (b)         43.61%                        40.01%               16.38%
Weight Value (a)x(b)         2.18                          1.60                 0.82
Total weights                4.60 (rounds up to 5)
Overall Outcome Rating       Satisfactory (5)                                                      Page 18 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional Capacity and Sustainability Risk. The project faced several challenges in the initial
implementation stage due to limited capacity to address various safeguards, financial management and
procurement concerns. While the project was able to strengthen the institutional capacity at the CI-Energies
and Côte d’Ivoire Electricity Company (CiE) to address these issues, there is a risk that changing
circumstances, lack of sufficiently qualified and trained staff to handle a growing portfolio and other
budgetary constraints may impact the availability of resources to fulfill their responsibilities in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project faced implementation readiness issues, mainly due to insufficient capacity and pro-
  activeness in addressing fiduciary and safeguards concerns. Preparatory work on environmental and
  social safeguards were found to be inadequate despite a strong dialogue between the Bank and the
  Borrower team during appraisal. Studies required to start activities were not completed before
  effectiveness and early Board approval did not leave enough time to finalize studies and address the lack
  of expertise on environmental and social safeguards. During implementation, the project’s resource
  utilization was partially impacted by reduced costs of equipment due to increased global competition
  among suppliers. As a result, the initial cost estimates at approval were found to be overestimated. Some
  of the savings were reallocated to other components, leading to a restructuring of the project. This
  restructuring aimed to increase the scope of under Component 3 and better align with the Borrower's
  infrastructure needs in electricity transmission and distribution at that time, but this increased scope had
  to be scaled back later. M&E Design had a few shortcomings with some of the indicators not being able
  to capture project level impacts. (ICR, para’s 70, 71 and 79)The ICR notes that design and setup of
  implementation arrangements incorporated key lessons learned, such as linking distribution and rural
  electrification to energy access to ensure that CI-Energies would build the distribution network and then
  rely on CIE to implement consumer connections to the limited number of customers with the means to
  pay the high connection fees, establishing a dedicated project implementation unit within CI-Energies,
  and making high upfront connection charges more affordable through installment payments added to
  monthly tariffs, benefiting low-income users who could not pay a lumpsum amount upfront. There was a
  thorough risk assessment carried out at appraisal and the overall project risks were well identified.
  However, some of the mitigation measures were found to be somewhat ineffective, especially when the
  Borrower was unable to promptly handle issues relating to fiduciary, environmental and social aspects of
  the project. (ICR, para’s 72, 73)



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team carried out 15 supervision missions covering project updates and prepared detailed
 Aide Memoires, which were shared with key stakeholders including the Government and the PMU. The
 project was supervised by four senior Task Team Leaders (TTLs), 3 of them were based locally, and
 supported by resident Bank staff. All of this helped sustain client commitment and focus on project
 activities. The Bank team was able to provide support to strengthen the PMU's capacity by establishing an
 environmental and social safeguards unit, hiring specialists, and supporting implementation. Close
 interaction with the client representatives led to the approval of a Program-for-Results Financing (PforR)
 operation on National Digitization and Access to Electricity Operation (P176776) in 2023, reflecting
 confidence that the Bank built in the technical, fiduciary and E&S capacity of the client. This follow-on
 PforR operation aims to increase electricity access, improve service quality, and enhance institutional
 capacity. (ICR, para 73)

 There were some challenges faced in the design and implementation of the first restructuring of June 2020.
 The restructuring reallocated savings from equipment acquisition to revise project costs, expand rural
 electrification, and update economic analyses. However, this coincided with the 2021 elections and with the
 Governments’ own electricity access expansion initiative, resulting in unrealistic targets being set that had
 to be reversed in a follow-on restructuring of March 2022. (ICR, para 74)

 Overall, Bank performance at supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the PDO statement was clear and aligned with the project’s theory of change and results
 framework. The PDOs remained consistent from approval through multiple restructuring phases until
 project closure and there was coherence between the implicit theory of change and the Results
 Framework. Most PDO indicators and intermediate indicators were measurable, achievable, and based on
 realistic baselines. However, it was difficult to measure the project level outcomes for two indicators -
 “cumulative duration of power outages per year in substations rehabilitated by the project (hours) and the
 "electricity losses per year in the project area (%)”. Assessment of these indicators in the ICR relied on a
 qualitative description of progress arising from the modernization of the transmission and distribution

                                                                                                  Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



 system supported by the project. The feasibility of measuring these indicators in the project area should
 have been assessed further at the design stage given that they reflected progress made at the national
 level by different stakeholders, and that a single project could have only a limited impact. (ICR, paras 53-
 56)



b. M&E Implementation
  Supervision missions and ISRs were essential for monitoring and sharing progress with stakeholders.
  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements were well-established and embedded in the right
  institutions, but there was a delay in setting up the Steering Committee. The PMU and CIEnergies played
  crucial roles in M&E, with the PMU consisting of project teams and an environmental and social
  safeguards unit. In the absence of a Steering Committee, effective monitoring was made possible by CI-
  Energies’ ability to coordinate and centralize all electricity sector information. The Results Framework
  underwent revisions during the 2020 and 2022 level-2 restructuring to adapt to changes in project scope
  and resource allocation – the project scope was initially expanded following large savings in
  implementing components 1 and 2, but the scope had to be scaled back later due to implementation
  setbacks as a result of inefficient contractors and inaccessible localities and the results framework had to
  be revised again. The definition used to measure indicators, such as electricity losses, was changed from
  what was proposed at initiation. During the restructuring, the project failed to make revisions to
  calculation of the indicators on outages and electricity losses to make them more measurable at the
  project level.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PMU's data reporting, along with Aide Memoires and ISRs from the Bank team, played a key role in
  reporting the status of the Results Framework and fostering dialogue among stakeholders regarding
  project implementation progress. Additionally, they guided significant implementation decisions,
  including level-2 restructurings that changed the project scope and determined the closing dates (ICR,
  para 60)

  There were some shortcomings in M&E design and implementation with some of the indicators chosen
  not easily measurable. There was also a need to reverse the results framework adopted during the 2020
  due to it being inadequate. Hence, the overall M&E quality was Modest



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B and triggered five safeguards policies. These included: OP/BP
   4.01 Environmental Assessment; OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats; OP/BP 4.36 Forests; OP/BP 4.11 Physical
   Cultural Resources; and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Various environmental and social

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



  instruments were prepared pre- and post-Board approval. At appraisal, an Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment (ESIA) was prepared for the Gagnoa 2 substation, along with environmental and social audits
  for the Bia-Sud, Treicheville, and Yopougon 1 substations. The Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) included sections to address potential issues with Natural Habitats, Forests, and
  Physical Cultural Resources. During the project, 19 Resettlement Action Plan’s (RAP’s) were prepared for
  various subprojects in distribution, transmission, and rural electrification. All environmental and social
  documents were reviewed, approved, and made public according to the Bank's requirements (ICR, para
  62).

  The project faced issues with poor compliance with ESHS requirements initially, leading to failures in
  following the Bank's environmental and social incident response guidelines. At project closing, CI-Energies
  had not completed four RAPs, affecting 3,663 people with an estimated compensation budget of 2.3 billion
  FCFA. However, the project was able to demonstrate good practices in social and environmental
  management by substantially improving its capacity and responsiveness on these issues during
  implementation and after the World Bank identified problem areas. The successful de-pollution of the Bia
  Sud was an example of the joint efforts to ensure compliance with the Bank's Environmental and Social
  (E&S) policies. The project also managed to record, monitor and satisfactorily address all complaints, with
  the CI-Energies reporting no outstanding complaints under the projects by February 2024. The project was
  able to establish and maintain a relatively good labor management system.

  A post-closure E&S action plan was created to ensure continued compliance with the Bank's policies due to
  some unresolved safeguard issues before project closure. As part of this, CI-Energies was to address key
  issues such as compensation payments, RAP completion reports, social audits, and pending complaints by
  preparing an action plan acceptable to the Bank, allocating necessary resources, and maintaining the
  monitoring and reporting system until all activities are completed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  Financial Management (FM) performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout the project mainly
  due to the PMU's failure to address issues raised in successive audits. At closure, the PMU ensured
  performance bonds were managed per contracts, bid bonds were released, and start-up advances were
  repaid, with follow-up arrangements for any outstanding repayments. The Bank and CI-Energies also
  agreed to maintain withholding deposit guarantees during the guarantee period.

  Procurement:

  Procurement of key investment activities faced initial delays due to delays in the preparation of safeguards
  documents and PMU's slow response to address issues raised in FM audits. The rural electrification
  component was especially delayed and could start only by late April 2019. Despite these delays the
  procurement function was generally satisfactory throughout the project. In order to address these issues,
  the Bank team has supported organizing a training session to enhance stakeholders' understanding of
  procurement procedures and expedite delayed procurement processes. (ICR, para 67,68)



                                                                                                 Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                 There were some shortcomings
                                                                                 in the M&E design and
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                     measurability of project level
                                                                                 impacts. Hence, the Quality of
                                                                                 M&E is rated Modest
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

    1. To ensure efficient project implementation, it is important to thoroughly assess
       technical studies, environmental and social considerations, procurement readiness,
       and Borrower capacity at the appraisal stage. The project faced initial delays in
       implementation due to incomplete studies and insufficient expertise, particularly on
       environmental and social aspects. The implementing agency, CI-Energies, was
       overstretched due it its involvement in multiple in multiple domestic and donor funded energy
       projects, impacting supervision. This was later addressed with owner's engineers, notably
       EDF playing a positive role in facilitating implementation, but future projects should prioritize
       readiness assessment, institutional strengthening, and enhancement of technical capacity
       during appraisal.
    2. For effective monitoring, it is crucial to design indicators and targets that can
       accurately measure performance results and be directly attributed to the project. The
       ICR indicates that one of the challenges faced was measuring the system losses, which was
       difficult to attribute solely to the project. Even though there was evidence of improvement, it
       was not easily measurable at the project level leading to misunderstandings about its
       achievement.
    3. Effective resolution of unexpected environmental challenges requires a collaborative
       effort among all parties involved, particularly government authorities, engineers, and
       organizations like the World Bank. During implementation, the unexpected discovery of
       pollution of water and land with hydrocarbons and Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCB) led to the
       suspension of activities on the Bia Sud. Significant work had to be undertaken for depolluting
       the site, which allowed activities to resume after an 18-month interruption. This incident

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)



         demonstrated the World Bank's comparative advantage in mobilizing financing and expertise
         from local and external partners to address unforeseen safeguard challenges. Stakeholders
         acknowledged that the high standards and thoroughness of the World Bank staff and their
         environmental and social instruments were crucial in identifying and addressing such
         unforeseen issues. Similar incidents may arise in other World Bank project sites, so teams
         should remain vigilant for potential leaks from stored transformers or other pollution when
         appraising and implementing electricity transmission and distribution projects.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, provides a detailed overview of the project, and includes a clear discussion on the
achievement of outcomes. It appropriately carries out a split rating for objectives, given the original indicators
and targets were changed during restructuring. It is also sufficiently candid and accurately points out some of
the shortcomings in the project, including design and identification of specific M&E indicators. The evidence and
analysis presented are mostly adequate for evaluating the performance of the project. The lessons were
evidence based and useful for future lending operations.

However, there are several shortcomings in the ICR with a lack of clarity and conflicting figures on some of the
indicators relating to project achievement in the Results Framework and in the Efficacy section. Some of the
definitions for calculating indicators were changed from what was identified in the PAD, and the ICR should
have given a clarification on why this was changed. There was a lack of methodological clarity as to whether
the large number of PEPT connections can be fully attributed to the project, which was later clarified by the
project team but should have been done in the ICR. In addition, the economic analysis results differ between
the main report and the Annex. The project team clarified that the figures in the Annex were not updated and
later provided an explanation on the revised calculations. However, these issues should have been resolved in
the ICR and it should have included the correct numbers I the Annex and a detailed explanation of how the
calculations in the main report were derived, in compliance with the guidelines. Hence, the overall quality of the
ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI-Electricity Transmissn and Access-SUF (P157055)




                                                                                  Page 25 of 25
