     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0024153

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P147348                                     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Georgia                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83770                                  31-Mar-2019                                             58,005,596.87

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 13-May-2014                                 31-Mar-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                          Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             60,000,000.00                                                  0.00

 Revised Commitment                              58,005,596.87                                                  0.00

 Actual                                          58,005,596.87                                                  0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator             Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                       IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objectives, as cited in the Loan Agreement (p.6), as well as on p.5 of the PAD, were
   “to provide reliable power transmission to the southwestern part of the grid, upgrade electricity exchange
   systems and provide economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable electricity sector
   planning”.

   In assessing the project, the objectives will be parsed as follows:


                                                                                                       Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



   (a) To provide reliable power transmission to the southwestern part of the grid,

   (b) To upgrade electricity exchange systems, and

   (c) To provide economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable electricity sector planning.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Transmission System Strengthening (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$52.35
   million. Actual cost at closing: US$63.38). This component financed the construction of the ABTL, a
   double circuit 220 kV high-voltage line connecting the Akhaltsikhe DC converter station with back-to-back
   configuration and 500/400/220 kV substation to Batumi 220 kV substation (US$45.46 million), including
   contingency (US$2.5 million) and a supervision consultant (US$4.2 million). The ABTL was intended to
   provide redundancy and hence reliability to the southwest part of the grid, while supporting the evacuation
   of excess power to Türkiye during the warm months.

   Component 2: Wholesale Power Exchange Platform (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$7.5 million; Actual
   cost at closing: US$4.135 million). The component financed the supply and installation of a power
   exchange platform, including hardware and software for metering, balancing and trading systems. It would
   also finance the design and supervision of this platform.

   Component 3: Electricity Sector Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$1.25 million; Actual cost at closing: US$0.857 million). This component financed the
   preparation of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) report, based on terms of
   reference from the Ministry of Environment & Natural Resources (MoENR), to be finalized through joint
   public consultations and incorporated into the revised power sector strategy to be developed for the
   country.

   Component 4: Project Management and Transmission System Studies (Estimated cost at appraisal:
   US$0.62 million; Actual cost at closing: US$1.857 million). The aim of the component was to support (a)
   consultants’ services to assist the Project Implementing Entity for the purposes of: (a) a new transmission-
   system expansion plan, (b) prospective transmission line feasibility studies, and (c) preliminary designs for
   the prospective transmission lines.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



   Project Cost and Financing

   The cost of the project was initially estimated at US$61.875 million, based on an IBRD loan of US$60
   million and Borrower contribution of US$1.875 million. The cost of the ABTL however turned out to have
   been overestimated, as bidding for the contract resulted in a lower price of US$36.65 million in lieu of the
   estimated price of US$45.65 million, or a saving of US$9 million. The savings allowed additions to be
   introduced to the components in the form of the reconstruction and rehabilitation of 102 km for three 220 kV
   transmission lines and the upgrading of various substations, under Component 1 and software to upgrade
   the existing Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system and the energy management
   system (EMS, under Component 2 – thereby enhancing the scope of the project.

   Borrower contribution

   A Borrower contribution of US$1.875 million equivalent was envisaged at appraisal, as part of the project’s
   financing. Actual disbursements on this account turned out to be much higher, to the extent of US$12.594
   million equivalent.

   Dates

   The project was approved on May 13, 2014, becoming effective on December 29, 2014. A Mid-Term
   Review was held on June 21, 2017. The original closing date of March 31, 2019 was extended twice – by
   an initial 24 months, through the March 2019 restructuring, and by another 25 months in the February 2021
   restructuring, to the final closing date of March 30, 2023. This brought the project’s implementation from
   approval to closing to just under nine years, in lieu of the original four years and 10 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

Georgia’s economy grew at around 6 percent during 2004-13, fueled by strong inflows of foreign direct
investment (FDI). However, the 2008 conflict with Russia and the global financial crisis led to a sharp
economic downturn and a contraction of GDP by 3.8 percent in 2009. The Government of Georgia (GoG)
responded with a fiscal stimulus package and public investments, which led to a recovery in economic
growth, at more than 5 percent during 2010-13, though FDI amounted to only a third of its previous high in
2007.

Despite the economic recovery, at the time of appraisal, the country had a high rate of unemployment and
its poverty rate was among the highest within the Europe and Central Asia region. The role of infrastructure
in promoting economic growth was increasingly seen as critical, with an emphasis on affordable, reliable,
clean energy to enable the private sector to compete, grow and contribute to the job creation necessary for
boosting shared prosperity.

The GoG had made major strides towards improving the performance of the power sector during the
preceding decade. Commercial management had improved dramatically and collections for billed electricity

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



had improved enormously, to nearly 100 percent. Although Georgia had no overall shortage of supply, it
was highly dependent on imported power to meet seasonal demand, raising concerns over security of
supply. The country’s power consumption peaked in winter, when hydropower generation was at its lowest,
necessitating reliance on substantial imported electricity or domestic natural gas-fired thermal generation to
make up the shortfall. In summer, no imports of power were required and – on the contrary – a surplus was
available for export. By increasing the share of hydropower plants with seasonal storage capability, Georgia
would be able to lessen its seasonal dependence on imported energy sources, enhancing the security of
supply.

It was estimated that without major investments in domestic seasonal generation, the security of power
supply would diminish further as Georgia’s economy grew, creating increased demand for power. Even
with a major increase in generation, weak parts of the transmission grid were likely to impede security of
supply. The northern, southwestern and northwestern branches of the transmission grid did not have
sufficient capacity to transmit power from the new generation facilities in that area. The Transmission Grid
Strengthening project was relevant in so far as it could help improve the stability and security of the grid’s
supply by constructing a new high voltage transmission line from Akhaltsikhe to Batumi to evacuate power
from the newly developed Adjaristsqali hydropower project there.

Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were consistent with those of the World Bank Group (WBG)’s country
strategy for Georgia, over the period of implementation. By contributing to the provision of infrastructure,
the project supported Focus Area 2 (“Enabling Job Creation by the private sector through improving
competitiveness”), Objective 8, of the Country Partnership Strategy, 2014-17, which highlighted the
potential for enhancing energy independence, energy efficiency and increased electricity exports. The
project’s objectives continued to be broadly consistent with those of the most recent Country Partnership
Framework (CPF), (2019-22) under Objective 3.3, dealing with the management of natural resources and
climate risks, activities in the electricity sector complementing the resilience agenda, which underpinned
Focus Area 3 of the Framework. The project’s objectives were also consistent with Focus Area 1 of the
CPF, which aimed to enhance inclusive growth and competitiveness, in so far as it contributed to the
country’s energy connectivity with neighboring countries like Armenia, Azerbaijan, Russia and Türkiye via a
regional power exchange hub. The ICR further argues (p.14) that the addition of the three transmission
rehabilitation subcomponents in the Imereti region would help enhance, through more reliable electricity,
the participation of the local population in economic activities and would increase regional economic
participation, consistent with Objective 1.4 of the CPF.

Since 1997, the World Bank had financed eight projects in the country’s energy sector for a total of US$300
million. The Georgian State Electrosystem (GSE), as implementing partner, had successfully managed
three projects as well as investments financed by other development partners, and had established a good
track record of operating transmission assets. Against this background, the project marked an enhanced
level of complexity and ambition, consistent with GoG and GSE’s implementation capacity. The project
recognized the power market development potential that sector unbundling had created, for both trading
power domestically and for exporting power as a tradable, through installation of a wholesale power
exchange platform and related metering, whilst also augmenting GoG’s hydro development plan with least
cost and environmentally and socially sustainable planning.

Based on the above, Relevance is rated High.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To provide reliable power transmission to the southwestern part of the grid”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             At appraisal, the operation was structured around the objectives of providing reliable power in the
                             southwestern part of the grid, upgrading electricity exchange systems and providing efficient and
                             environmentally sustainable planning. Key activities consisted of (a) installation/rehabilitation of transmission
                             lines plus substations, (b) installation of a wholesale power exchange platform, providing metering, balancing
                             and trading, (c) preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) report, along with
                             transmission systems studies. These in turn were expected to lead to the main outcomes of more reliable
                             power transmission provided to the Southwestern part of the grid, power being traded via the new exchange
                             platform, and economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable electricity sector planning being
                             provided.

                             Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were fairly straightforward. Key outcome indicators
                             included the elimination of outages in Batumi substation, the successful evacuation of electricity from newly
                             developed power stations in Southwestern Georgia via the grid, the successful exchange of power using the
                             new Wholesale Exchange Platform, and the results of the least cost planning and strategic environmental
                             assessment being included in the Government’s hydropower development plan. The 2016 restructuring
                             introduced additions to the components, based on contract savings, including the reconstruction/rehabilitation
                             of 102 km for three 220 kV transmission lines and upgrading of substations, and software to upgrade the
                             existing Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) and energy management (EMS)
                             systems. Changes were accordingly made to indicator targets and an additional core indicator added. It
                             should be noted, as mentioned by the ICR (p.21) that the results indicators were oriented more towards
                             outputs than outcomes, which had a bearing on the monitoring of achievements.

                             Assumptions underpinning the TOC were that (a) least-cost planning would in fact be part of the
                             Government’s hydro development plan, and (b) that actions other than the power exchange system,
                             necessary for power trading, would also be undertaken elsewhere in the sector.

                             Outputs

                             By March 2024, the following outputs were delivered by the project:


                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



1. Rehabilitation of a total of 102 km of three existing 220 kV transmission lines (Menji-Kutaisi, Tskaltubo-
Kutaisi and Kutaisi-Zestaphoni), accompanied by the upgrade of Menji, Tskaltubo, Kutaisi and Zestaphoni
substations.

2. Construction of the Western Section of the ABTL – consisting of 52.4 km of 220 kV double circuit
transmission line connecting Batumi substation to Shuakhevi HPP (175 MW) via the Koromkheti HPP (150
MW).

3. Construction of Part 3 of the Eastern Section of the ABTL, for a total of 56.8 km of 220 kV double circuit
transmission line, comprised of 40.3 km connecting Adigeni to Akhaltsikhe and 16.5 km connecting Adigeni to
Beshumi.

In total, the project constructed or rehabilitated 211.2 km (86 percent) of the targeted 244 km of transmission
lines. Construction of Part 3 of the Eastern Section of the ABTL was not however completed by project
closing, leaving 39 km connecting Shuakhevi to Beshumi – equivalent to 26 percent of the ABTL - pending
completion.

Outcomes

Despite the shortcoming in terms of completing the ABTL, the project registered some important outcomes:

(a) The key PDO indicator relating to total electricity evacuated from the newly developed power generation
station in southwestern Georgia through the grid was more than fully achieved, with 443 GWh being
successfully evacuated, against a target of 400 GWh. This went a long way toward easing the overload on
the transmission lines and the substations, and could reasonably be expected to lead to fewer electricity
outages, especially during the summer months, when demand was high.

(b) The Batumi substation saw a decrease in total duration of outages from a baseline of 136 hours to zero
(target was 0.50). While, technically, this would be a measure of system reliability rather than transmission
reliability per se, it would not be possible to achieve a system reliability of zero outages without reliable
transmission capacity to evacuate power generated; hence, it can be taken as a dependable proxy for
achieving transmission reliability.

In this way, there was overall a clear improvement in the reliability of power transmission to the southwestern
part of the grid, consistent with the objectives of the project. This was a consequence of western section of
the ABTL, connecting Batumi to Shuakhevi HPP, and the rehabilitation/upgrading of the three existing lines,
now providing stability by acting as backup to the transmission grid backbone. That said, the original intent
was to improve reliability through establishment of redundancy in the system via the ABTL, 26 percent of
which remained to completed at the time of closing. On account of this important shortcoming, but taking into
account the significant progress made on other fronts, efficacy of Objective 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




Objective
“To upgrade electricity exchange systems”

Rationale
To achieve this objective, the project was to finance the design, supply, supervision and installation of an
upgraded power exchange platform – including hardware and software for metering, balancing and trading
systems. The project was additionally to upgrade the SCADA/EMS, to make it compatible with the more
advanced metering systems being added to the platform.

Outputs

- Both the wholesale power exchange platform and the SCADA/EMS were installed and upgraded. By
project closing, the platform had been tested for 1.5 years and was technically functional, though not yet
operational.

Outcomes

Power was nominally exchanged (traded) using the new platform; though this represented a virtual (rather
than actual) trading volume of 60 percent of Georgia’s total electricity demand, as reported by the dry run day
ahead market (DAM). Operationalization of the platform however required a functioning wholesale market (as
per the assumptions underpinning the TOC), in turn necessitating politically sensitive policy reforms by the
Government to liberalize and deregulate the market. Since it was unclear when such reforms would be
undertaken, without which actual trade and exchange of power could not take place, achievement of PDO2 is
rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
“To provide economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable electricity sector planning”

Rationale
Under this objective, the project was expected to finance consultancy services to prepare a strategic
environmental and social assessment (SESA) of the electricity sector. The Ministry of Economy (MoE) and
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MoENR) were tasked with jointly preparing terms of
reference for the preparation of an assessment, conduct public consultation meetings and seek
feedback. The findings of the assessment would feed into a revised power sector strategy that would be
developed. Achievement of this objective would be measured by the results of the least cost planning and
strategic environmental assessment being incorporated into the GoG’s hydropower development plan - which
was in practice a somewhat narrower measure than the objective of efficient and sustainable sector
planning. The SESA document was meant to serve as an important input into the Strategic and
Environmental Assessment (SEA) of the ongoing draft National Energy and Climate Plan (NECP), being
supported by The United States Agency for International Development (USAID).


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




                            Outputs

                            - The Strategic Environmental Assessment was prepared, prior to project closing, based on the feedback
                            received from all stakeholders. The required public consultation was kicked off by public disclosure of the
                            document (completed in December 2023), upon holding two meetings of national stakeholders.

                            Outcome

                            The SESA developed four scenarios, of which Scenario 1 was the least cost generation plan. The
                            Government however adopted Scenario 4, the National Energy and Climate Plan, which – though not
                            technically the least cost generation plan – turned out (per the ICR’s analysis) to result in the lowest overall
                            energy consumption of all the scenarios; hence, in practical terms was the least cost approach. As such, the
                            results of the least-cost planning and strategic environmental assessment were incorporated into GoG’s
                            hydropower development plan.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project contributed substantially to the achievement of the development objectives by helping to improve
                            reliability of power transmission to the southwestern part of the grid. It succeeded in upgrading the electricity
                            exchange systems, but only modestly succeeded in its objective of operationalizing the new exchange
                            platform due to the inability of GoG to create the necessary (functioning) wholesale market. The project
                            however substantially succeeded in providing economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable
                            electricity sector planning. Based on this, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   Economic analysis conducted at appraisal indicated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 13.4 percent
   and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$3.12 million, discounted at 12 percent. After the first restructuring, which
   increased the scope of the project out of the savings obtained in contracting, without increasing its cost, the
   EIRR was recalculated at 56.5 percent, and the NPV to US$216 million. Due to reconsideration of some of the

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



assumptions underlying these calculations, the ICR re-estimated the EIRR at both appraisal and restructuring at
13 percent and 81 percent respectively (and the NPV at US$2.05 million and US$215 million respectively). In
comparison, the estimated EIRR at project closing, as calculated by the ICR, worked out to 60 percent, with
NPV estimated at US$194 million. These estimates suggest that the project was mostly efficient, overall,
principally on account of the inclusion of the three transmission line rehabilitations in the first restructuring, which
were successfully carried out.

Operational/Administrative Efficiency

The project faced several implementation issues resulting in delays and cost overruns on some items (though
these were offset by the overall contract savings). Disputes with the contractor over compensation led to a six-
month suspension by the World Bank of further construction on the Eastern section of the ABTL in 2018, until
issues were settled. As noted in the Borrower’s ICR, resistance from the local population to particular
construction locations and activities had also been a significant challenge causing delays in construction. The
project’s overall implementation period, including the 24-month extension of closing date required for the
expanded scope of the operation, was nine years compared to the nearly five years originally envisioned.

Taking into account the positive economic efficiency estimated for the operation, tempered by implementation
delays negatively impacting administrative and operational efficiency, the project’s overall efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         100.00
 Appraisal                                                    13.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         100.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 60.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives were highly relevant to the World Bank’s most recent Country Partnership
Framework (FY2019-22). The project was substantially effective, overall, in its objectives of providing reliable
power transmission to the southwestern part of the grid and of providing environmentally and socially
sustainable electricity sector planning, but modestly effective in upgrading electricity exchange systems. The
project’s efficiency was rated Substantial. As such, the project’s Overall Outcome is rated Moderately
Satisfactory.


                                                                                                          Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The overall risk of the project was rated Moderate in the ICR. Uncertainties existed on account of the fact
that the eastern section of the grid is yet to be completed and fully energized. Once that is done, the risk
would be expected to decline to Moderate, over time. At a technical level, the risk to reliability of power
transmission, manifested in outages arising in the Batumi service area, is considered to be low, and would
be a function of higher-than-expected demand growth rather than the operations of the transmission capacity
constructed on the ABTL or rehabilitated within the Imereti region.

The risk that the power exchange system will not be sustained is Moderate at the technical level, since the
platform has already been constructed. A greater risk is that the wholesale market does not function, that
the average clearing prices remain in excess of least cost, due to strategic bidding and other market
inefficiencies, over protracted periods, leading to eventual market failure and consequently redundancy of
the exchange system.

Political and governance risks are rated low, in view of the expected transition from a merit order and central
dispatch configuration to a market-based trading configuration. However, there would be a moderate risk
that sector planning could itself be superseded by investments driven by market forces, sidelining the role of
sector planning.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was consistent with the objectives of the sector, as laid out in the World Bank’s
  Country Program Strategy, namely to meet a critical need for the country in addressing concerns
  regarding the security of its supply of electricity. It drew upon the lessons learned from similar Bank
  engagements in countries such as Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan, as well as in Georgia. The appraisal
  identified (PAD, p.9) substantial risks arising on account of the complex environmental, social and
  technical challenges associated with the design, construction and operation of the transmission line. It
  also reflected the complexity of aligning the completion of the transmission line with the development of
  the associated hydropower project, with its multiple stakeholders. A lack of consensus among the
  various stakeholders on the best way to transition from a merit-order central dispatch system to a market-
  based wholesale trading system, and on the final design of the wholesale power market, turned out to be
  a key constraint impacting the design and implementation of the power exchange system.

  The ICR mentions (para 47) that while the objectives of the project were mostly realistic, they were
  oriented more towards outputs than outcomes, and with a results framework that did not always yield a


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



  measure of the objectives. This meant that monitoring of the indicators would not necessarily provide a
  good assessment of the achievement of objectives.

  On the basis of the above, the project’s quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (pg. 29), project supervision was thorough, though the 15 Implementation Status &
 Results Reports (ISRs) that were completed over the nine-year implementation period indicated a
 frequency that was less than standard. Five task team leaders (TTLs) were assigned to the project over
 the period. The team was proactive in restructuring the operation to utilize and reallocate contract savings
 and to arrange for the closing date extensions that were necessitated. When issues arose regarding
 compensation for project-affected persons (PAPs), the Bank team intervened to suspend further project-
 related civil works until all RAP (Resettlement Action Plan) entitlements were settled. The ICR also
 indicates that on-site local supervision by the locally-resident TTL and project team was instrumental in
 achieving much of the implementation progress that was actually achieved. The Bank team was also
 instrumental in facilitating a smooth transition of Component 3, by arranging for SESA public consultations
 to take place as part of the NECP public discussions being supported by USAID.

 Based on this, quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As indicated earlier, results indicators were biased towards outputs rather outcomes, making it somewhat
 more difficult to monitor achievement of objectives. This shortcoming was to some extent mitigated by the
 frequency of monitoring, which was provided for in the Results Framework. The ICR (para 58) also points
 to a slight lack of clarity at the outset as regards the monitoring arrangements for environmental & social
 safeguards, as to whether these lay with the Resettlement Management Team of GSE or the
 Environmental and Social Safeguards Unit. Though the issue was eventually resolved, according to the
 ICR this could be considered a moderate shortcoming in M&E design.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, M&E arrangements appear to have been adequate and satisfactorily implemented. According to
  the ICR (para 59), GSE diligently reported on the monitoring indicators for the ABTL as well as for the
  rehabilitation of the three 220 kV lines and the creation of the power exchange platform. PDO and
  intermediate indicators were regularly updated in the ISRs, reflecting GSE’s compliance with monitoring
  reporting requirements. On the ground, monitoring of contractor activities was also detailed and enabled
  timely response by the supervision team.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was adequate, as reflected in timely restructurings of the project, as well as proactivity in
  terms of resource allocation, guidance and consultation in dispute resolution and efforts to find
  alternative solutions to resolve the lack of consensus among stakeholders.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental: The project was classified as Category A, triggering OP/BP 4.01, requiring preparation of a
   full-scale ESIA), public consultations and development of a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a
   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The following other safeguards were triggered under the Bank’s
   Safeguards Policy: OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.36
   (Forests) and OP/BP 4.37 (Dam Safety). As of March 2023, all OP/BP 4.01 items were in compliance. An
   ESIA was prepared and rated Moderately Satisfactory, and compliance with all remaining safeguard policies
   was rated Satisfactory. A supplemental ESIA for the entire ABTL corridor, produced on account of the
   realignment of parts of the Eastern section of the ABTL, was disclosed and consultations held with
   stakeholders. The ICR does not clarify whether all other safeguard polices were in compliance. However,
   the ICR does indicate (para 63) that in the operations phase of the overhead transmission line (OHL), GSE -
   as owner – would ensure functioning of the environmental, health and safety system in compliance with ISO
   14000, local legislation and the World Bank’s requirements, with an estimated budget of US1.72 million over
   its 30-year operating lifespan.

   Social: In view of the implications of the right-of-way (ROW), common to most transmission projects,
   OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) was triggered, as ABTL was expected to acquire some 10 ha of
   land with easement for the ROW, requiring relocation of roughly 60 houses. This called for preparation of
   an RPF by GSE, with site-specific RAPs to be prepared once the exact positioning of the line was
   established. A rating of Moderately Satisfactory was provided for compliance of this policy at project
   closing. Since more than 80 percent of the original routing had to be changed during implementation, three
   new ESIAs and four new RAPs had to be prepared. Complicating the resulting social issues was the fact

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



  that the project was out of social compliance and suspended for six months – notwithstanding which the
  outstanding actions from the RAP completion report for the three completed sections were successfully
  completed and compensation for the remaining portion of the Eastern section was almost fully paid.

  GSE has continued to maintain a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) under a new Energy Supply
  Reliability and Financial Recovery Project (P169117), with assistance from the World Bank’s global surge
  initiative. A consolidated grievance log was created by GSE, with an improved classification system for
  grievances, and providing gender sensitization for its staff. At end-2022, GSE also introduced software that
  helped track and manage E&S issues, including progress on resettlement and the status of GRM.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  According to the ICR (page 28), GSE was responsible for financial management (FM) for all components
  except for Component 3, which would be implemented by MoE; though GSE retained responsibility for
  consolidation and submission of the project’s annual budgets, quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) and
  annual financial statements to the World Bank. The project’s overall FM risk was assessed as Moderate at
  inception.

  FM arrangements were found to have been satisfactory at project closing and acceptable to the World
  Bank during implementation. Unaudited IFRs were submitted on time and were of acceptable
  quality. During the Covid-19 pandemic, audited project financial statements for the year ended December
  31, 2021 were submitted with a delay of one month, but nevertheless found acceptable. The auditor
  issued an unmodified opinion on the entity financial statements. No potential FM-related issues or risks
  were flagged that could hinder project implementation.

  A Procurement Risk Assessment and Management Report conducted at appraisal identified a risk that
  GSE did not necessarily have the capacity to coordinate procurement activities under the project or to
  properly evaluate the bids in timely manner without external consulting support. To mitigate these risks,
  the Bank’s procurement specialist conducted a bid evaluation course, and organized attendance at
  regional procurement training in April 2014 (also, subsequently, in March and April 2022). Procurement
  risk was evaluated as Moderate after applying these mitigation measures. A Procurement Plan was
  prepared (to be updated annually), and the e-procurement platform was to be used for procurement of
  goods. As of September 2022, the project’s procurement risk remained Moderate and procurement
  performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory (on account of the remaining work contract not being
  completed by closing).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR indicates (para 43) that the project helped strengthen GSE’s Environmental and Social
  Management System. Prior to the project, GSE had just one safeguards specialist; but as the project was
  being prepared, an E&S safeguards unit was created in the International Projects and Reporting
  Department. The preparation of the SESA under Component 3 would further strengthen electricity
  generation expansion planning in Georgia through incorporation of adequate E&S considerations.


                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   The ICR rates outcome as MS in
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   the main text.
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons from the ICR:

1. The transition from a merit order-based regulated system to a market-based system for
providing stable low-cost power to the consumer needs to take into account the level of
development of the system: As demonstrated by the project, the degree of volatility identified by
the market opening study and the initial lack of consensus on an appropriate market structure
suggested that careful consideration needed to be given to the structuring of the wholesale market in
terms of its institutions and regulatory framework, to provide assurance of a stable revenue stream
for new entrants. Secondly, the regulatory environment for such a market needed to provide
assurances early on of prevention of market abuse. Thirdly, the relative fiscal costs of the safety net
under market-based pricing (as against a regulated tariff) needs to be carefully considered in
designing the structure of the market.

2. The form of contract for power transmission or large projects with potential E&S impacts
needs to separate activities by responsibility, for more efficient execution: Specifically, for
power transmission projects, route planning and the related ESIA need to provide for a waiting
phase during which the Government would complete all necessary processes for registering lands
and properties, complete any RAP compensations, and issue all necessary permits. Under this
scenario, the contractor would remain in standby during this “permitting period” without incurring any
costs, until this phase is completed. This approach was utilized for ESRFRP-funded contracts for
the Jvari-Tskaltubo 500 kV transmission line construction, as well as for the KfW-funded
transmission line, and appeared to be successfully avoiding the typical complications that could
arise.

3. While quality and cost considerations are important, it is important not to lose sight of the
fact that contractor capabilities constitute an important criterion: This is especially true with
respect to E&S issues and also with respect to supervision contracts needing more careful
consideration of procurement – which would apply to most large transmission projects. In this

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)



regard, adherence to pre-qualification under the Bank’s procurement guidelines is a key factor to
consider for large transmission projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally clearly written, concise and candid. The theory of change is outlined in a detailed
diagram, though a discussion of its underpinning assumptions would have been helpful. The achievement of
objectives is adequately analyzed, and the project’s efficiency is outlined in a fair degree of detail. However,
the discussion on the performance of the Bank, particularly of quality at entry, would have benefited from a
fuller discussion of such issues as the adequacy of the project’s components for achieving the project’s
objectives, the capacity of the implementing agency and lessons learned in prior operations that informed the
project’s design. There is also inconsistency in the outcome rating in the main text (Moderately Satisfactory)
and ICR data sheet (Satisfactory).




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 15
