     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024206

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P127585                                   TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Tanzania                                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16921                                  31-Dec-2023                                             494,284.74

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Apr-2014                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            5,149,183.11                                     5,149,183.11

 Revised Commitment                               538,053.95                                     1,624,637.06

 Actual                                           494,284.74                                       494,284.74




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Shkaratan            Dileep M. Wagle              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was stated in the Program of Activities Design Document
   (PoA-DD) as follows: “The objective of the Program of Activity (PoA) is to increase access to modern energy
   services in Tanzania promoting both off-grid (isolated mini-grid) and national grid renewable energy projects
   in the country” (PoA-DD, April 23, 2014, page 1).

   The PDO was not revised. For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as one PDO.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Jan-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The Project had one component which was to implement the Carbon Development Mechanism (CDM)
   Program of Activities (PoA). The PoA would encourage generation of electricity from renewable sources,
   replacing fossil fuels and increasing and improving energy supply in the rural areas. This was a recipient-
   executed project, to be implemented by the Tanzania’s Rural Energy Agency (REA). The implementation
   involved the following: i) coordinating the implementation of the PoA; (ii) screening and accepting CDM
   program activities (CPAs); (iii) supporting commercialization of certified emission reductions (CERs); and
   (iv) liaising with the PoA’s sub-project developers to maintain the required database for verification. The
   sub-projects were to be implemented by different private developers; and REA would have a contractual
   agreement with each. The contract would give REA the legal rights to deal with the carbon credits
   generated by the sub-projects and monitor emission reductions from each CPA. The conditions for the sub-
   projects’ inclusion in the PoA would follow the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
   (UNFCCC) regulations. The UNFCCC would conduct a verification of the produced CERs.

   There were three categories of CPAs, based on the type of power transmission (grid or mini-grid or both): (i)
   Category 1: Renewable energy (RE) technology (hydro, wind, biomass, or PV) connected to the national
   grid; carbon emission reduction was expected from avoided fossil fuel-based generation; (ii) Category 2: RE
   technology (hydro, wind, biomass, or PV) connected to isolated mini-grids; carbon emission reduction was
   expected from the replacement of diesel-based generation; (iii) Category 3: RE technology (hydro, wind,
   biomass or PV) connected to both the national grid and the isolated mini-grids.

   The component was not revised.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$4.06 million, and the actual disbursement was US$0.49
   million. The difference between the actual cost at closure and the estimated cost at approval was due to a
   reduction of Project scope at the restructuring.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



   Project Financing: The Project was fully financed by a Recipient-Executed Trust Fund grant from the
   Carbon Fund of the Carbon Partnership Facility.

   Borrower contribution: there was no Borrower contribution.

   Dates: The Project was approved on April 25, 2014. It became effective prior to the approval date, on
   March 31, 2014 when the Certified Emission Reductions Purchase Agreement for Programmatic Clean
   Development Mechanism (ERPA) was signed by the International Bank for Reconstruction and
   Development (IBRD) (as Trustee of the Second Tranche of the Carbon Fund of the Carbon Partnership
   Facility) and the REA, for the period 2015-2020.

   Note: An ERPA is a legally binding contract allowing one party to deliver verified carbon credits to another
   and defining related obligations; as well as the price, volume, and delivery schedule of emissions reductions
   (carbon credits). It gives project developers (‘sellers’ of carbon credits) an upfront guarantee that a specific
   volume of carbon credits will be purchased. The buyers benefit from locking in a below-market price for
   carbon credits. The Bank’s involvement was in utilizing its trust funds for carbon finance to supports client
   governments in developing carbon finance mechanisms. (based on ICR, page 4)

   No MTR review was held. The ERPA was amended once: on December 18, 2019, reflecting a significant
   change in the PDO target. The Project closure was planned for December 31, 2023, and that was the date
   of actual closure.

   Significant change:

   On December 18, 2019, the PDO outcome target was reduced, signaling reduced Project ambition: in
   the original PDO indicator “Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 820,139 tCO2e from 2015 to 2020 from
   the displacement of fossil fuel electricity generation through the generation of small hydropower in
   Tanzania”, the stated target was changed to 116,268 tCO2e. The ERPA was amended accordingly. The
   reduction of the target was due to the Project’s slow progress, explained in the ICR by the following
   reasons: a low number of projects joining the program, the inability of project developers to raise the
   required capital, technical issues the projects were experiencing, and the changing regulatory environment
   (ICR, page 9). The government policy toward private sector altered after the change in government in 2017.
   Specifically, the government ownership of the Project diminished, and the new uniform tariffs negatively
   affected the small power producers (SPPs) and the mini-grid systems operators. While the Government
   established a framework for the development of SPPs in 2019, it was too late because the ERPA’s time
   period for generating CERs under the Project was to end in 2020.

   No other significant changes were made during Project life.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At the time of the Project appraisal, in 2012, only 15.3 percent of Tanzania’s
population had access to electricity, with rural access being below six percent. At the same time, the
country had a relatively high technical potential for small scale renewable energy (RE) projects, relevant for

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



               the rural power access needs. Tanzania’s efforts to support the development of rural RE included the
               establishment of the Rural Energy Agency (REA) in 2005 and the promotion of the Rural Energy Fund
               (REF), which was to focus on RE. Despite the improved policy environment in support of small-scale RE,
               the pace of development of such projects remained slow, primarily because of the high equity obligations:
               private investors were required to contribute 30-40 percent of the total upfront investment cost, which was a
               constraint for local developers. Bridging 5-10 percent of the investment gap would accelerate the financial
               closure of the small-scale RE projects in the REA’s pipeline. The Project was designed to support REA in
               using carbon financing (RE CDM) to bridge the RE projects’ investment gap.

               Relevance to Government Strategies. The Project was aligned with the government priorities at closure.
               Tanzania’s National Five-Year Development Plan for 2021/22 - 2025/26 (FYDP III) recognized that private
               sector development was a driving force of economic transformation, specifically in relation to infrastructure
               investments. Within the energy sector, one of the strategic goals was stated as “improving the enabling
               environment for private sector investment in the energy sector” and one of the six key planned interventions
               was defined as “promoting and developing renewable energy technologies and projects (biogas,
               geothermal, LPG, solar, and wind energies), particularly for rural households” (FYDP III, page 80).

               Relevance to the World Bank's Country Partnership Framework. The Project was aligned with the
               World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Tanzania FY 2018-2022, specifically, with two
               objectives under the Focus Area 1 Enhance Productivity and Accelerate Equitable and Sustainable Growth:
               (i) Objective 1.4 Increase Access to Energy Services; and (ii) Objective 1.6. Enhance transport, energy, and
               digital connectivity for improved services to rural areas. Under Objective 1.4., the CPF underscored its
               continued support to private investment in “on-grid and off-grid renewables” (CPF, page 22). Under
               Objective 1.6., area Energy Sector Connectivity, the stated priority was “supporting rural electricity
               connectivity for households and enterprises, through both traditional grid coverage and stand-alone solar
               power installations” (CPF, page 25).

               Related World Bank operations. The Project was aligned with the WB’s Tanzania Energy Development
               and Access Expansion Project (TEDAP, P101645, approved in FY2007, closed in FY2017): it was designed
               to help private rural RE project developers, supported through TEDAP’s SPP component, to bridge the
               investment gap. (PID, page 3) The Project was also aligned with other WBG’s operations, including the
               WB’s Tanzania Rural Electrification Expansion Project (TREEP, P153781, approved in FY2016, closed in
               FY2023), which supported building both on- and off-grid rural connections. (CPF FY 2018-22, page 21)

               Overall, the Project was aligned with major government priorities at closure and with WB strategic priorities
               during implementation and at closure. It was designed to support a WB investment operation and was
               linked to other operations. Therefore, the rating is High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase access to modern energy services in Tanzania promoting both isolated mini-grids and national
grid renewable energy projects in the country using hydro, solar, wind and biomass technologies for electricity
generation.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not developed at appraisal. The ICR did not develop a ToC
either but presented the logic of the Project-supported carbon financing scheme in a diagram. The diagram
and the accompanying bullet points indicated that Tanzania’s REA and the Carbon Partnership Facility
(through IBRD) would sign ERPAs for the purchase of CERs with the private developers of the RE SPP sub-
projects under the PoA and, with donor support, would create an REA Revolving Facility. REA would also
sign Carbon Purchase and Equity Advance Agreements and Green Generation Performance Grants with the
sub-project developers to provide an upfront subsidization of the required equity contribution by developers
and, therefore, to support the issuance of commercial loans by banks to the developers. The Revolving
Facility would be receiving funds from the Carbon Partnership Facility and other donors (an advance payment
for the anticipated carbon revenues), and, at the time of the ERPA contracts signing, disburse the Green
Generation Performance Grants to the Project, to be awarded to the private RE sub-project developers. (ICR,
page 6).

The Original Project’s Results Framework (RF) had one PDO indicator and one output indicator. The
indicators monitored the implementation of the main activities in the CDM PoA component of the Project (the
single component of the Project): supporting the commercialization of certified emission reductions (CERs)
from the participating rural RE sub-projects, implemented by different private developers.

Outputs

1. “Installed renewable energy generation capacity (Megawatt (MW))”. The achievement at closure was
10.97 MW, against the original target of 12 MW. The target was 91.4 percent achieved.

Outcome:

1. “Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 820,139 tCO2e from 2015 to 2020 from the displacement of
fossil fuel electricity generation through the generation of small hydropower in Tanzania”. The
achievement at closure was 96,584 tCO2e (as per the UNFCCC verification of November 2023). The target
was 11.8 percent achieved.

2. Non-RF indicator of Project performance, linked to the PDO indicator. The Project originally intended
to support ten CDM PoAs (RE SPP sub-projects). However, only five of them became operational and had
generated CERs prior to Project closure. Out of the five non-operational PoAs, four were dropped due to sub-
project development delays and one stopped working in 2017 due to its low efficiency (ICR, page 13).

The original project partially achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is Modest. The PDO indicator
target was barely achieved, while the output target was substantially achieved, and the result of the number
of sub-projects implemented (which was outside of the RF) was partially achieved.



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)




                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To increase access to modern energy services in Tanzania promoting both isolated mini-grids and national
                            grid renewable energy projects in the country using hydro, solar, wind and biomass technologies for electricity
                            generation.

                            Revised Rationale
                            Please see the discussion of the ToC under Original Project.

                            Output:

                            1. “Installed renewable energy generation capacity (Megawatt (MW))”. The achievement at closure was
                            10.97 MW, against the original target of 12 MW. The target was 91.4 percent achieved.

                            Outcome:

                            1. “Reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 116,268 tCO2e from 2015 to 2020 from the displacement of
                            fossil fuel electricity generation through the generation of small hydropower in Tanzania”. The
                            achievement at closure was 96,584 tCO2e (as per the UNFCCC verification of November 2023). The target
                            was 83.1 percent achieved.

                            2. Non-RF indicator of Project performance, linked to the PDO indicator. The Project originally intended
                            to support ten CDM PoAs (RE SPP sub-projects). However, only five of them became operational and had
                            generated CERs prior to Project closure. Out of the five non-operational PoAs, four were dropped due to sub-
                            project development delays and one stopped working in 2017 due to its low efficiency (ICR, page 13). This
                            (non-RF) target was partially achieved.

                            The Revised Project substantially achieved its objectives, and the efficacy rating is Substantial. The PDO and
                            the outputs targets were substantially achieved, and the result of the number of sub-projects implemented
                            (which was outside of the RF) was partially achieved.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 15
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



         For the Original Project, efficacy is Modest: the Project barely reached the PDO target of reduction in green
         house gas emissions, while the output target was substantially achieved.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
         Modest                                                   Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         For the Revised Project, efficacy is Substantial: the Project substantially achieved both the PDO target of
         reduction in green house gas emissions and output targets.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

Neither economic nor financial analysis was conducted at appraisal or at closure.

Administrative efficiency

The Project was implemented within the original financing envelope, without an extension of Project closure and
with no adjustment to the Project component. This was due to the high quality of the financing scheme's design,
which was the core of the Project.

However, as the ICR reported, the Project was ambitions (reflected in the over-optimistic PDO indicator, which
had to be significantly reduced in 2019), resulting in delays with the implementation of the CDM PoAs (sub-
projects), which struggled to meet the quality requirement for emission reduction monitoring and certification;
and therefore the Carbon Partnership Facility was unable to transfer carbon revenues to the Revolving Facility
(RF). Consequently, the Revolving Facility was unable to provide grants to sub-project developers, negatively
affecting the issuance of bank loans for the sub-projects. Sub-projects also faced technical issues supplying
electricity to the grid. The ICR noted that the risk of achieving financial closure for sub-projects could have been
mitigated by scheduling the disbursement of the advance payment only after the plants were commissioned.
(ICR, page 16)

There was also an over-optimistic assumption that bridging 5-10 percent of the equity gap was sufficient for the
sub-projects to acquire bank loans; this worked for some of them but not for all. Carbon finance could not
overcome financial and institutional barriers, such as low capacity of financial institutions, high risks of private
sector investments, and regulatory uncertainty. (ICR, page 21)



                                                                                                            Page 7 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



External factors negatively affected implementation efficiency, such as the change in government that took place
in December 2015, which resulted in diminished support for private sector development and a reduced priority of
the Project; and cost constraints for developers due to the newly introduced uniform tariffs (ICR, page 16).

Internal factors, which were under the Project's control but were not mitigated, also had a negative impact. The
ICR noted that the TEDAP project, which underpinned the reviewed Project, closed in 2017, disrupting the
internal monitoring process. Project supervision faced several challenges, including a reduced capacity to follow
up with counterparts, causing further delays (ICR, page 20).

On balance, considering that the Project was implemented with no additional financing and on time, but also
taking into account the administrative shortcomings (including delays with the sub-project implementation) and
the lack of economic analysis at appraisal and at closure, the Project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                         Original project                  Revised project
Relevance of Objectives                  High
Efficacy                                 Modest                            Substantial
Efficiency                               Modest
Outcome                                  Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU)    Moderately Satisfactory (MS)
Outcome value                            3                                 4
Amount disbursed (US$ million)           0                                 0.49
Disbursement %                           0%                                100%
Total Value                              4 -Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



Based on the shares of the disbursed funds before and after restructuring (US$0.0 million or zero percent
before the restructuring in December 2020 and US$0.49million or 100 percent after restructuring), the overall
project outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory* (0.0*3+1.0*4=4.0).


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership. The change in Government in 2017 led to a shift in policy towards the private
sector and diminished support for the Project (ICR, page 16). While the Ministry of Energy established a
framework for the development of small power projects in 2019, thus supporting rural electrification (ICR,
page 9), this was insufficient to ensure the sustainability of the Project outcomes. This is a continued risk;
however, it might be diminishing due to the formation of a new government in March 2021 and the somewhat
reduced negativity toward the private sector

Regulatory. During Project implementation, “due to the change in enabling environment and the uniform
tariff scheme, [sub-project] developers faced a lengthy process” getting access to the network, “adding to the
difficulties obtaining financing for construction” (ICR, page 16). This is a continued risk.

Financial. The ICR noted that although the financing scheme was well designed, it did not work as expected
in practice: developers struggled to secure bank loans from the banks because the bridge subsidy from the
Project was insufficient, and the time to get the CERs was too long (ICR, page 16). This is a continued
consideration because of the high risk of the private sector investments in the country overall, and more so in
rural electricity.

Technical capacity. The ICR reported that the REA and the project developers faced challenges in
operating the equipment. While the World Bank provided capacity building to REA, and Project staff were
trained in CPA operation and management, as well as operators, low technical capacity is still a
consideration, specifically as it relates to acquiring and supporting new technology/equipment.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that Project design was knowledge-based, including in relation to energy sector
  development specifics in Tanzania. An experienced and committed task team provided technical support
  for Project preparation. Major risk factors and lessons learned from earlier World Bank CDM PoA projects
  in other countries were incorporated into Project design. The Project was designed as per the
  requirements of UNFCCC for a CDM Program of Activities, building on the TEDAP IDA project. The PDO
  was clear, the Project design was simple, and the indicators were adequately aligned with the PDO.
  Three main barriers were considered: (i) challenging (for private investors) equity requirements for
  financial closure; (ii) lack of private sector experience with the new regulations for distributed power and

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



  tariffs setting methods, (iii) insufficient technical capacity as related to the RE technology/equipment. The
  project also had a suitable plan for monitoring and tracking, detailing the parameters, data collection,
  methodologies for each of the CPA categories, and the reporting methodology. An operations and
  management plan was in place; and there was clarity about the division of responsibilities for
  implementation. (ICR, page 15-16, page 20)

  However, the ICR also reported that the design was overambitious, mainly because the risks were not
  properly estimated or fully accounted for in the Project design. Specifically, the limited capacity of the
  SPP operators and the REA was not taken into consideration, and the sub-project developers had
  difficulties accomplishing emission reduction monitoring and certification according to the quality
  requirements, which resulted in delays in obtaining the CERs, negatively affected the functioning of the
  Revolving Facility, and led to a significant reduction of Project scope, as five out of ten potential sub-
  projects were unable to participate in the Project. Also, the Project was lacking in stakeholder
  communication mechanisms that would be useful in the context of the change in government in 2017
  (which led to a shift in policies, negatively affecting the Project). In addition, the Project was designed to
  bridge a 5-10 percent equity gap for sub-project developers, underestimating the subsidization needs,
  which could have been avoided if the private sector investment risks were properly estimated at design.
  (ICR, page 16, pages 21-22)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the World Bank team was proactive in its support to the counterparts to identify and
 address issues as they emerged, provided REA with capacity building as well as guidelines and templates
 to develop the sub-projects, and hired a consultant to provide direct support to REA for sub-projects
 supervision. (ICR, page 20)

 However, there were significant issues during implementation. Specifically, there were delays with sub-
 project development, and ultimately, the scope of the Project had to be significantly reduced. M&E
 implementation was weak (as reported in section 9 of this Review), and this had negatively affected the
 Project, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic when the World Bank environmental and social team
 could not conduct any supervision missions (from March 2020 to the end of 2022). When TEDAP, which
 underpinned the reviewed Project, closed in 2017, the internal monitoring process through operational
 ISRs was disrupted, and the standalone supervision of the Project faced challenges, including a reduced
 capacity to follow-up with counterparts, causing further delays. The challenges were exacerbated as the
 newly introduced task teams needed time to get up to speed in understanding the ongoing challenges and
 find solutions. (ICR, pages 16-17, pages 21-22)

 Overall, the Bank Performance is rated as Moderately Satisfactory per OPCS harmonized guidelines.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework (RF) was linked to the PDO and the implicit ToC (as described in section 4, under
 Original Project). The objective of the Project was clearly specified, and the RF indicators reflected both
 expected outputs and outcomes. The selection of the RF indicators was sound, and while the RF included
 only two indicators, they were sufficient to monitor Project implementation. Both indicators had baselines
 and targets and were time-bound. The ICR reported that there was an adequate monitoring and reporting
 plan, with detailed parameters, data collection arrangement, methodologies for each CPA category, and a
 reporting methodology (ICR, page 16).

 Considering the nature of the Project (subsidization of the RE sub-projects using advance payments for the
 anticipated carbon revenues), the RF indicators, including the PDO indicator, which measured GHG
 emission reduction from the sub-projects, were supposed to be strictly monitored by the plant operators at
 each sub-projects site. The data were to be recorded daily, while any data gaps would be also recorded
 and reported to the plant engineer and then to the CPA manager, who was to manage the CPA database
 in line with the CDM requirements, under REA’s supervision. Electricity generated would be metered, with
 a maximum error of 0.5%. Quarterly monitoring reports would be produced and submitted to the REA and
 to other relevant parties. (ICR, page 18)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the electricity generation, as well as the parameters used to estimate emission
  reduction, were monitored. REA was acting as the coordinating and managing entity (CME) for
  implementing the PoA and, as such, was supervising the implementation of the M&E monitoring plan and
  the related training of the REA and CPAs staff. Data quality assurance and quality control (QA & QC)
  measures for data reading, recording, auditing, and archiving were established (ICR, page 18).

  However, there were delays in the monitoring and reporting of the sub-projects, which was the main
  factor in the delays with obtaining the CERs and ultimately in the need to reduce the Project scope in
  December 2019. Also, the monitoring did not fully follow Project design; specifically, there was no regular
  monitoring of the implementation progress, and the environmental monitoring reports were delayed as a
  rule. This was especially concerning during the COVID-19 pandemic, as no supervision missions were
  possible from 2020 to 2022. (ICR, pages 18-19)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the M&E framework was helpful in keeping track of the Project’s progress and
  constraints. The framework design was simple and therefore easy to implement. However, due to the


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



  inadequate quality of the M&E implementation (delays in the monitoring and reporting of the sub-
  projects, the lack of regular monitoring of the implementation progress, and delays with environmental
  reporting) and the lack of employees from REA fully dedicated to the Project, M&E utilization during
  Project implementation, which could have supported timely Project adjustment, was weak (ICR, page
  19).

  On balance, given the robust M&E design, but weak implementation and utilization, the M&E quality is
  rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social (E&S) Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B, due to the investments in power generation. Five environmental safeguards policies were
   triggered, namely: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP 4.11),
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International
   Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). An Environmental and Social Action Plan (ESSAP), as well as an Environmental
   and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Framework were prepared for the off-grid
   electrification component. In relation to the OP/BP 4.37, the ESMF for the SPP component explained the
   application of dam safety to small dam projects. In relation to the OP/BP 7.50, a riparian notification was
   carried out, and no comments were received opposing the Project.

   A final joint Environmental and Social Safeguard field visit was conducted by the World Bank and the REA
   to three selected CPAs in November 2022 (ICR, page 19-20). At IEG’s request, the team provided
   information on E&S compliance, based on this field visit. The Mini hydropower plants conducted an
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and were in possession of ESIA Certificates in
   compliance with the National Environmental Management Act, 2004, including the requirements regarding
   impact on sensitive areas and cultural sites. Dam safety measures were considered during the designing,
   construction, and operation of mini-hydro plants; all the recommended mitigation measures were
   implemented, and no major pending environmental issues were identified. Environmental & Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs) were implemented as appropriate, and progress reports were regularly
   submitted. SPPs were considered to have a low potential of causing serious adverse effects. The SPPs had
   no GRM structures and responded to villagers’ concerns through local government offices. No grievances
   that could impede the construction and operation of SPPs have been reported. The grievances were mainly
   related to delays in establishing electricity connections. The conclusion was that SPPs need to establish a
   formal GRM mechanism and directly communicate with the communities.

   The Overall Safeguards Rating was mostly Moderately Satisfactory during Project implementation but
   improved to Satisfactory in December 2022 and stayed at that level up to the Project closing.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The ICR reported that Project funds were used for their intended purposes
   and that the FM supervision was carried out regularly, which included reviews of project accounts,
   documents, and internal control procedures. The management of project funds was satisfactory and in
   compliance with the World Bank’s procedures. (ICR, page 20) Both the FM and the procurement ratings
   were Satisfactory from May 2021 until the Project closing.

   Procurement. Since this was a carbon finance operation, governed by the ERPA (please see a
   description of ERPA in section 2.e. of this review and a description of the carbon financing scheme in
   section 4, first paragraph), there was no procurement involved: the funds were disbursed upon acceptance
   of the third-party verification and subsequent issuance and transfer of CERs by UNFCCC.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                Given the robust M&E design,
                                                                                but weak implementation and
Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Modest
                                                                                utilization, the M&E quality is
                                                                                rated as Modest.
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (based on ICR, pages 21-22):

1. Designing an easy-to-implement monitoring plan prior to project implementation is
critical for the timely delivery of the expected project outcomes. The design of the reviewed
Project did not account for the limited capacity of the SPP operators and the REA. The sub-project
developers struggled to satisfy the quality requirements for emission reduction monitoring and
certification, which resulted in delays in obtaining the CERs. This led to bottlenecks in the
functioning of the Revolving Facility and, ultimately, to the need to reduce the Project’s scope, as
one-half of the potential sub-projects were not able to participate in the revolving scheme. The

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



Project could have taken these issues into account at the design stage by including capacity-building
activities in the implementation plan, thus creating a basis for timely and proper monitoring and
reporting by the sub-project developers.

2. Designing an efficient stakeholder communication mechanism and using it to provide
information about the project’s benefits early on is critical for timely project implementation
and satisfactory performance. In the reviewed Project, having such a mechanism would have
supported government ownership at the time when the change of government (and of policies
towards the private sector) occurred by clearly communicating Project benefits.

3. When developing a revolving fund in a country with a high investment risk, it is important
to ensure that risk estimates are sufficiently robust during project design. The reviewed
Project intended to provide subsidies that would cover 5-10 percent of the sub-projects cost, with the
assumption that it would be enough to bridge the equity gap; however, it was an underestimate, as
the sub-project developers were often unable to cover the rest of the banks’ upfront capital
requirement. More generally, the level of the financial institutions’ risk aversion in Tanzania was
reflective of such critical factors as insufficient development of financial institutions, high risk of new
business development, and regulatory uncertainty. Developing a carbon finance project in such
high-risk environment was challenging, and the reviewed Project was not able to fully mitigate these
risks.

4. SPPs are a preferred option for developing off-grid electricity in rural areas, thus providing
significant economic and social benefits to the communities; and small power producers’
(SPPs’) social and environmental responsibility can be essential for community trust and
support. The reviewed Project’s experience demonstrated that social and environmental (including
water resource conservation) sustainability of the SPP sub-projects was an important factor in
community support to the sub-projects and to the off-grid electricity overall.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a succinct and useful technical description of the project's design, sufficient to understand its
logic. It also candidly presents Project outcomes, the factors of Project performance, and various aspects of
Project implementation. The ICR contains enough evidence to evaluate project efficacy, Bank performance,
and M&E design and implementation. The lessons learned are useful for future operations. At the same time,
the ICR has some gaps: the Safeguards section could have provided information on policies triggered and
related safeguard documents prepared.

Overall, the ICR quality is rated as Substantial.




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 15
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TZ-Renewable Energy CDM PoA (P127585)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                       Page 15 of 15
