     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024113

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P167432                                   Benin GPE Project Phase 3

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                     Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B0364                                  30-Sep-2023                                        18,797,604.86

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jul-2019                               30-Sep-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           18,900,000.00                                  18,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            18,900,000.00                                  18,900,000.00

 Actual                                        18,797,604.86                                  18,797,604.86




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz        Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 16) and the Grant Agreement (page 6), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve the quality of teaching and learning in basic education with an emphasis on the
           early grades; and strengthen equity in primary education, particularly in four regions of the
           country.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
      1. Improving the quality of basic education (Appraisal: US$ 12.0 million; Actual: US$ 12.5 million): This
           component aimed to improve the curricula to enhance quality, improve teachers’ knowledge and
           teaching practices, and strengthen pre-service teacher education. Activities included: revision of
           early grade French and mathematics curricula; revision of Lower Secondary French, mathematics,
           physics, and English curricula; provision of teacher guides and learning materials; monitoring of
           implementation of new materials; revision of teacher training modules; training of school directors on
           pedagogical support; and revision of pre-service teacher training curricula. Disbursement-linked
           indicators for these activities included: increase in the national average of students’ promotion rate
           and implementation of at least 80% of newly revised Grades 1 and 2 curricula.
        2. Improving equity in basic education (Appraisal: US$ 3.1 million; Actual: US$ 2.8 million): This
           component aimed to promote equitable access to schooling for Grades 1 and 2 students in deprived
           districts and children with disabilities. Activities included: awareness campaigns on the benefits of
           education; provision of uniforms; incentives for schools with greatest enrollment increases;
           awareness campaigns on schooling for children with disabilities; and medical consultations and
           physical aids for children with disabilities.
        3. Strengthening the delivery of education services (Appraisal: US$ 3.8 million; Actual: US$ 3.5
           million): This component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity of the implementing Ministries
           and also the monitoring and evaluation system. Activities included: grants to sub-regional
           inspectorates (linked to performance-based contracts) to improve pedagogical support; provision of
           tablets; data collection for primary and lower secondary schools; and project management support.
           Disbursement-linked indicators for these activities included: conducting of the first national learning
           assessment for Grades 1 and 2 and reduction in the difference between the highest student-teacher
           ratio by district and the national average.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 18.9 million. The actual cost at completion was US$ 18.8
           million.

   Financing

         The project was financed by a Global Partnership for Education Trust Fund grant in the amount of
           US$ 18.9 million, of which US$ 18.8 million disbursed.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                        Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



                       Borrower contribution

                            There was no planned Borrower contribution.

                       Dates

                              July 17, 2019: Project approval.
                              January 9, 2020: Project effectiveness.
                              April 19, 2020: Mid-term review.
                              September 30, 2023: Project closing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Benin is a low-income country with a population of about 11 million people. Despite recent steady economic
growth, per capita income remains low (US$ 860 in 2017) and human development outcomes are also low
(ranked 127 out of 157 countries on the UN Human Development Index, 2018). In education, progress has
been steady but slow, with a 67.5% primary completion rate in 2017/18, up from 65.0% in 2005/06.
Challenges in the basic education sector include weak sector administration, inefficient teacher deployment
and limited pedagogical capacity, low retention and high drop-out rates, low learning outcomes, and
significant disparities in education service delivery along geographic and social divisions.

There were 2.3 million students in primary school and 0.9 million in general secondary school in the 2016-
17 school year. The recent Education Sector Plan for 2018-30 set forth a new structure for basic education:
two years in preschool, six years in primary school, and four years in lower secondary school), led by the
Ministries of Pre- and Primary School (Ministère des Enseignements Maternel et Primaire, MEMP) and
Secondary, Technical and Vocational Education ((Ministère des Enseignements Secondaire, Technique et
de la Formation et Professionnelle, MESFTP). The Plan included improving the quality of teaching and
learning as one of four main priorities. Specific strategic actions included delivery of school kits, inclusion of
children with special needs, and review of teacher training.

The Bank’s Country Partnership Framework for FY2019-23 identified investing in human capital as a key
focus area, with improved relevance of education as one of the objectives, noting the need to improve
educational outcomes and address disparities in access. However, indicators measure youth employment
and postsecondary education completion, rather than basic education outcomes. The recently closed GPE
project (P129600, US$ 42.3 million) focused interventions in targeted deprived districts, with the specific
aim to improve access, equity, and quality of teaching, and included key activities of teacher training,
provision of learning materials and classroom equipment, and school kits. This operation followed up by
continuing the focus on improved learning and also extending the scope to lower secondary education.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 13
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the quality of teaching in basic education with an emphasis on the early grades

               Rationale
               The theory of change was clear. Activities to improve teacher knowledge and capacity - specifically
               increasing technical training and pedagogical support for teachers – alongside revised curricula and teaching/
               learning materials were likely to contribute to the intended outcome to enhance teaching.

               Activities for this objective and the second objective below were implemented nationwide. Over 1.5 million
               students and 47,600 teachers and school heads were expected to benefit from all project activities.

               Note: Project funds were pooled with contributions from other donors including Danish International
               Development Agency (DANIDA), French Development Agency (Agence Française de Développement, AFD),
               the German Development Bank (Kreditanstalt für Wiederaurfbau, KFW) and The Netherlands.

               Outputs

                     Revision of Grades 1 and 2 curricula for French and mathematics. This included revision of the
                        language immersion approach and phonics instruction.
                       Revision of Lower Secondary curricula for French, mathematics, physics and English. The new
                        curricula were reviewed, validated, and certified in December 2020, with implementation beginning
                        with the 2021-22 school year and completed with the 2022-23 school year.
                       Development of teaching and learning materials, including well-structured and explicit lessons plans
                        that follow a systematic progression of learning throughout the school year. Distribution of 40,000
                        curricula guides, 49,800 pedagogical guides, and over 2.8 million reading booklets (target: 2.5 million),
                        covering all Grades 1 and 2 students in public primary schools.
                       Updated training modules for in-service teacher training on the new curricula and methods of
                        instruction. 46,128 teachers in Grades 1 and 2 received the training (target: 43,600).
                       Updated pre-service teacher training curricula for teacher training institutions. The new curricula was
                        fully developed, including the competency, training, and evaluation framework. However, the COVID-
                        19 pandemic negatively impacted the timeline and therefore the curricula were not yet being
                        implemented by project closing as planned.
                       Three cycles of teacher evaluations to monitor implementation of new teaching and learning materials
                        through classroom observations. The evaluations were also used to identify strengths and
                        weaknesses of teachers to further improve the teacher training program.

               In addition,




                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




      Provision of grants to sub-regional inspectorates, linked to performance-based contracts, to improve
       teachers’ pedagogical support (through supporting actions such as classroom visits, enrollment
       increase incentives). Each inspectorate prepared a detailed action plan towards achievement of the
       results identified in the contract.
      Participation of 389 MEMP and 125 MESTFP pedagogical inspectors and advisers in workshops and
       training sessions on how to support teachers and gather data from classroom visits and observations.
       Provision of 400 tablets to collect data for the Kobo data collection system
      Operationalization of learning assessment system at the primary level. This included creating an
       evaluation division with permanent staff, disseminating results of the 2017 learning assessment, and
       analyzing the results of at least 60% of primary schools in the country.

Outcomes

      80.3% of Grades 1 and 2 primary teachers were rated satisfactory by an external agency in the use of
         the new education kits developed under the project. This surpassed the target of 60.0%. The
         proportion increased steadily over the project period, from 66.3% in 2021 to 67.8% in 2022.
        100% of Lower Secondary teachers in French, mathematics, physics and English were using the new
         curricula. This surpassed the target of 90%.
        The difference between the highest student-teacher ratio by district and the national average
         decreased from 52.9% in 2017 to 23.2% at project closing. This fell short of the target of 20.0%. The
         ICR (page 17) noted that this shortfall was due to the difficulty in deploying teachers to security-
         threatened communes bordering Burkina Faso and Nigeria.
        100% of heads of sub-regional primary school inspectorates achieved at least 75% of their
         performance-based contract criteria. This surpassed the target of 85%.
        83.8% of schools communicated school budget and student assessment results through community
         briefings at least once per year. This surpassed the target of 75.0%.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of the use of new curricula and training of existing teachers
to upgrade knowledge and skills (in-service), but with a shortcoming in implementing new curricula to train
new teachers (pre-service).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of learning in basic education with an emphasis on the early grades.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. As in the above objective, activities to improve curricula and
teaching/learning materials, alongside improved teacher knowledge and capacity were likely to contribute to
the intended outcome to enhance learning.



                                                                                                 Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



Outputs

See outputs reported above.

Outcomes

      The percentage of Grade 2 students who attained defined minimum standards on national learning
       assessments in reading increased from 17.4% in 2017 to 29.1% at project closing. This surpassed
       the target of 23.2%. Among girls, the percentage increased from 16.8% in 2017 to 34.7% at project
       closing. This surpassed the target of 22.8%.
      The percentage of Grade 2 students who attained defined minimum standards on national learning
       assessments in mathematics increased from 23.2% in 2017 to 34.7% at project closing. This
       surpassed the target of 31.2%. Among girls, the percentage increased from 22.8% in 2017 to 34.5%
       at project closing. This surpassed the target of 30.8%.
      The national average of students’ promotion rate in public primary schools increased from 68.4% in
       2017 to 77.5% at project closing. This achieved the target of 76.0%.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased scores on learning assessments.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen equity in primary education, particularly in four regions of the country.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities to increase awareness of the importance of education and to
reduce financial-related barriers to enrolling in school, alongside providing specific support to specialized
institutions for children with disabilities, were likely to contribute to the intended outcome of increased equity.
The prior sector operation had provided school kits (comprised of school supplies, school bag, and uniform)
to Grades 1 and 2 female students in 25 deprived districts, which resulted in increased student enrollment, as
well as piloted activities to promote enrollment of children with disabilities. This project builds upon those
interventions and focused on deprived districts in all of Alibori and five of eight districts in Borgou regions, and
children with disabilities in Zou and Collines regions.

Outputs

      Communication campaigns, including through radio, press releases and posters, on the benefits of
       education to village and religious leaders, villagers, and parents, and to inform communities about the
       distribution of school kits.
      Provision of 302,751 uniforms for all Grades 1 and 2 students in the targeted districts (target:
       273,600). UNICEF provided schools supplies and backpacks, as well as handled procurement of all
       above items to ensure timely delivery for the school year.

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




                                    School improvements grants awarded to five primary schools with greatest increases in enrollment
                                     rates, to be used for school improvement plans.
                                    Communication campaigns on schooling options for children with disabilities
                                    Community leader and teacher training and mentoring on inclusive education
                                    Provision of medical consultations and specialized equipment/ technical aids (including walking aids,
                                     hearing aids, visual aids, two mini-busses), school fees, and school kits for approximately 1,586
                                     children with disabilities (target: 700)

                            Outcomes

                                    The intake rate in Grade 3 in the deprived districts of Alibori and Borgou regions increased from
                                     67.0% in 2017 to 84.7% at project closing. This surpassed the target of 75.0%. Among girls, the
                                     percentage increased from 70.7% in 2017 to 79.7%, surpassing the target of 76.0%.
                                    The percentage of children with disabilities enrolled in primary school in Zou and Collines regions
                                     increased from 4.7% in 2017 to 12.2% at project closing. This surpassed the target of 10.0%.

                            Achievement is rated High due to evidence of increased access/enrollment of children in deprived districts
                            and children with disabilities, which surpassed targets.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of the use of new curricula and training
                            of existing teachers to upgrade knowledge and skills (in-service). Achievement of the second objective is
                            rated Substantial due to evidence of increased scores on learning assessments. Achievement of the third
                            objective is rated High due to evidence of increased access/enrollment of children in deprived districts and
                            children with disabilities, which surpassed targets. Therefore, Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (PAD, page 32) discussed the economic rationale for the project, such as
   benefits to school children in deprived districts and children with disabilities, and also the improved primary


                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



completion rate and learning outcomes which would promote human development and economic growth. There
was no quantitative analysis included.

The economic analysis at completion (ICR, Annex 4) presented a cost-efficiency analysis based on Components
1 and 2. The expected benefits were monetary gains due to improved teaching and learning conditions, which
would lead to eventual increased incomes for beneficiaries. The costs were represented by actual project costs.
The resulting net present value (NPV) was calculated as US$ 144.0 million and the internal rate of return as
16.1%, based on a discount rate of 4.5%. The ICR (page 20) noted that although these figures cannot be
compared to an appraisal estimate, they are “comparable to similar projects in the region and highlight a large
and positive economic impact.” Also, a sensitivity analysis indicated that the project had a positive NPV and IRR
in excess of the discount rate under scenarios with discount rates of 7.0% and 10.0%, and with half of the
estimated impact.

Several aspects of project implementation also point to favorable efficiency: the project achieved its objectives
and targets within the planned time frame with no extensions; all project implementation arrangements
utilized the existing government systems and procedures rather than creating new ones; cost of learning
materials was 42% lower than the forecasted amounts (US$1,481,393 vs. US$2,552,716; and 12 days training
for 22,500 grade 1 and grade 2 teachers and school heads cost the same as the initially planned 6 days training
(ICR, page 20).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     81.40
 ICR Estimate                                              16.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country sector strategy,
and Bank strategy. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial due to evidence of achieved outcomes for all three
objectives. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable cost-efficiency and project implementation. Therefore,
overall outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Policies in support of improving quality and equity are embedded in current government sector strategies and
likely to be sustained. Numerous key project activities were institutionalized in the relevant Ministries, such
as curricula development, feedback loops from classroom observations to teacher training, pedagogical
support, and support to children with disabilities. In addition, capacity development in the Ministries and
teacher training institutions, as well as for pedagogical advisors, will likely be sustained. Follow on projects
from GPE and the Bank are expected to continue funding in order to sustain support to the basic education
sector.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were closely aligned with government and Bank sector education plans. The
  project built upon lessons learned from previous GPE operations, such as the effectiveness of well-
  structured and explicit lessons plans, emphasis on equity to attain universal primary education, and
  effectiveness of providing in-kind school support to families, The project's implementation arrangements
  utilized existing government systems and procedures, while aiming to strengthen them, which ensured
  smooth implementation start-up. The design also drew upon successful pilot activities from those prior
  operations and over a decade of experience in the education sector in Benin, including leading donor
  implementation efforts and producing analytic and strategic work. The inclusion of the results-based
  financing approach (reflected by the Disbursement-linked indicators and activities) was appropriate to set
  out incentives to strengthen governance and administration of the education sector including
  management of teachers and institutional structure for systemic assessment of student learning.

  The overall risk was assessed as Substantial, primarily in the areas of political and governance risk,
  macroeconomic risk, technical design (i.e. curricula revision), institutional capacity, and fiduciary aspects.
  Significant implementation support was planned to mitigate these risks.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team demonstrated adaptability as challenges arose, including due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
 such as switching to virtual supervision meetings, expanding the gender focus to complement the parallel


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



 COVID operation, and modifying DLI targets (due to COVID-related delays in implementing the new
 Grades 1 and 2 curricula). Other challenges such as price increases for materials and administrative
 bottlenecks in signing performance-based contracts were resolved in a timely manner with the support of
 the Bank team. Fiduciary and safeguards performance was monitored regularly and M&E was
 implemented effectively.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objectives were clearly specified. The results chain of inputs, outputs and outcomes was clear and
 logical. The indicators were relevant and measurable, with clear baseline and target figures identified and
 mostly available. The M&E design and arrangements made use of the existing government system for
 reporting and data collection, thereby well-embedded institutionally. Additional M&E arrangements included
 the creation of a new M&E division, conducting of the first national learning assessment for Grades 1 and
 2, use of a teacher observation tool, and use of performance-based contracts to incentivize critical actions.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project indicators were tracked and reported regularly. Data for school yearbooks were collected on
  time with statistical yearbooks produced annually in 2021, 2022 and 2023. Learning assessments,
  including the grades 1 and 2 assessment and an Early Grade Reading and Mathematics Assessments,
  were conducted as planned, with the specialized M&E division created within the Ministry with support of
  the project. The teacher observation tool was implemented to measure utilization of new classroom
  materials by the teachers, although no assessment of actual improved teacher quality was planned or
  conducted.



c. M&E Utilization
  As reported in the ICR (page 25-26), the statistical yearbook data were used for reporting the
  achievement of project indicators as well as to inform decision making by education administrators. The
  assessment results and teacher observations were also used to inform teacher training and student
  support needs.




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category “C” project, as no adverse environmental impacts
   were expected. No safeguard policies were triggered. However, with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic,
   environmental and social framework guidelines for COVID were adopted, including codes of professional
   ethics and sexual exploitation/abuse. All relevant staff received training on environmental and social
   aspects and prevention measures for COVID.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial reports and annual audits were produced in a timely manner. However,
   there were two instances when the audit reports had qualified opinions, due to confusion in the financial
   statements between what the government had invested to achieve the DLIs and the expected
   disbursement amounts for the project activities. Overall, financial management performance rating was
   Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory throughout the life of the Project

   Procurement: The Bank conducted regular procurement missions. Procurement plans were updated and
   regularly submitted as required. The Bank provided specific support in consistently entering all the
   procurement steps into the procurement system. Project procurement was rated as Moderately
   Satisfactory throughout the project period, with no procurement irregularities reported in the ICR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---

d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)



Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 28-29), adapted by IEG:

        Curricula reform can be smoothly and effectively implemented by relying on technical
         expertise and timely feedback. In the case of this project, these steps included the early
         establishment of a competent and dedicated technical team, supported by national and
         international experts, relying on best practices and well-established research, piloting of the
         curricula and learning materials, and timely feedback loops to inform design and
         implementation issues.
        In-service teacher training can have increased impact by using structured and explicit lesson
         plans. In the case of this project, the training utilized scripted lessons for the training of
         teachers as well as for use in the classroom.
        Assessment tools that offer timely results can create a feedback loop to improve
         effectiveness. In the case of this project, the learning assessment results were disseminated
         in a timely manner to inform decision-making and the teacher observation tools offered
         immediate feedback to inform teacher training.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was internally consistent, concise, and consistent with guidelines. The quality of the evidence was
strong, drawing upon the effective implementation of M&E arrangements and significant data collection. The
lessons were clear and informative, providing specific and useful lessons for implementing curriculum reform
and teacher training.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Benin GPE Project Phase 3 (P167432)




                                                                   Page 13 of 13
