     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024205

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P115763                                    ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                  Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-14673                                   30-Jun-2016                                           6,375,259.68

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Jul-2013                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            6,969,350.00                                     6,969,350.00

 Revised Commitment                             6,389,888.00                                     6,375,259.68

 Actual                                         6,389,888.00                                     6,375,259.68




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 5) and the Financing Agreement of July 11, 2013 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to reduce the consumption of HCFC-141b in the foam sector in Indonesia
   in order to contribute to the government’s effort to comply with Indonesia’s HCFC phase-out obligations under
   the Montreal Protocol”.




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Note that the figures for planned and actual costs in this section deviate from the figures in the ICR. This is
   due to a cancellation and refund of US$ 14,628.32 that was calculated and processed after the ICR was
   finalized (communication with the Bank team August 26th, 2024).

   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Investment in HCFC-141b Consumption Reductions in the Polyurethane (PU) Foam
   Sector (appraisal estimate US$2.45 million, actual US$5.83 million): This component was to finance
   financial incentives to about 26 foam producing companies in the refrigeration appliances, refrigerated
   trucks and integral skin foam sub-sectors, to phase out at least 360 metric tons (MTs) of HCFC-141b and
   introduce alternative, non-HCFC consuming production technologies.

   The eligibility of these companies for the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of Montreal Protocol
   (MLF) financial support was to be confirmed through a survey and was to be reconfirmed before Foam
   Technology Replacement Agreements (FTRA) can be signed with them. A financial incentive was to be
   provided to each company based on their HCFC-141b consumption in 2009 and 2010 and the costs of the
   technical alternative selected.

   In 2017, the project received AF as a result the target for reductions was increased and an additional
   US$4.01 million was allocated to this component.

   Component 2: Technical Assistance and Policy Support (appraisal estimate US$0.13 million, actual
   US0.29 million): This component was to finance technical assistance to support the government in
   developing and implementing: i) policies preventing establishment of new and expansion of existing PU
   foam manufacturing facilities using HCFC-141b to ensure that HCFC consumption levels for each HCFC
   stay below the agreed consumption limits,: and ii) guidelines, policies and regulations to support the
   introduction of new technologies that replace the use of HCFC-141b. Furthermore, this component was to
   finance technical assistance, including training and workshops for the benefit of selected foam producing
   companies, i) to inform them about the objective of the project and the implementation arrangements; and ii)
   to assist them with the preparation of conversion plans and proposals, equipment specifications, Project
   implementation and preparation of completion reports.

   In 2017, the project received AF and an additional US$0.12 million was allocated to this component.

   Component 3: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$0.13 million, actual US$0.25 million): This
   component was to finance the establishment of a PMU, which was to be responsible for project
   implementation, including project management and monitoring and evaluation, and verification of
   implementation of the sub-projects under component.

   In 2017, the project received AF and an additional US$0.12 million was allocated to this component.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 12
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$3.63 million. Actual cost was US$6.37 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by a Trust Fund (TF-14673) from the Multilateral Fund For the
  Implementation of the Montreal Protocol (MLF) in the amount of US$2.71 million (of which US$2.13 million
  disbursed) and an Additional Financing grant in the amount of US$4.26 million (of which US$4.24 million
  disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$920,000 which did not materialize due to
  enterprises that had been identified at the beginning of the project, which were providing this counterpart
  financing, dropped out of the project.

  Dates: The project was restructured three times:

        On June 29, 2016, the project was restructured to change the loan closing date from June 30, 2016
         to June 30, 2018 to: i) ensure disbursement and use of the 3rd and 4th MLF tranche for the project;
         ii) complete the technology conversion in two system houses; and iii) allow for an orderly transition
         to Stage 2 of HCFC Foam Sector Plan, which was to be prepared in FY17. The project had
         experienced delays in the completion of component 1 due to government reorganization and slow
         decision making by the smaller targeted companies, as well as due to a delayed ExCom decision on
         the plan to support system houses under tranches 3 and 4.
        On December 28, 2017, the project received AF in the amount of US$4.26 million to finance the
         HPMP Stage 2 and support Indonesia in completing the total phase-out of HCFC-141b1
         consumption in the PU foam sector by 2023. The targets in the Results Framework were adjusted
         upwards accordingly. Furthermore, the project’s closing date was extended from June 30, 2016, to
         June 30, 2023, to allow for the completion of phase 2. Also, the component costs and
         implementation schedule were adjusted accordingly.
        On June 12, 2023, the project was restructured to: i) extend the closing date from June 30, 2023 to
         December 30, 2023 to allow for the completion of on-going project activities, including evaluation of
         voucher distribution and continuation of the VS to cover more small enterprises, verification and site
         visits on voucher distribution in order to achieve the targets of a PDO indicator (“Avoided CO2e
         emissions as result of conversion to low GWP technology for the PU foam sector”) and two
         intermediate indicators (“HCFC-141b quantity covered by signed contract” and “HCFC141b quantity
         phase-out completed”); ii) cancel US$579,462 in grant savings from Stage 1; and iii) reduce the end
         targets of one PDO indicator (“Avoided CO2 emissions as a result of the conversion to low GWP
         technology for the PU foam sector” since the calculation methodology was updated per the MLF
         ExCom guidelines), and intermediate outcome indicator (“HCFC-141b quantity covered by signed
         contract” due to the non-participation or withdrawal of foam enterprises that were originally expected
         to be involved in the project. Even though the target was reduced at the restructuring, a split
         evaluation will not be undertaken since the target was revised due to the update of the calculation
         methodology per the MLF ExCom guidelines.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 12
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Indonesia committed to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete
the Ozone Layer (MP) which required gradual phase-out of Hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) starting
from 2013. The MP aimed for developing countries to complete the phase-out of HCFC consumption and
production by 2030. The MP encouraged countries to promote the selection of alternatives to HCFCs that
minimize environmental impact, in particular impact on climate, as well as meeting other safety, health
standards and economical consideration. At the time of appraisal, Indonesia did not produce Ozone
Depleting Substances (ODS) but consumed them as refrigerants in refrigeration and air-conditioning
equipment as well as blowing agents for producing polyurethane foam.

Since Indonesia was a party to the MP and operated under MP Article 5, it was eligible for financial and
technical assistance (TA) from the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the MP (MLF) to meet its MP
obligations. Since 1993, the government had undertaken a number of ODS phase-out projects under the
MP, including the sector plans for the phase-out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFC-11) in the polyurethane foam
sector and CFC-12 in the mobile air conditioning sector. By 1 January 2008, Indonesia had completed its
phase-out of CFC-11 consumption in the foam sector, two years ahead of its MP obligations. Furthermore,
by January 2010 Indonesia had completed the phase-out of CFC-12 consumption in the mobile air
conditioning sector. However, further phasing out of ODS was necessary for Indonesia to comply with its
commitments. The Government was committed to the phasing down of HCFC-141b in alignment with
national priorities and fulfilling its obligations under the Montreal Protocol. According to the Bank team, this
provided the basis for the Government's strong ownership and implementation of this project.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported Indonesia’s voluntary
target to reduce CO2 emissions by 26 percent by 2020 to follow the Kyoto Protocol’s request to limit the
country’s impact on climate change, save energy, promote green growth, and move toward a low-carbon
economy. The PDO was also in line with Indonesia’s nationally determined contribution commitment to
reduce GHG emissions by 29 percent from the business-as-usual scenario by 2030 or by 41 percent,
conditional on foreign assistance.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. At the time of appraisal, the objective of the project was in line
with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (2013-2014) which aimed to strengthen private sector
development and environmental sustainability. The objective of the project was also in line with the World
Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (FY21-25) under engagement area IV (Sustain management of
natural assets, natural resources -based livelihoods and disaster resilience) Objective 4.1 (Strengthen
management of natural assets and environment).

The objective of the project was pitched at an appropriate level to address a critical development problem,

Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 12
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reduce the consumption of HCFC-141b in the foam sector in Indonesia in order to contribute to the
               government’s effort to comply with Indonesia’s HCFC phase-out obligations under the Montreal Protocol.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as providing financial
               investments to about 26 foam-producing companies in refrigeration appliances, refrigerated trucks, and
               integral skin foam subsectors based on their HCFC-141b consumption in 2009 and 2010, introducing
               alternative non-HCFC consuming production technologies and signing agreements with beneficiaries to use a
               reduced HCFCC-245fa formulation as an alternative foam blowing agent was to result in several outputs.
               These outputs were to include at least 360 MT of HCFC-141b being reduced and that alternative, non-HCFC
               consuming production technologies would be introduced, and agreements with beneficiaries signed. These
               outputs were to result in the outcome of reduced consumption of HCFC-141b in the Indonesian foam sector.

               Outputs:

                     26 agreements with beneficiaries were signed achieving the target of 26 agreements.
                     Annual import quota was issued, achieving the target of issuing an annual import quota.
                     732.36 MT HCFC141b were phased out, exceeding the target of 666.92 MT.
                     76 TA activities were completed, exceeding the original target of 15 TA activities and the revised
                      target of 50 TA activities. According to the World Bank team (August 26, 2024) these TA activities
                      included the development of policies/bans and technical guidelines, hiring of technical experts,
                      provision of training for different stakeholders (foam enterprises and government agencies),
                      workshops/technical meetings, and awareness raising events and materials.
                     All reporting requirements were complied with, achieving the target of fully complying with reporting
                      requirements.
                     All phaseout of HCFC-141b targets were achieved. The project was able to, through technical
                      conversion and policy and regulatory activities, completely eliminate and ban the import and use of
                      HCFC-141b in Indonesia.
                     671.8 tons of HCFC 141b quantity was covered by signed contract, achieving the original target
                      of 666.92 tons and the revised target of 650 tons.

               The following inputs/activities were not included in the Results Framework and lacked targets:

                     A voucher system, which involved detailed steps to foam SMEs and the system house (chemical
                      suppliers) to follow to achieve HCFC-141b phaseout by adopting non-flammable drop-in alternatives,
                      was implemented. This allowed system houses to continue supplying SMEs and keep their share of
                      the Indonesian market rather than competing with international system houses (which would have
                      been too expensive for SMEs).
                     Two foam system houses were financially supported in setting up cyclopentane mixing facilities.

                                                                                                                Page 5 of 12
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)




                                  Financial incentives were provided to 26 foam producing companies in the refrigeration appliances,
                                   refrigerated trucks, and integral skin foam subsectors.

                            Outcomes:

                                  496,760 CO2e emissions were avoided as a result of the conversion to low Global Warming Potential
                                   (GWP) technology for the PU foam sector, exceeding both the original target of 290,000 MT and the
                                   revised target of 439,000 MT.
                                  HCFC-141b imports from the foam sector decreased from 90.61 MTs in 2010 to zero in 2023,
                                   surpassing the original target of 81.55 MTs and achieving the revised target of zero MTs.

                            The project was able to introduce non-HCFC consuming production technologies and sign agreements with
                            beneficiaries to use a reduced HCFCC-245fa formulation as an alternative foam blowing agent, which
                            resulted in avoiding Co2e emissions as a result of the conversion to low Global Warming Potential (GWP)
                            technology for the PU foam sector as well as decreasing HCFC-141b imports from the foam sector.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to avoid the targeted CO2e emissions as a result of the conversion to low Global
                            Warming Potential (GWP) technology for the PU foam sector. Also, the project was able to reduce the HCFC-
                            141b imports from the foam sector to zero. Thus, the overall efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 21) conducted a financial analysis to assess the financial impact of the project on the Indonesian
   PU foam industry. The financial analysis estimated the net incremental costs in terms of investments in foaming
   equipment based on the selected foaming technologies. Furthermore, the analysis estimated the additional cost
   of raw materials for foam production, particularly the higher cost of HFCs compared to HCFC-141b. The analysis
   compared the cost “with” and “without” the project over a 20-year time frame. The Net Present Value (NPV) of
   the net incremental cost “without” HCFC Phase-out was US$11.90 million while it was US$19.0 million for “with”


                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 12
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



HCFC phase-out. The ICR (para. 44) compared the cost per kilogram of HCFC phased out (US$/kg HCFC) with
the project cost at appraisal. The project's cost-effectiveness was estimated at an average of US$6.99/kg, with
an MLF grant of US$2.45 million and a total reduction of 360 MT. When the project received AF, the total
financing was increased to US$6.97 million, and the project was to reduce an additional 388.45 MT of HCFC-
141b. Therefore, the average CE for stage 2 was US$10.95/kg, and the total CE of the project was US$9.31/kg.

When the project’s financing was reduced to US$6.39 million, 712 metric tons of HCFC-141b were phasing out.
The CE increased accordingly, with US$8.07/kg of HCFC-141b for component 1.

This analysis indicated that the project was a worthwhile investment.

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced several implementation delays. During the initial phase of implementation of component
1, due to government reorganization and slow decision-making by the smaller targeted companies, as well as
due to a delayed ExCom decision on the plan to support system houses under tranches 3 and 4, requiring an
extension of the project’s closing date by 36 months. Also, during the restructuring in 2023, the closing date was
extended by six months to allow for the completion of project activities, which had been delayed due to the
COVID-19 pandemic.

Overall, the project's efficiency was rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the World Bank’s Country Partnership
Framework (FY21-25) and national priorities. The project’s efficacy and efficiency were Substantial, resulting in
an overall Satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating

                                                                                                      Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

According to the World Bank team (August 26, 2024) no future risks to the project’s development outcome
are foreseen. The government is highly committed to the phaseout process of HCFC and has a solid
technical team in place which has been working on similar projects since the phaseout of CFCs in the late
1990s/early 2000s. The new regulations from the MP on reduction of HFCs are also well monitored and the
country is committed to meet all obligations to the protocol.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 78) the World Bank team had the adequate expertise in key areas such as
  financial management, procurement, safeguards as well as technical issues to prepare the project. The
  PAD (para. 53) stated that the World Bank identified relevant risks to project implementation related to
  the relative safety of HC and HFC-245fa technology in foam blowing applications and the experience of
  the NOU with the earlier CFC phase-out project. Also, there was a risk of weak financial capacity of small
  foam producing companies in Indonesia to co-finance the project. Mitigation measures included
  implementing the World Bank’s safeguard policies as well as a higher cost effectiveness for funding of
  the conversion measures for small companies. However, according to the ICR (para. 58) mitigation
  measures were not adequate. During stage 1, 17 out of 26 of companies dropped out of the project for
  various reasons and started to convert at their own cost or changed lines of business. Under stage 2, the
  project was able to mitigate this risk by working with system houses and polyol suppliers and
  implementing a voucher scheme to assist small medium enterprises in subsidizing the costs of chemical
  being used in foam. Overall, more small companies were reached out through the Voucher System
  support for HCFC-141 phaseout allowing the project to achieve its objective.

  The project’s Results Framework was adequate (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted a total of 20 supervision missions throughout the 10-and-a-half-year
 implementation period. According to the ICR (para. 78) the World Bank team prepared detailed aide-
 memoires, identified implementation and addressed them appropriately. For example, when many
 companies dropped out under stage 1, the team and the government counterpart redirected the funding
 forward system houses, allowing for the project to achieve its objective. Furthermore, the World Bank team


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



 processed stage 1 and stage 2 HPMPs in the foam sector under one project, which allowed for a smooth
 transition from stage 1 to 2 and include system houses to support more small medium enterprises in HCFC
 phaseout to mitigate against enterprises dropping out as was the case in stage 1.

 According to the ICR (para. 80) the World Bank secured the approvals for each tranche of funds under
 stage 1 and stage 2 in a timely manner. Also, the World Bank team oversaw the preparation of the project’s
 annual implementation plans, provided inputs, an submitted the plans on behalf of Indonesia to ExCom for
 approval



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s objective was clearly specified. Also, the theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcomes was sound and appropriately reflected in the Results
 Framework. Furthermore, the intermediate outcome indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable,
 achievable, relevant and timebound to demonstrate the component’s contribution towards achieving the
 project’s objective.

 According to the PAD (para. 48) monitoring and reporting was to be carried out on three levels: i)
 compliance with the MP and ExCom agreement; ii) implementation of the Foam Sector Plan; and iii) results
 of sub-project activities. The MOE, assisted by the PMU, was to monitor and report on Indonesia’s
 compliance with the MP and the Agreement with ExCom.

 According to the ICR (para. 56) the project established the national HCFC consumption in Indonesia
 through an analysis of 2009 and 2010 import data from several Indonesian sources. The baseline data was
 used to establish the reduction and phaseout schedule.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 68) the PMU submitted reports including Tranche Implementation Reports
  and Plans, Financial Reports, Sub-Project Verification Reports, Progress Reports on a regular basis. In
  addition, project beneficiary enterprises reported on sub-projects through achieved milestones (which
  was required to release incentive payments), as well as preparing a sub-project completion report which
  was required by MLF to confirm the successful implementation of each sub-project.




                                                                                                   Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



  After the first project restructuring in 2016, the project used data collected by the system houses, which
  was more accurate and detailed than the analysis of 2009 and 2010 import data on the national HCFC
  consumption in Indonesia.

  During the 2017 and 2020 restructurings, the Results Framework was modified to first reflect the increase
  in project scope and then to reduce the targets of one PDO and one intermediate outcome indicator
  due to the non-participation or withdrawal of foam enterprises that were originally expected to be involved
  in the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 70) M&E reports were used to report on MP compliance and to plan MP
  compliance at the national level. Also, M&E data were used to assess implementation progress towards
  achieving the project’s objective. Furthermore, M&E data informed key decision making such as
  processing AF and reducing two indicator targets.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment). The project prepared an Environmental Management Framework which
   provided detailed checklists for risk mitigation, especially on safety issues. According to the ICR (para. 75)
   before any milestone payment was made, a joint supervision mission confirmed that beneficiaries had
   installed all equipment needed to ensure safety of the operation.

   The project’s safeguard compliance was Satisfactory throughout implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 73) the project complied with the World Bank’s Financial Management policies
   and provided timely financial and audit reporting throughout project implementation. The project’s internal
   control was adequate as demonstrated in the audit reports. Also, the project addressed implementation
   and audit recommendations that were identified during supervision missions. Furthermore, the external



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



   auditor’s opinions were unqualified. At closing, the project’s Financial Management rating was
   Satisfactory.

   Procurement:

   According to the ICR (para. 74) the project complied with the World Bank’s procurement and consultant
   guidelines. The project did not encounter any procurement related implementation delays. At closing, the
   project’s procurement rating was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 30) included several lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      Providing financial incentives to local foam system houses through a voucher system
       to invest in alternative technology can ensure that system houses as well as SMEs
       keep their share of the local market. In this project, without the voucher system, it would
       have been unlikely the system houses would have formulated HFO polyol on their own, and
       SME beneficiaries were to continue to rely on HCFC-141b, especially given the high prices of
       HFOs by international system houses.
      Combining financial investments in the private sector with regulatory control can
       allow for a sustainable phaseout of HCFC-141b. In this project, the partially financing of
       the phasing out of the HCFC-141b, using the quota system as well as regulatory control to
       ban the import and use of HCFC-141b after completion of the technology conversion was
       critical for achieving HCFC-141b targets.


                                                                                                Page 11 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ID-HCFC Phase-out in the PU Foam Sector (P115763)



        Collaboration among different entities involved in the subject area can be critical for a
         successful phasing out of HCFC-141b in the foam sector. In this project, regular
         interministerial coordination meetings between the Ministry of Environment and Forestry,
         Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, and Ministry of Finance around
         implementation progress and bottlenecks allowed for the development of a forward-looking
         approach to integrating policies and provisions that include both HCFCs and HFCs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR included a
financial analysis, was internally consistent, concise, and sufficiently outcome driven. The lessons learned
included in the ICR were useful for future World Bank operations in this area. The overall quality of the ICR was
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
