     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0024116

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Program Name
 P157507                                      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                     Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-61700                                    30-Nov-2021                                        379,999,571.43

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Dec-2017                                  31-Oct-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              380,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          379,999,571.43                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina              Vandana Chandra               Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA) dated December 29, 2017 (p. 5) and the Program Appraisal
   Document (PAD) (p. 3), the Program Development Objective (PDO) was:

   “To improve public financial management (PFM) and procurement systems for better management and
   accountability in service delivery for health and education sectors.”



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



   For the purposes of this review, the Program Development Objective (PDO) has been parsed as follows:

         PDO 1: To improve public financial management for better management and accountability in service
          delivery for the health and education sectors.
         PDO 2: To improve procurement systems for better management and accountability in service delivery
          for the health and education sectors.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Program had five Key Result Areas (KRAs) and eight (8) Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). For
   clarity, IEG is labelling the KRAs as Components 1-5 and their Sub-components would be the
   corresponding DLIs (PAD, Table 1 and Annex 1):

   Component 1: Strengthening the legal framework and internal management systems in the line
   ministries and service delivery units. This component aimed to strengthen the PFM regulatory framework
   to ensure that all funds were remitted to the Treasury Single Account (TSA) and empower service delivery
   practitioners to spend timely resources by simplifying the rules for expenditure authorization.

         DLI 1: Reduction of variance in functional expenditure composition for the health and education
          sectors to improve reliability of the budget (Allocated amount US$70 million).
         DLI 2: Reduction in cash held outside the Recipient’s TSA (Allocated amount US$70 million).

   Component 2: Improved procurement performance. This component aimed to improve transparency,
   efficiency, and competition in procurement practices for better value for money in selected federal ministries
   and provincial departments.

         DLI 3: Percentage of vendor contracts processed through the recipient’s e-procurement system
          (Allocated amount US$50 million).

   Component 3: Payroll and pension payment systems. This component aimed to track resources to the
   point of use at the school or health center level and use technology to correct for large inefficiencies in the
   pension payment system.

         DLI 4: Percentage of alignment of information and identification numbers for individual primary
          school teachers and health workers related to their place of work and salaries (Allocated amount
          US$30 million).
         DLI 5: Percentage of pensioners, disaggregated by gender, authenticated against the National
          Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) computerized national identity card, paid through the



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



         Direct Credit Scheme no later than the following pension payments cycle after retirement (Allocated
         amount US$30 million).

  Component 4: External audit, legislative scrutiny, and social accountability. This component aimed to
  strengthen the technical capacity of the Department of Auditor General of Pakistan (DAGP), develop and
  implement social accountability strategies for citizen participation, improve financial reporting and improve
  transparency in PFM.

        DLI 6: Percentage of audit recommendations processed through the Audit Management Information
         System (AMIS) (Allocated amount US$40 million).
        DLI 7: Increased citizens’ access to key fiscal information concerning health and education
         (Allocated amount US$30 million).

  Component 5: Performance-based grant. This component aimed to strengthen federal-provincial fiscal
  coordination and promote innovative service delivery and accountability ideas in PFM.

  DLI 8: Percentage of fiscal performance and service delivery indicators met by the provinces (Allocated
  amount US$80 million).



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The total program cost at appraisal was US$982 million, of which the World Bank’s (WB)
  contribution was US$400 million. The WB’s revised contribution was US$380 million. The total amount
  disbursed at closing through the PforR instrument was US$ 379.99 million.

  Financing: The Program for Results (PforR) was originally financed with a US$400 million IDA credit and
  US$582 million in additional non-WB administered financing provided by the government of Pakistan
  (US$575 million) and the European Commission (US$7 million). The original Program cost was US$982
  million. The actual disbursements were as follows: Revised Program cost US$1,512 million of which the
  GoP disbursed US$1,125 million, WB US$379.99 million and EU US$7 million.

  Dates: The Program was approved on December 19, 2017, and became effective on December 29, 2017.
  A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted in December 2020. The original closing date was November 30,
  2021, but the Program was extended by two years and closed on October 31, 2023.

  Restructurings: While the PDO, components (KRAs), and outcome targets remained the same during the
  life of the Program, the latter was restructured three times.

  Restructuring No.1: The first restructuring on November 22, 2021, aimed to ensure that all critical
  activities across Components (KRAs) were finalized and implemented to support the achievement of the
  PDO (RES45628, p. 5). All DLIs, except DLI 8, and their timelines, allocation, and scope were revised. The
  PDO and M&E framework remained unchanged. The WB’s financing was decreased by US$20 million to
  align with the narrowed scope of DLIs 2 and 3 and the closing date was extended by 19 months
  from November 30, 2021, to June 30, 2023 (PAD Annex 1; ICR, para 11).




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 30
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



Restructuring No.2: The second restructuring on June 25, 2023, aimed to further extend the Program’s
closing date by four months from June 30, 2023, to October 31, 2023.

Restructuring No.3: The third restructuring on October 26, 2023, aimed to adjust the reallocations of
funds.

DLI                          Changes made during Restructuring No. 1
                                  Baseline updated and DLI made scalable in proportion to the
                                   results achieved by each province and the federal government
DLI 1: Reduction of                (DLR 1.5 and 1.6)
variance in functional            Scope broadened with inclusion of federal government (1.5 and
expenditure composition            1.6).
for the health and                DLR 1.4 deleted.
education sectors                 Two new DLRs introduced.
                                  Completion date extended.

                                   Baseline revised and scope sharpened to exclude cash held by
                                      provincial and local governments in commercial banks and focus
DLI 2: Reduction in cash              on federal government deposits held outside the TSA, aligning
held outside the                      DLI with TSA Policy.
Recipient’s Treasury                 DLRs 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5 deleted.
Single Account.                      Two new DLRs introduced.
                                     Reduced allocation of US$30 million, including a US$15 million
                                      cancellation.
                                     Completion date extended

                                   Scope sharpened to include only health and education sectors.
                                   End target reduced from 90% to 50 - 90% of transactions
DLI 3: Percentage of                processed through the e-GP and verification protocols amended
vendor contracts                    to align with the PDO.
processed through the              Three new DLRs introduced.
recipient’s e-procurement          Allocation reduced by the relevance of the Program's objectives
system.                             $5 million.
                                   Completion date extended.

DLI 4: Percentage of
alignment of information           Baseline reworded and scope broadened to cover the whole of
and identification numbers          the government instead of selected district pilots.
for individual primary             Two new DLRs introduced: 4.6 and 4.7.
school teachers and                Allocation increased by US$5 million.
health workers related to          Completion date extended.
their place of work and
salaries.
DLI 5: Percentage of               Two new DLRs were introduced: 5.5 and 5.6.
pensioners, disaggregated          Allocation split between two financial years.
by gender, authenticated

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



   against the National               Completion dates extended.
   Database and Registration
   Authority (NADRA)
   computerized national
   identity card, paid through
   the Direct Credit Scheme
   (DCS) no later than the
   following pension
   payments cycle after
   retirement.
   DLI 6: Percentage of audit         Scope broadened to include four sectors —Revenue, Social
   recommendations                     Safety, Climate, and Public Works.
   processed through the              Two new DLRs were introduced: 6.5 and 6.6.
   Audit Management                   Allocation increased by US$10 million.
   Information System.

   DLI 7: Increased citizen
                                      DLR 7.1 was not achieved because the Open Government Action
                                       Plan was not submitted and was replaced with enhanced
   access to key fiscal
                                       reporting requirements under DLI 6.
   information concerning
   health and education.              Two new DLRs introduced: 7.5 and 7.6.

   DLI 8: Percentage of fiscal
   performance and service            No change.
   delivery indicators met by
   the provinces.

3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives     New




  Rationale
  Country and sector strategy: The PDO was relevant at appraisal both in the broader country context as
  well as the more specific PFM context which was highly centralized in Pakistan. Addressing PFM bottlenecks
  by the federal government was critical to service delivery. PFM functions were split between federal and
  provincial entities with budgeting and expenditure management being responsibilities of the provincial
  government, and accounting and auditing being federal mandates. Provincial Accountant Generals,
  employed by the federal government were responsible for processing payroll, pension and vendors’
  transactions which were targeted in Component 2 (Improved Procurement Performance) and Component 3
  (Payroll and Pension Payment Systems) of the Program. The institutional capacity of the provincial
  governments was important for implementing these functions.

  Health and education service delivery was devolved to the provinces in 2010 under the 18th Constitutional
  Amendment in Pakistan, but despite a substantial increase in the health and education budget at the
  provincial level between 2013 -14 and 2017-18, resources failed to be efficiently executed. The government
  aimed to increase the budget allocation to both sectors, but without structural changes in PFM and reliable
  execution of the budget, a larger budget would not translate into better PFM performance. According to

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



the Program’s PAD (para 4), the actions needed to remove the PFM bottlenecks were: a robust law; strong
cash management; timely and comprehensive reporting; improved federal-provincial coordination; timely
release of funds; streamlined payroll and pension systems; efficient and transparent procurement, and user-
friendly reports for citizen engagement.

Government Strategy: At appraisal, the proposed PDO was well aligned with the government’s six-pillar
PFM Reform Strategy (2018-2027) that had been jointly approved by the federal and provincial governments.
The objective of the reform was to consolidate PFM progress and make incremental improvements to ensure
that systems delivered to their full potential and were subject to accountability and transparency. Five of the
six pillars of the PFM Reform Strategy were directly supported by the PforR: Pillar 1 on fiscal sustainability
and credibility of the budget; Pillar 3 on service delivery and results-based management; Pillar 5 on
oversight, transparency and accountability; Pillar 6 on vehicle PFM coordination; and, partially, Pillar 4 on
public investment management and PPP (PAD, para 8).

The PFM Reform Strategy was also supported by the National Procurement Strategy and Training Plan
(2017-2021) (PAD, para 7). In addition, the Program’s PDO was aligned with Pakistan’s Vision 2025 which
focused on a responsive, inclusive, transparent, and accountable system of governance, and was fully
relevant for the Program’s objectives.

Country Partnership Strategy: At appraisal, the PDO was well aligned with the WBG’s Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) FY15-20 for Pakistan. The Program was aligned with Result Area 4 on “Service Delivery” by
adopting a citizen-centered approach to removing PFM constraints to service delivery, focusing on results,
and fully exploiting the potential of emerging technologies to advance transparent and accountable service
delivery as expressed in Component 3 (Payroll and pension payment systems), Component 4 (External
audit, legislative scrutiny, and social accountability), and Component 5 (Performance-based grant).

The PDO supported the International Development Association (IDA) 18 commitment to improve public
expenditure, financial management, and procurement, and was aligned with Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 16 on governance and institutions.

In addition, the PDO was aligned with the World Development Report 2017: Governance and the Law on its
recommendations to strengthen commitment, coordination, and cooperation in PFM systems and institutions.
Finally, it would contribute to Pillar 2 of the 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) by improving PFM
under the priority area: “Improve efficiency and equity of spending on poverty reduction.”

Prior WB sector and country experience: The Program was informed by previous WB work in Pakistan,
including the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) Assessment of 2012 and the lessons
learned from the Project to Improve Financial Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA). The basic ICT infrastructure
was already in place through the previous PIFRA projects (PAD, para 11).

Moreover, the Program complemented ongoing WB-financed health and education operations aimed at
improving service delivery outcomes directly. According to the PAD (para 12), there were five ongoing sector
projects with actions relevant to the Program: Pakistan: Third Punjab Education Sector Project (P154524),
Pakistan: Sindh Education Sector Project, Enhanced Nutrition for Mothers and Children (P131850), Punjab
Health Sector Reform Project (P123394), and the National Immunization Support Project (P132308).

Country capacity and adequacy of PforR Instrument: Given the challenges in Pakistan, and the need for
multiple system-wide reforms, designing the first PforR Program around five PDO-level indicators


                                                                                                 Page 6 of 30
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



                was appropriate to address the key PFM and procurement constraints to better service delivery in the
                education and health sectors.

                Five PDO-level indicators and targets, as well as the eight DLIs were considered adequate outcome
                measures, except that the Program failed to distinguish between targets at the provincial and federal levels
                and the scope of the Program was ambitious. Each of the five PDO-level indicators overlapped with a DLI;
                DLIs 4, 5 and 7 were not associated with a PDO-level indicator. The Program’s Theory of Change (ToC)
                (ICR, Figure 1, p. 60) presents a succinct and logical flow from activities (inputs) and outputs to DLIs, and
                intermediate outcomes to PDO level outcomes and high-level outcomes.

                The program supported capacity building and institutional strengthening of key PFM institutions and service
                delivery units and provided incentives for behavioral change in recipient agencies. Support was aimed at the
                Pakistan Audit and Accounts Academy (PAAA) to operate as a PFM Centre of Excellence using the
                qualification framework of the Pakistan Institute of Public Finance Accountants. Support was also to be
                provided to the Public Procurement Authority to enable it to provide training in Public Procurement Rules
                across government departments. Finally, training on collaborative leadership was to be developed with the
                PAAA with the objective of supporting behavioral change and program ownership.

                In addition, the Program benefitted from consultation and dialogue with development partners and
                complementary support through projects with the European Union, USAID, and the United Kingdom’s
                Department for International Development. These would contribute to the country’s capacity for implementing
                its first PforR (PAD, p. 14).

                The selection of a PforR instrument was well justified for this operation as it was driven by the need
                to address system-wide bottlenecks to PFM and procurement by supporting key reforms,
                strengthening country systems, capacity building and institutional strengthening accompanied by incentives
                for behavioral change, and reforms to strengthen public administration processes using emerging
                technologies. Proposed solutions included a PFM law; timely and comprehensive reporting; streamlined
                payroll and pension systems; e-procurement; and citizen-friendly reports.

                There were, however, some shortcomings in the instrument. The absence of Technical Assistance (TA) was
                a shortcoming as it was needed to strengthen capacity and knowledge of the new instrument both at the
                provincial and federal levels. Despite actions needed to address major federal-provincial coordination
                constraints necessary for program implementation, the Program’s Performance-based grant DLI (8) only
                dealt with the creation of a coordination mechanism (the Fiscal Coordination Committee) and establishment
                of an incentive system for rewarding fiscal performance in selected areas. While a coordination mechanism
                and incentives for fiscal performance were necessary, they would not resolve the constraints.

                Despite these shortcomings, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




                Rating
                Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                     New




                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 30
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)


DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI 1 referred to the reduction of variance in functional expenditure composition for the health and education
                sectors to improve the reliability of the budget.


                Rationale
                DLI 1 contributed to PDO 1 by reducing the variance in expenditure for the health and education sectors
                through a set of measures that included a strong PFM regulatory framework for fiscal discipline, strengthening
                the connection between plans and budgets, efficient procurement systems, and trimming the arbitrary
                reallocation of resources to other sectors. DLI 1 would be measured by the reduction in the variation between
                the original approved budget and actual expenditures in health and education. The timeline set targets at less
                than 25 percent variance in year 2; less than 15 percent in year 3; and less than 10 percent in year 4. The
                verification protocol was clear, technically sound and credible, entailing review of the PFM law, review of the
                Auditor General of Pakistan (AGP) Notification, review of the Financial Accounting and Budgeting System
                (FABS) report and calculation of variance using the PEFA methodology. The original disbursement allocated
                to this DLI was US$70 million, and the actual amount disbursed was the same.

                Achieving this outcome would improve reliability of the budget in health and education. This, in turn, would
                contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 (improve PFM for better management and accountability in service
                delivery for health and education sectors) by narrowing the variance between the original and actual
                expenditures in both sectors. However, a lower variance did not automatically imply better budget execution
                or better quality of programs and projects in health and education.

                During the first restructuring, DLI 1 was adjusted to be scalable although the target was unchanged.

                This DLI is rated Substantial.



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 2
                DLI
                DLI 2 referred to the reduction in cash held outside the Recipient’s TSA.

                Rationale
                DLI 2 contributed to PDO 1 by addressing the need to enact a legal framework to ensure that all funds went
                to the TSA and simplified expenditure authorization rules to allow timely spending by service delivery
                practitioners. Two factors encouraged government departments to keep cash outside the TSA: a highly
                centralized payment authorization system without a legal framework, and an inadequate IT infrastructure for
                e-payment. As of June 2017, there were 753,084 government accounts in commercial/scheduled banks with
                a total balance of PKR 1.584 trillion. DLI 2 would be measured by a special survey of governments accounts
                in commercial banks and the adoption of an accounting framework for daily consolidation of all government
                cash balances as part of the TSA. The timeline set targets at 5 percent reduction in cash held outside the
                TSA in year 2; additional 5 percent in year 3; and additional 5 percent in year 4. The verification protocol was

                                                                                                                    Page 8 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



clear, technically sound and credible, entailing review of the Auditor General of Pakistan’s (AGP) special
survey report on government bank accounts held in the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) and scheduled/
commercial banks; verification of adequacy of coverage, including several accounts held in public entities and
line ministries; and review of the SBP Bulletin on classification of scheduled bank’s deposits; fiscal operations
report, and FABS bank reconciliation reports.

Achieving this outcome would ensure all funds went to the TSA and simplified expenditure authorization rules
for the health and education sectors. This would contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 by allowing timely
spending in both sectors.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$70 million, and the actual amount disbursed was
US$40 million. During the first restructuring, DLI 2 was adjusted to exclude cash held by provincial and local
governments in commercial banks and focus on federal government deposits held outside the TSA, aligning it
with TSA Policy and the allocation was reduced by US$30 million, including a US$15 million cancellation.

This DLI is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
DLI 3 referred to the percentage of vendor contracts processed through the Recipient’s e-procurement system.


Rationale
DLI 3 was to be achieved through reforms to enhance transparency, efficiency, and competition in
procurement practices for better value for money in selected federal ministries and provincial government
departments. DLI 3 contributed to only PDO 2 (improve procurement systems for better management and
accountability in service delivery for health and education sectors). The procurement reforms would be
measured by the share of the targeted procurement packages processed through e-procurement in the health
and education sectors and included the publication of bidding documents for goods, proposals for
consultancy services, and contracts for specialized procurements. The timeline set targets at 50 percent of
targeted packages to be processed through e-procurement for the health and education sectors in year 3,
and 90 percent in year 4 as well as 50 percent for additional procurement entities also in year 4. The
verification protocol was clear, technically sound and credible, entailing review of notifications on Public
Procurement Rules, Standard Bidding Documents, procurement plans and transaction reports from the e-
procurement system, among others.

The key constraints to efficient procurement included the lack of linkages between procurement plans and
budgets, gaps in procurement rules limiting competitive bidding, inefficiencies due to a manual procurement
system, and the need for qualified procurement personnel. These issues caused delays and inadequacies in
funding for service delivery units, hindering the timely receipt of essential inputs and negatively impacted
health and education service delivery outcomes.



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



Achieving DLI 3 would improve the transparency and efficiency of the procurement system in health and
education and contribute to the achievement of PDO 2.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$50 million, and the actual amount disbursed was
US$45 million. During the first restructuring, DLI 3 was scaled down to include only the health and education
sectors, the end target was reduced from 90% to 50 - 90% of transactions processed through the e-GP,
verification protocols amended to align with the PDO, and the allocation was reduced by US$5 million.

This DLI is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
DLI 4 referred to the percentage of alignment of information and identification numbers for individual primary
school teachers and health workers related to their place of work and salaries.

Rationale
DLI 4 aimed to strengthen tracking the attendance, postings, and transfers of front-line service delivery
personnel that complicated the planning and payroll audits of teachers and health workers. DLI 4 sought to
rectify the constraint caused by the lack of integration between the Education Management Information
System (EMIS), the Health Management Information System (HMIS) and the Financial Accounting and
Budgeting System which made it difficult to track resources to their end use. For example, bulk budgets
received by Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) were not broken down by individual schools or health
centers. DLI 4 was to be measured by the mapping of school teachers and health workers to education and
health units in pilot districts and standardization of sanctioned position codes between the budget and payroll
in pilot districts. The timeline set targets at 40 percent of teachers and health workers tagged in year 2; 60
percent in year 3; and 80 percent in year 4. The verification protocol was clear, technically sound and
credible, entailing review of extracts from an Organization Management module to ascertain linkage of payroll
and sanctioned positions. The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$30 million, and the actual
disbursed amount was US$35 million as US$5 million was added during restructuring. During the first
restructuring, the DLI was adjusted to cover the whole of the government instead of selected district pilots and
the allocation was increased by US$5 million.

Achieving DLI 4 would improve tracking of teachers and health workers personnel, planning and payroll
audits. This, in turn, would contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 by improving the percentage of alignment
of information and identification numbers for individual primary school teachers and health workers related to
their place of work and salaries.

This DLI is rated High.



Rating


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



High

DLI 5
DLI
DLI 5 referred to the percentage of pensioners, disaggregated by gender, authenticated against the National
Database and Registration Authority’s (NADRA) computerized national identity card, paid through the Direct
Credit Scheme no later than the following pension payment cycle after retirement.

Rationale
DLI 5 aimed to improve the efficiency of the pension payment system through the authentication of
pensioners against the NADRA database. DLI 5 contributed to PDO 1 by addressing a PFM constraint
caused by a highly inefficient pension payment system in which most pensioners were from the health and
education sectors. A PFM bottleneck was created because their service records were maintained manually at
various office locations where they served. DLI 5 sought to remove the bottleneck by setting authentication
targets at 70 percent in year 2; 80 percent in year 3; and 90 percent in year 4. The verification protocol was
clear, technically sound and credible, entailing a review of employee records in HR/ Payroll databases and
measures to ensure gender disaggregation. The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$30
million, and the actual amount disbursed was the same.

Achieving DLI 5 would contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 by narrowing the variance between the
original and actual expenditures for pension payments in both sectors.

During the first restructuring, the allocation was split between two financial years.

This DLI is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
DLI 6 referred to the percentage of audit recommendations processed through the AMIS.



Rationale
DLI 6 aimed to address the inefficiencies in financial reporting and transparency in PFM and contributed to
PDO 1 by increasing and ensuring that the number of audit recommendations in the health and education
sectors processed through the AMIS were effectively acted upon. This DLI was measured by the
establishment of a competency wing with trained staff, Public Accounts Committee (PAC) recommendations
effectively acted upon, and reports made accessible to the public. The timeline set targets of 40 percent for
the recommendations effectively followed up and reports published and made accessible to the public by year
2; 60 percent in year 3; and 80 percent in year 4. The verification protocol entailed reviews of the AMIS
implementation and training plan, and review of the DAGP Annual Audit Report to verify evidence of effective
follow-up of the audit findings; included issuance by the executive or audited entity of a formal written

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 30
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



response to the findings and reports on follow-up to provide evidence of implementation. The verification
protocol was clear, technically sound, and credible, entailing processing audit reports through the AMIS.

Achievement of DLI 6 would increase the share of the audit reports that were acted upon and published on an
official website. The outcome, however, was more comprehensive as the AMIS system was implemented
across all directorates within the Auditor General’s Office contributing to the achievement of PDO 1.

The original amount allocated to this DLI was US$40 million, and the actual amount disbursed was US$50
million. During the first restructuring, the scope of DLI 6 was expanded to cover the follow-up of audit
recommendations from two to six sectors, including four additional sectors — Revenue, Social Safety,
Climate, and Public Works and the allocation was increased by US$10 million.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
DLI 7 referred to increased citizen access to key fiscal information on health and education.

Rationale
DLI 7 aimed to develop and implement social accountability strategies for citizen participation in PFM. DLI 7
contributed to PDO 1 because a strong PFM system is influenced by transparency and citizen participation
when there is strong evidence that transparency positively impacts public service delivery outcomes. A report
from Uganda indicated that public access to financial information can enhance service delivery and improve
accountability. According to the Open Budget Index, the GoP provided the public with limited budget
information, but it had committed to the Open Government Partnership (OGP) Principles. This was to be
measured with the submission in year 1 of an OGP National Action Plan that included a Fiscal Transparency
theme and the uploading of the Integrated Service Delivery Report (ISDR) for the education and health
sectors in the Open Public Finance Data Portal by year 2 and its continuation in years 3 and 4. The
verification protocol was clear, technically sound and credible, entailing the submission of the OGP National
Action Plan and review and verifications of the use of the ISDR for budget monitoring and accountability,
among other protocols.

Achieving this outcome would improve reliability of the budget in health and education. This, in turn, would
contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 by reporting on the narrowing of the variance between original and
actual expenditures in both sectors on the Portal. The Portal was established, and the ISDRs were uploaded
in the Portal and websites of the Ministry of Finance (MoF), Auditor General and Controller General under
“Citizen data” (TTL interview).

The original amount allocated to this DLI was US$30 million, and the actual amount disbursed was the same.
However, during the first restructuring, the DLI was adjusted as the OGP Action Plan was not submitted and
was replaced with enhanced reporting requirements under DLI 6.



Rating

                                                                                                Page 12 of 30
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



            Substantial

            DLI 8
            DLI
            DLI 8 referred to the percentage of fiscal performance and service delivery indicators met by the provinces.


            Rationale
            DLI 8 aimed to address shared responsibilities between federal and provincial governments and was the
            Program’s most important aspect. It contributed to PDO 1 as service delivery responsibilities had largely
            shifted to the provinces while PFM stayed with the federal government, and fiscal performance and delivery
            indicators were directly linked to PFM systems.

            Three key developments had significantly impacted PFM systems and service delivery in the country: (i) the
            provinces were responsible for service delivery; (ii) the Auditor General of Pakistan’s role in holding provinces
            accountable for resource use had been strengthened; and (iii) the provinces' share of the federal resource
            pool had increased significantly. These changes empowered provinces to enhance service delivery, but also
            necessitated more collaborative leadership to implement national goals and the Sustainable Development
            Goals. DLI 8 was to be measured by the establishment of a Fiscal Coordination Committee (FCC) by the
            Council for Common Interests (CCI); establishment and approval of an incentive system by the FCC to
            improve fiscal performance and service delivery in selected areas, the provision of an innovation award for
            the indicators met, and other measures. The timeline set targets on the innovation award to be provided to
            provincial governments for 10 to 20 percent of the fiscal performance indicators met by year 2; between 25 to
            50 percent by year 3; and between 35 to 70 percent by year 4. The verification protocol was clear, technically
            sound and credible, entailing review of the FCC Notifications issued by the CCI; review of the incentive
            system for performance-based grants; achievement of the Fiscal Responsibility and Service Delivery
            Barometer to determine the innovation award; and the scalability of the innovation award thresholds. The
            original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$80 million, and the actual amount disbursed was the
            same.

            Achieving DLI 8 would improve Pakistan’s fiscal performance and service delivery indicators. This, in turn,
            would contribute to the achievement of PDO 1 by improving transparency and coordination between the
            federal and provincial governments. The program led the provinces to adopt the citizens’ budgets, enact PFM
            laws, as well as fully implement Direct Credit Pension payments and e-Payment solutions, thanks to these
            strategic interventions. In addition, the federal government’s e-Procurement system was adopted by the
            provinces.

            During the first restructuring, DLI 8 was the only DLI left unchanged.

            This DLI is rated High.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                                                                                                               Page 13 of 30
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)




               OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
               Rationale
               The relevance of the Program's objectives was rated Substantial, and the relevance of the 8 DLIs was rated
               Substantial. The overall relevance rating for the Program is Substantial.

               The DLIs were highly relevant to the WB's country and sector strategies both at appraisal and closure. They
               were also highly relevant to the GoP’s PFM strategy at appraisal, but less so by the time of closing as
               external factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic had shifted the government’s focus away from the policy
               priorities of the Program.

               The eight DLIs were clearly defined, well aligned with the PDO, and provided appropriate incentives to trigger
               actions and performance. They reflected measurable progress towards the broader reform priorities of the
               government and improved efficiency mainly by helping to clear PFM and procurement bottlenecks, innovating
               on technologies to advance transparency and accountability, improving citizen participation, and building
               human and institutional capacity to sustain PFM and procurement system reforms over the long term. Among
               the few shortcomings were the lack of TA to familiarize the government officials with the logistics of the DLI’s
               given that this was the country’s first PforR, and the absence of discrete targets at the federal and provincial
               levels.



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1: To improve PFM for better management and accountability in service delivery for health and
               education sectors.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The Program would achieve PDO 1 by simplifying PFM processes and supporting legal
               and institutional reforms. This would be achieved by reducing the variance in functional expenditure
               composition for health and education to improve reliability of the budget (DLI 1); and reducing the cash held
               outside the Recipient’s TSA (DLI 2). This would be facilitated by key activities such as approving Pakistan’s
               first PFM Act of 2019 that would provide the legal basis for PFM reforms, standardize expenditure controls,
               and capacity building, as well as activities such as the implementation of a special survey of government
               bank accounts, setting up a cash management policy and accounting framework for TSA consolidation, online
               bill submission and EFT, and timely automated bank reconciliation to reduce the cash held outside the TSA.

               The Program would also achieve PDO 1 by aligning information and identification numbers for primary school
               teachers and health workers related to their place of work and salaries (DLI 4); and authenticating

                                                                                                                 Page 14 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



pensioners, disaggregated by gender, against the National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA)
computerized national identity card (DLI 5). This would be achieved by key activities such as
the establishment of biometric identification and linkage to NADRA, linkages with the EMIS and the
HMIS, digitizing service books and setting up the Pension Management Information System.

The Program would also achieve PDO 1 by increasing the number of audit recommendations processed
through the AMIS (DLI 6); and increasing citizen access to key fiscal information on health and education (DLI
7). The key activities that would facilitate these included establishing the AMIS Wing and Financial
Transactions audited through Computer Aided Audit Tools, guidelines/MoUs for the selection of Civil Society
Organizations (CSOs), publishing guidelines on Citizen Participatory Audits (CPA), and
establishing performance audits conducted through CPA. Other activities included instituting an Open Data
Readiness assessment (ODRA), an ISDR template, and an Open Public Finance data Portal.

The Program would also achieve PDO 1 by attaining fiscal performance and service delivery indicators in the
provinces (DLI 8). This would be accomplished by establishing a Fiscal Coordination Committee to facilitate
coordination between provincial and federal governments, developing a Performance Grant Framework and
performance indicators to reward health and education practitioners, establishing innovation award criteria
and innovation proof of concepts. The ultimate outcome sought was improved PFM processes in all provinces
to facilitate an enabling environment for PFM in service delivery.

The achievement of PDO 1 is based on the efficacy of 7 DLIs and 4 PDO outcome indicators. The evidence is
further triangulated with the achievement of 10 Intermediate Result Indicators (IRIs) - IRIs 1 – 8, and IRIs 15-
16. The 4 PDO indicators were similar or identical to the 4 DLIs.

The four PDO indicators targeted to reducing the variance between the originally approved budget
and expenditure (same as DLI 1), reducing cash held outside the Recipient’s TSA (same as DLI 2),
increasing the percentage of audit recommendations processed through the AMIS (same as DLI 6) and
increasing the percentage of fiscal performance and service delivery indicators met by the provinces (same
as DLI 8) would, like the DLIs, contribute to the achievement of PDO 1.

In short, a strengthened legal framework enabled by Pakistan’s first PFM Act of 2019 and internal
management systems provided Pakistan a legal basis for PFM reforms, led provinces to establish PFM laws,
improved budget preparation, reduced unapproved projects, and reduced arbitrary allocations. The program
also improved efficiency in payments for service delivery through digital payments and fiscal savings through
TSA; digitized pensions payments and payroll to improve resources management; enhanced transparency in
audit; and reduced manual processes that curbed paper and fuel usage, lowering the PFM carbon footprint.
The combination of these activities led to improved PFM for better management and accountability in service
delivery for the health and education sectors.

Key Inputs/Outputs

        Pakistan’s first PFM Act of 2019 was established.
        Steps in standardized expenditure controls reduced from 22 steps to 3 steps.
        51% of vouchers were exempted from pre-audit and cleared within 24 hours.
        Savings of PKRs 10.9 billion in 8 months of TSA rollout.
        Delays in vendor payments were reduced from 27 to 4 days.
        Delays in pension payments reduced from 90 days to 1 day.

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)




      22,000 ghost pensioners were removed from the scroll thanks to biometric verification.
      2.5 million pensioners received payments directly in their bank accounts (20% (500,000) were
         women).
        Payroll information of six million employees was made accessible on an online dashboard.
        AMIS was established and audit reports were published.
        Guidelines on Citizen Participatory Audits were prepared and published.
        Citizen dashboards and citizens’ budgets were published on the FD website.
        A Fiscal Coordination Committee was established, and the Performance Grant Framework was
         developed.

DLIs and PDO Outcome Indicators

There were seven DLIs (DLIs 1-8, except DLI 3), that contributed to PDO 1. Four DLIs were similar but not
identical to the PDO indicators.

DLI 1/ PDO indicator 1 were similar and referred to the reduction of variance in functional expenditure
composition for the health and education sectors to improve reliability of the budget at the federal and
provincial government levels (ICR, Annex 1A and 1B). DLI 1 focused on the variance at the federal level while
PDO indicator 1 focused on the variance at the provincial level. Baseline: Variance in: Health 43%; Education
30%. Variance in health and education for fiscal year 2016-17 for the federal and provincial governments:
Federal: 26%; Punjab: 21 %; Khyber Pakhunkhwa: 29%; Sindh: 11%; Baluchistan: 10% (ICR, Annex 1A);
Original Target for Health and Education: less than 10% (Annex 1B, p. 31). Original/ Revised Targets:
10% (ICR, p. 18 notes the same target); Actual achieved at completion: No information is reported for the
variance in the individual sectors (See Annex 1B, p. 31-32). The combined average variance for the
education and health sectors was Federal: 9.65%; Punjab: 14%; Sindh: 10%; KPK: 17%; Baluchistan: 7%
The target was achieved at the Federal level (DLI 1 achieved), as well as at the provincial levels in Sind and
Baluchistan, but the target was missed in the provinces of Punjab and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa largely due to
catastrophic floods. As the Actual target was met for DLI 1 but only partially achieved for PDO indicator 1, a
rating of Modest is assigned to DLI 1/ PDO indicator 1. They contributed to PDO 1 by reducing the variance
and improving the relationship between PFM plans and budgets.

DLI 2/ PDO indicator 2 referred to the reduction in cash held outside the Recipient’s TSA. Baseline: 753,084
government accounts in commercial/scheduled banks with a total balance of PKR 1.584 trillion (Annex 1B)/
(FY 2016-17) federal government deposits of PKRs 0.916 trillion parked in commercial bank accounts of
which PKRs 0 billion was brought into the TSA (Annex 1A); Original and Revised Target: 15% of the
baseline or PKRs 150 billion brought into the TSA. The Revised Target focused only on federal government
accounts. Actual achieved at completion: PKRs 152 billion of funds brought into the TSA through a
sweeping arrangement resulting in significant cost savings (estimated at PKR 9 billion in interest expenses
during the last 8 months of the Program) for the government. The Target was modestly exceeded and is rated
Substantial. DLI 2/ PDO indicator 2 contributed to PDO 1 by ensuring that all funds went to the TSA and
simplifying expenditure authorization rules to allow timely spending by service delivery practitioners.

DLI 4 referred to the percentage of alignment of information and identification numbers for individual primary
school teachers and health workers related to their place of work and salaries. After restructuring, DLI 4 was
broadened to align with the Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) and the Integrated
Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) from two pilot districts to all four provincial and federal
levels. Baseline: Individual data in the OM was not aligned with data in EMIS and HMIS; Target: 80% of

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



primary school teachers and health workers tagged; Actual: 80% achieved at completion but by only one of
the four provincial governments - Modest. DLI 4 contributed to PDO 1 by integrating the EMIS, the HMIS, and
the FABS to track resources to their end use in one province.

DLI 5 referred to the percentage of pensioners, disaggregated by gender, authenticated against the National
Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) computerized national identity card, paid through the Direct
Credit Scheme (DCS) no later than the following pension payment cycle after retirement. Baseline: DCS paid
35%; Target: 90%; Actual achieved at completion: 90% exceeded DLI 5 is rated High as the target was
surpassed and the DCS system was replicated across the country. An additional US$500,000 was disbursed
for each additional 1% achieved above the target of 85% (Annex 1B, p. 43). DLI 5 contributed to PDO 1
through the authentication of pensioners against the NADRA database because most pensioners were from
the health and education sectors with their service records maintained manually.

DLI 6/ PDO indicator 3 referred to the percentage of audit recommendations processed through the AMIS.
After restructuring, DLI 6 was expanded from covering 2 sectors (education and health) to 6 sectors including
four additional sectors — Revenue, Social Safety, Climate, and Public Works. Baseline: AMIS did not exist;
Target: 80% of the audit recommendations for education and health were effectively acted upon and reports
published on an official website or by any other means easily accessible to the public; Actual achieved at
completion: 100% and AMIS was implemented although with shortcomings across all directorates within the
Auditor General's Office. The outcome was more comprehensive than the initial aim but was achieved with
delays and its impact has yet to be assessed (ICR paras 25 and 29). As an example, the internal audit
function was implemented but did not become operational in the Department of Education and remained as
pilots in the education and health sectors. Therefore, the achievement of DLI 6 is rated Substantial. DLI 6
contributed to PDO 1 as the number of audit recommendations in the health and education sectors processed
through the AMIS were effectively acted upon, improving legislative scrutiny and social accountability.

DLI 7 referred to increased citizen access to key fiscal information on health and education. Baseline: Budget
execution report by economic classification in PDF format. Target: ISDR for education and health sectors
uploaded in Open Public Finance Data Portal; Actual achieved at completion: The Portal was established,
and the dashboards were uploaded on the websites of the Ministry of Finance under “Citizen data,” Auditor
General and Controller General. The Open Public Finance Data Portal was established. Public access to
financial data through citizen dashboards and online portals improved the Open Budget Index Score. The key
actions that contributed to this improvement include publishing of audit reports, monitoring reports of the
Output Based Budget, pre-budget statements, citizens’ budget, and annual fiscal risk statements. The budget
execution reports compelled citizens and government officials to make 137,000 site visits (ICR, p. 46-47 and
TTL interview). However, it is unclear whether these achievements apply to all four provinces or only the
federal government. The ICR notes: “The Citizens’ Participatory Audit (CPA), with guidelines published, was
piloted in one province and two pilots are underway,” (para 25). Achievement rating Substantial. DLI 7
contributed to PDO 1 by contributing to transparency and citizen participation in PFM.

DLI 8/ PDO indicator 4 referred to the percentage of fiscal performance and service delivery indicators met
by the provinces. Baseline: 0%, no existing coordination mechanism existed; Target: Award from the MoF
provided to the provincial governments for meeting at least 35% and up to 70% of the fiscal performance and
service delivery indicators; Actual achieved at completion: 74.14%. The provinces adopted citizens’
budgets and enacted PFM laws, and fully implemented Direct Credit of Pension Payments and e-Payment
solutions. In general, the provinces adopted the Federal government’s e-procurement system. While
the target was exceeded, the ICR does not clarify whether it was achieved by all four provincial governments.
While the ICR notes that the e-procurement system was adopted by the provinces, it also notes that KP,

                                                                                               Page 17 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



Punjab and Sindh demonstrated commitment to it but does not specify whether Balochistan adopted or
rejected it. DLI 8/PDO indicator 4 is rated Substantial.

Based on the preceding discussion of DLIs, three DLIs out of four that were also PDO indicators are rated
Substantial, and one was rated Modest. Out of the remaining three DLIs, one is rated High, one Substantial,
and one DLI is rated Modest.

The overall rating for the 7 DLIs and four PDO Outcome indicators is Substantial.

PDO 1 IRIs

The Efficacy of PDO 1 is also assessed by evidence provided by ten IRIs (IRIs 1 – 8, and IRIs 15-16).

IRI-1: Notification of revised updated delegation of power, General Financial Rules, Accounting Policies and
Procedures Manual and Chart of Accounts. Baseline: Legal Framework for PFM in terms of Law and
Subsidiary Rules does not exist. Target: Regulatory Framework updated (PFM law, Functions and Powers of
PAO, Receipt and Payment Rules, General Financial Rules, APPM and Chart of Accounts). Actual achieved
at completion: PFM Law of 2019 enacted. Delegation of Power Rules notified, Treasury Rules revised,
General Financial Rules updated. Payment procedures updated. However, the New Accounting Manual was
not updated. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-2: Internal Audit arrangements modernized in the health and education departments. Baseline:
Regulatory framework for the internal audit function does not exist. Target: 2 internal audit reports prepared
for the Departments of Health and Education. Actual achieved at completion: Internal Audit Rules were
notified, and 2 internal audit reports were prepared for the Departments of Health and Education. The position
of Financial Advisor was eliminated. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-3: Improve the timeliness of comprehensive financial and nonfinancial reporting by linkage or interface.
Baseline: Dashboard for fiscal information does not exist. Target: Improve the timeliness of comprehensive
financial and nonfinancial reporting by linkage or interface of FABS to Departmentalized Accounts and
establish interface with SBP, National Bank of Pakistan, Federal Bureau of Revenue (FBR), Central
Depository of National Savings (CDNS), Economic Affairs Division (EAD), Pakistan Post Office Department ,
Pakistan Railways, Public Works Department (PWD)/Communication and Works. Actual achieved at
completion: Linkages have been established with FBR, CDNS, Pak PWD, Pakistan Post and SBP, whereas
linkages with EAD and Military Accountant General are in process. Customized dashboards were prepared
for Budget and Expenditure Wing of MoF. The dashboards are available on the website of the MoF. These
are updated at least once a month. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-4: Approved Cash Management Policy with accounting framework for daily consolidation of all
government. Baseline: Regulatory framework for Cash Management does not exist. Target: Cash
Management Policy approved by the Cabinet and Secretary of Finance approved a framework for
implementation of TSA. Actual achieved at completion: Cash Management Policy approved by the Cabinet.
Secretary Finance has also approved a framework for implementation of TSA. TSA Rules were notified and
the PFM law mandated establishment of a cash management function. Accounting procedure for sweeping of
TSA was also notified. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI-5: Reports of PAC hearings on audit report on annual financial statements are published on the website.
Baseline: Reports of PAC hearings on audit report on annual financial statements do not exist. Target:

                                                                                               Page 18 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



Reports of PAC hearings on audit report on annual financial statements are published. Actual achieved at
completion: PAC sessions are open to media and the audit reports are widely publicized through new
reporting. Since 2019, at the direction of PAC, the AGP published all the audit reports on its website.
(Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 6: Financial transactions of health and education function recorded in FABS audited through Computer AI.
Baseline: 0%. Target: 80%. Actual achieved at completion: 100%. IT center established and Audit
Command Language (ACL) software acquired. Officials were re-trained in ACL and financial transactions of
the health and education sectors were subjected to ACL audit. The AGP procured an additional software
QLIK for data analytics. The automated system runs on the entire payroll data on a real-time basis and any
suspicious transaction is automatically singled out. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 7: Citizen Portal set up to facilitate CPA, including fraud hotline for feedback. Baseline: Citizen Portal did
not exist. Target: Citizen Portal was established. Actual achieved at completion: CPA Portal on the
website of the AGP is operational. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 8: Citizen Participatory Audit reports that cover indicators in the ISDR published. Baseline: 0.0. Target: 8
performance audit reports are published. Actual achieved at completion: The Auditor General notified that
all Directors Generals should undertake at least one performance audit by using the CPA. For the fiscal year
ending 2021, 12 performance audit reports are published covering topics such as elementary education and
health. Citizens are engaged at the time of audit planning and identification, but not for the entire
cycle. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 15: Incentive system by the FCC to improve fiscal performance and service delivery in selected areas.
Baseline: No. Target: Yes. Actual achieved at completion: Performance Grant mechanism was notified by
the council of ministers in 2019. This has helped with the replication of PFM reforms in the
provinces. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 16: Innovative applications used to report and account for funds utilized. Baseline: 0. Target: 4. Actual
achieved at completion: MIS for procurement was developed in Punjab and piloted in the federal Ministry of
Education. The Punjab Education Department developed FMIS which is being integrated with the IFMIS.
Online bill submission was piloted in the ministries of health and education at the federal level. The e-
stamping system was replicated across all provinces. (Achieved - Substantial)

All IRIs targets were achieved. Based on the evidence provided, their overall Efficacy rating in support of
PDO 1 is Substantial.

The Efficacy of PDO 1 is rated Substantial on the basis of the achievement ratings of 7 DLIs, triangulated by
the achievement ratings of four PDO Outcome indicators and 10 IRIs. The PforR operation succeeded in
creating institutional change by facilitating Pakistan’s first PFM Act of 2019 that provided the legal basis for
the PFM reforms, that, in turn, led the provinces to establish PFM laws, redress PFM constraints to service
delivery, and create an enabling environment for improved service delivery. The program improved efficiency
in payments for service delivery through digital payments and fiscal savings through TSA. As an example, the
TSA consolidated over PKR 152 billion (around US$550 million), exceeding targets and saving PKR 10.9
billion (US$32 million) in interest by 2023. Electronic funds transfer (EFT) and online billing systems reduced
payment time from 27 to 5 days. The program also digitized pension payments and payroll to improve
resources management, enhanced transparency in audit through the establishment of the AMIS, and
improved public access to financial data through citizen dashboards and online portals. AMIS made 40,000

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



audit recommendations transparent and helped recover US$1.6 billion in FY2023. The program also
promoted institutional strengthening and coordination between federal and provincial governments setting up
a council of ministers to coordinate PFM reforms across the federal and provincial levels and introduced a
performance grant mechanism to unify reforms countrywide.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To improve procurement systems for better management and accountability in service delivery for
health and education sectors.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The Program would achieve the PDO of improving the procurement systems for better
management and accountability in service delivery in the health and education sectors by increasing the
number of vendor contracts processed through the Recipient’s e-procurement system (DLI 3). This would be
achieved by key activities such as an e-procurement system that would reduce bureaucratic delays and
dispute resolution time, amendment of procurement rules, linking procurement plans and budgets, developing
procurement guidelines, developing Standard Bidding Documents and Price Norms, providing training for
accreditation of procurement staff and committee members, training users and registering vendors, reducing
litigation times and making declarations on beneficial ownership mandatory.

Like the DLI 3, the PDO indicators targeted towards increasing the percentage of vendor contracts processed
through the Recipient’s e-procurement system would contribute to the achievement of PDO 2.

In sum, legal reforms in procurement, and the establishment of an e-procurement system to tackle
inefficiencies in procurement and reduce bureaucratic delays led to improved procurement systems for better
management and accountability in service delivery in the health and education sectors.

Key Inputs/ Outputs

        E-procurement system was rolled out.
        E-procurement guidelines and standard bid documents were developed.
        7,500 users were trained.
        2,700 vendors were registered.
        Litigation time was reduced from two years to 70 days.
        Beneficial ownership declaration was made mandatory.

The achievement of PDO 2 is based on the efficacy of one DLI (DLI 3) and one PDO indicator. They were
similar. This evidence in this discussion is further triangulated with the achievement of 6 IRIs (IRIs 9 – 14).

DLIs and PDO 2 Outcomes Indicator


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



DLI 3/PDO Outcome indicator 5 referred to the percentage of vendor contracts processed through the
GoP’s e-procurement system. DLI 3 initially focused on e-procurement in all sectors, but later prioritized
health and education. Baseline: 0.0%; Original Target: 90%; Revised Target: 50 – 90%. Actual achieved
at completion: 100% of entities in the Health and Education sectors were processed through the e-
procurement system. In addition to these two sectors, the system was implemented in 17 departments of the
federal government in addition to health and education. It was also implemented in the provinces. However,
the e-procurement system faced delays. The program exceeded the targets by closure, but the
remaining timeframe was inadequate for a comprehensive impact evaluation. As a result, even though the
revised target was eventually exceeded, DLI 3 is rated – Substantial. DLI 3 contributed to PDO 2 by
requiring vendor contracts to be processed through the Recipient’s e-procurement system which contributed
to better PFM management and accountability for service delivery.

PDO 2 IRIs

The Efficacy of PDO 2 is also assessed by evidence provided by 6 IRIs (IRIs 9 – 14).

IRI 9: Number of departments with vendor claims for health and education departments paid at accounting
offices electronically. Baseline: 0. Target: 4. Actual achieved at completion: 34. Guidelines for simplifying
payment authorization procedures developed by CGA and approved and notified by the AGP. The EFT and
online billing system reduced the payment time from 27 to 5 days. A separate channel for petty expenditures
was also introduced (31% of the petty expenditures in the health and education departments of the federal
government and 52% of expenditures in the government of Punjab were exempted from pre-audit
requirements). During October 2023, transactions from more than 250 departments were paid through EFT,
out of which at least 34 departments related to health and education. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 10: WB reconciliation of all active government bank accounts in the TSA takes place at least monthly.
Baseline: 8 weeks. Target: 4 weeks (monthly). Actual achieved at completion: 4 weeks. For the entities
which migrated to EFT solutions, the reconciliation was in real time. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 11: Percent of budget derived from procurement plans in selected federal ministries of health and
education. Baseline: 0 percent. Target: 100 percent. Actual achieved at completion: 100 percent. Before
the budget demand, all procurement plans for the ministries of health and education were uploaded onto the
system. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 12: Databases or records are maintained for contracts, including data on what has been
procured. Baseline: 0 percent. Target: 50 percent. Actual achieved at completion: 100 percent. Under the
Program, the database has been digitized using AI. The data is now available on the Public Procurement
Regulatory Authority (PPRA) website in machine readable format. Contract data of all selected entities are
archived in the e-Procurement system. The selected entities are under the federal ministries of education and
health. (Achieved - Substantial)

IRI 13: E-procurement guidelines issued and Supplier Relations Management Module is operational in the
health and education sectors. Baseline: 0. Target: 2. Actual achieved at completion: 2. The system’s
operational and guidelines are issued. (Achieved - Substantial)




                                                                                                Page 21 of 30
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



IRI 14: End user training in e-Procurement systems. Baseline: 0. Target: 80. Actual achieved at
completion: 9,500 persons were trained. Extensive end user training was conducted in federal and provincial
governments. (Achieved - Substantial)

The government decided to replicate the system across all federal and provincial governments. A large
number of end users as well as vendors had to be trained. The total number was 9,809, of which 9.65 percent
were women.

On the basis of this discussion of the IRIs, the overall rating for the IRIs supporting PDO 2 is Substantial.

The achievement of the DLI, PDO outcome indicator and the IRIs jointly support an efficacy rating of
Substantial for PDO 2. The Program developed an e-procurement system targeting the health and education
sectors originally but was later extended to all sectors and provinces. The systems improved the dispute
resolution time from 18 months to 70 days. Over 7,500 procurement agents were trained countrywide.
Although an impact assessment could not be conducted due to insufficient data, focus group discussions
revealed that more than two thirds of the participants recognized that the new system improved transparency,
efficiency and user-friendliness and improved the bidding process. The Program was expanded to Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab, and Sindh.



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
Based on the Program’s achievement supporting PDO 1 and PDO 2, the Overall Efficacy rating is
Substantial. Despite the significant impact on the overall efficacy of PFM, and impressive institutional
development in the PFM area, there were certain shortcomings. For example, while important achievements
were made with respect to the internal audit function in the AGP’s office, and the guidelines were published
for the CPA, the latter did not become fully operational in the Department of Education and remained as a
pilot in both health and education sectors. The e-procurement system faced delays and although the program
exceeded the e-procurement target by closure, the remaining timeframe was inadequate for a full-fledged
impact evaluation (ICR, para 29).

The focus of the Program was clearly on the PFM bottlenecks to service delivery as evidenced in the Results
Framework, the DLIs and the PAD. Since the sequencing of the interventions was not clear, implementation
was undermined by the lack of a sequencing strategy. The targets for the federal and provincial government
levels were also not specified. As a result, it is unclear whether achievements at the provincial level apply to
all four provinces or just one. The timeframe was severely insufficient for an ambitious PDO and the
largescale reforms that were aligned with the Government of Pakistan’s 15-year PFM Reform Strategy.



Rating
                                                                                                   Page 22 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the Program's objectives was Substantial as they were strongly aligned with the country
context in which the service delivery functions for the health and education sectors were devolved to the
provinces. The relevance of the Program's objectives was also aligned with the goals of the GoP’s 15-year PFM
Reform Strategy, the WB’s CPS and the IDA 18 Commitment. Although the DLIs and PDO outcome indicators
together with the IRIs support the substantive achievement of PDO 1 and PDO 2, due to moderate
shortcomings, the overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The main foreseeable challenges to the sustainability of the reforms introduced by the Program relate to the
continued implementation of the e-procurement systems, including the need for sufficient HR capacity, the
need for committed and visionary leadership that will sustain the pace of the reform, the governance
arrangements in the PPRA, the need to overcome bureaucratic impediments, and the ability of the GoP to
maintain and update the new e-procurement system countrywide. There is also a risk that despite the PFM
reforms, they do not translate into tangible impacts on health and education service outcomes. Due to
insufficient time, the Program could not evaluate outcomes on the ground. Nevertheless, two other WB
projects, namely, Punjab Resource Improvements and Digital Effectiveness (PRIDE) and Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa Spending Effectively for Enhanced Development (SPEED), introduced complementary reforms
in the provinces and partially mitigated these risks. These programs also focused on addressing bottlenecks
in health and education and included e-procurement.

The ICR points to the need that future operations include a pathway to ensure that reforms have a
measurable impact on the quality of health and education services.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  From a positive lens, the PforR operation built successfully on the previous PFM reform efforts by the
  GoP and responded to the new challenges under the 18th Constitutional Amendment (2010) that
  devolved health and education service delivery to the provinces. A PEFA assessment and a PIFRA were
  implemented prior to the Program and informed it. Additionally, the WB had five ongoing health and
  education operations aimed at directly improving service delivery outcomes. This enabled the WB team
  to develop both a deeper understanding of the issues and challenges confronting the PFM bottlenecks in

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 30
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



health, education and decentralized service delivery. This also helped the team to forge a close working
relationship with the client. The Program thus drew and built upon the GoP’s PFM Reform Strategy
(2018-2027), prior WB experience with PFM in the health and education sectors and benefitted from the
GoP’s commitment and multiple stakeholder’s contributions in its design.

The Program was the first PFM reform operation in Pakistan to employ the PforR instrument. The
decision to use the PforR instrument was informed by an understanding that an appropriately incentivized
system-wide change management approach was required and a traditional investment project could not
achieve this objective. The Key Result Areas were priorities of the GoP’s Program and PFM Reform
Strategy. The Results Framework was aligned with the output-based budgeting (OBB) system of the
implementing agencies, the DLIs were carefully crafted to ensure they were realistic and achievable, and
the implementation arrangements were organized under the leadership of the Finance Division (FD) and
had a Program Implementation Cell (PIC) established at the onset of implementation.

The WB’s PFM expertise and its understanding of the country context helped. The WB’s co-Task Team
Leader (co-TTL) became the Accountability and Decision-Making (ADM) TTL throughout implementation
and ensured sustained support because of his presence in the country. In the absence of a TA
component, the task team’s substantial support and the presence of the ADM TTL in the country helped
collaboration.



The Program’s design had several shortcomings that surfaced in the early stages of implementation and
became a challenge for the client. The design was too complex including a two-level broad and ambitious
PDO. For a first-time PforR, the number of DLIs, PDO indicators and IRIs to be achieved was excessive,
especially when applied to a PFM Program designed for a 15-year period. It is not clear to what extent it
was useful to have a two-level PDO (PDO 1 and PDO 2) after the PAD emphasized PDO 1 that included
most of the indicators. The ambitious PDO posed the greatest challenge for the initially overoptimistic
timeframe. An additional factor was the variable capacity of the four provincial governments that were
expected to apply all components and pursue similar objectives. The complex design and ambitious
timeframe both led to the project’s problem status which arose partly because the client (federal and four
provincial governments) was learning about the project while implementing it without the benefit of
technical assistance (TA) which accompanies most projects in a similar country context and is
instrumental in building capacity and facilitating learning.

The health and education indicators were largely absent from the Program’s design without any
explanation in the ICR. The ICR notes the relevance of the procurement DLIs but does not differentiate
between the targets and achievements at the beneficiary sector level such as health and education.

A TA component and a Project Management Unit were two important requirements missing from the
Program’s design. The client had limited knowledge of the PforR instrument as it was the first in Pakistan.
It was also a complex and large-scale Program designed to be rolled out over a 15-year period. In the
section on Key Factors During Implementation, the ICR reports that the absence of a TA component and
a PMU exacerbated delays in implementation. According to the Virtual Quality Enhancement Review of
the ICR (April 9 to April 17, 2024), the interviews with stakeholders also confirmed that a TA could have
helped to avoid delays, including at the stage where the PPRA was struggling to draft the Request for
Proposals (including the requirements for the e-procurement system). According to the Program team, at
the Program design stage, the guidelines for PforRs were still being developed and there was an


                                                                                                Page 24 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



  aversion to a hybrid PforR. During approval, the team was not authorized to proceed with a TA
  component due to a corporate decision.

  In addition, the PDO lacked targets for the federal and provincial levels which made it difficult to gauge
  whether they were achieved by all four or only one provincial government. This later required
  modifications in the coverage of some DLIs. For a first PforR for Pakistan that was also responding to the
  new political challenges under the 18th Constitutional Amendment (2010) that devolved health and
  education service delivery to the provincial government level, the Program clearly had an overambitious
  schedule and a large array of targets which negatively affected the Program’s quality-at-entry.

  The IEG assessment of WB performance on quality-of-entry is Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was regular engagement with the government counterparts, fostering trust and collaboration that
 were further enhanced by the permanent presence of the co-Task Team Leader (TTL) in the country. The
 WB conducted at least ten Implementation Support Missions (ISMs), one MTR, several regular meetings
 between the ISMs, and regular virtual meetings during the COVID-19 pandemic. The team prepared the
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) for every mission and filed Aide Memoires and
 Management Letters routinely to ensure continuous monitoring of progress. The Program was in a problem
 status for almost two years between March 2020 and December 2021. In addition to the COVID-19
 pandemic-related delays and disruptions, the ambitious schedule and complexity of the first PforR Program
 posed a variety of difficult challenges and risks for the Program. As the ICR (para 44) aptly notes, robust
 supervision and restructurings successfully turned the Program around in 2022. Supervision was highly
 commendable during the remainder of the Program’s implementation. The third-party verification protocol
 was strong and important in the absence of a PIC.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is assessed as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                  Page 25 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework linked the DLIs, the PDO indicators, and the intermediate indicators (IRIs). All PDO
 indicators were DLI indicators and the IRIs helped in triangulating the evidence for achieving the DLIs and
 PDOs. However, the design lacked an M&E plan which would have strengthened capacity in the absence
 of a TA component.

 The M&E arrangements were appropriate and clearly established in the ToC. The Results Framework
 provided a roadmap to measure progress toward objectives and was in line with the outcomes-based
 budgeting (OBB) of the implementing entities, making the M&E design efficient and sustainable. The
 Program was designed to use formal country systems’ structures through the Program Implementation Cell
 (PIC) to ensure that the responsibility for meeting the DLIs was within the mandate of the assigned
 implementing agencies. The implementation of each component (KRA) was supervised by the Controller
 General of Accounts (KRA 1 & 3), F-PPRA (KRA 2), DAGP (KRA 4) and FD (KRA 5) (PAD, p. 39). The FD
 had overall responsibility for coordinating, monitoring, and reporting on the Program’s results indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  Based on the ICR, the M&E arrangements worked well during implementation, and data collection and
  reporting were well structured. The FD coordinated and reported on results and had a reform minded
  leader that managed data coordination and accelerated the pace of implementation. Coordination was
  strong between all implementing agencies. However, one of the main challenges during implementation
  was the absence of an M&E plan and an M&E Specialist, although, according to the ICR, it did not affect
  the quality of the M&E. A Program Management Committee also monitored the progress of the DLIs
  and the third-party verification agency (TPVA) was instrumental for maintaining integrity and stakeholder
  trust in particular given that a PIC had not been created. The TPVA verified results and submitted annual
  verification reports which, according to the ICR, ensured timely disbursements against the achievement
  of the DLIs.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system of the Program informed operational and policy decisions, including the various
  restructurings from the federal to the provincial levels. The GoP discussed progress regularly with the
  WB and kept the WB’s team informed through regular meetings. Data from M&E guided the
  implementing agencies in submitting annual performance reports against their Output-Based Budgeting
  (OBB) to the FD which, in turn, contributed to the Annual Performance Monitoring Report for the
  Parliament. Data from M&E, such as the results from the implementation of the DLIs, also guided the
  provinces in implementing similar reforms such as the e-procurement and pension systems.

  Overall, the quality of design, implementation, and utilization of M&E is assessed as being Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 26 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Program was assessed to have no environmental and social risks at the outset and remained so
   throughout implementation. The Program did not trigger any social or environmental safeguards and
   policies. According to the ICR (para. 41), the assessment at appraisal concluded that the DLIs did not
   comprise activities that would negatively impact the population, or that required land acquisition and would
   cause any physical or economic displacement.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary Risks were assessed as Substantial at the outset, and the quality of fiduciary performance was
   assessed as adequate by the ICR.

   According to Annex 5 of the PAD, the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA) covered financial
   management, procurement, grievance and complaints mechanisms, fraud, and corruption risks associated
   with the Program. The FM risks and mitigation measures were included for entity and program level, legal
   and institutional framework, planning and budgeting, funds flow, accounting and financial reporting, internal
   control, and audit and oversight risks. The procurement risks and mitigation measures were included for
   procurement planning, standard procedures, procurement documents, procurement capacity, and
   compliance and oversight risks. The assessment concluded that the PFM system complemented by the
   program-specific mitigation measures was adequate to support the operation.

   The Program achieved all the legal covenants concerning mitigation of fiduciary risks and mitigation
   measures were implemented in the Program Action Plan (ICR, para 42). The Program relied on country
   PFM systems (including procurement) to provide reasonable fiduciary assurance. The ICR (para 42)
   reports that a high-level PFM Reforms Steering Committee provided continuous oversight, including
   fiduciary matters, and the TPVA reported that the FM systems were adequate. All project audit reports
   were presented and acceptable, sometimes with minor delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   N/A



10. Ratings


                                                                                                   Page 27 of 30
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


11. Lessons

This was the first PforR Program in Pakistan, in the South Asia region of the WB, and in the federal
and provincial government administration sectors. The ICR offers two lessons. IEG agreed with
them but would like to add one on program complexity.

Successful program implementation, especially in a first-of-its-kind PforR, can be
compromised if the original program design is not simple. The Pakistan PFM PforR Program
had a complex, wide-ranging, two-level PDO that was applicable at the federal and four state-
government levels with diverse capacity, and covered PFM for greater accountability in service
delivery as well as improvement in procurement systems. As the PforR was being used for the first
time in Pakistan, government officials were tasked with simultaneously implementing the Program
while also learning about it, and striving to meet a large array of targets set by eight Disbursement-
Linked Indicators, five PDO outcome indicators, and 16 IRIs. The Program experienced a two-year
implementation delay, resulting in a "problem project status" during its early stages. This delay
underscores the benefits of a simpler initial design. A simpler design from the outset can be useful in
preempting initial delays, fostering a more productive learning experience and enabling gradual and
longer-lasting capacity building at the federal and state government levels.

Complex reform programs need to plan for adequate implementation time to allow the
achievement of outcomes. The Pakistan PFM PforR Program’s successful implementation was
undermined by an inadequate timeframe at the design stage and the lack of a sequencing strategy.
The original timeframe was insufficient for an ambitious PDO and the largescale reforms that were
aligned with the government’s 15-year PFM Reform Strategy leading to the extension of the
Program’s closing date by two years. Building institutional capacity is a long-term process. The ICR
(para 34) noted that the Program experienced delays, mainly due to its nature and scale of reforms
requiring multi-stakeholder coordination across federal and provincial levels, as well as a lack of
dedicated HR capacity. At least five steering and management committees were established but
staff in the implementing entities struggled with daily management issues. The ICR also noted that
the project period was insufficient to manifest tangible improvements in the health and education
sector outcomes (para 45), and that a sequencing strategy would have helped leverage the progress
achieved.

A first-of-its-kind PforR can benefit significantly from a TA component. The Pakistan PFM
PforR was the first in the country and the client and stakeholders had little knowledge of its
approach, challenges and logistics. These collectively undermined the Program’s implementation as
the client required time to understand the instrument. A TA component and training on the PforR

                                                                                                      Page 28 of 30
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



instrument for the client and other stakeholders would have been useful to avoid delays in
implementation. The ICR (para 48) mentioned that the WB’s substantial support was positively
embraced by stakeholders, but a TA component would have more effectively built institutional
capacity, particularly in change management, M&E, trainings, and impact evaluations.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear and complete overview of the Program. The TOC showed how the program aimed at
overcoming PFM bottlenecks in the health and education sectors in Pakistan through eight DLIs, including
procurement issues that impacted funds for service delivery.

The evidence supporting the results of the Program was synchronized with the independently verified indicators
that triggered the disbursements. The ICR narrative supported the ratings using the results framework. The
justifications for the ratings were summarized under each section of the report. The lessons for consideration in
future PforR programs were also clearly informed by this Program. The annexes further clarified the results of
the operations.

The summary of the Virtual Quality Enhancement Review conducted for the ICR (April 9-17, 2024) provided
additional guidance on the Program’s storyline, ratings and lessons learned.

However, the ICR has the following shortcomings:

      The ICR interprets the focus of the Program’s PDO as addressing PFM bottlenecks to service delivery
       in Pakistan’s health and education sectors but fails to report the actual or expected outcome for the
       individual sectors. Instead, the reported outcomes are combined for both sectors. As stated in the FA, p.
       5, the PDO is a compound statement: “To improve public financial management and procurement
       systems for better management and accountability in service delivery for health and education sectors”
       that needs to be “unpacked” to recognize the relevance of each promised outcome.
      The discussion in the ICR focuses well on the relevance of the DLIs in the context of their contribution to
       the PFM constraints but not their implications for the two PDOs. The methodology of this section is
       important as it has implications for the Overall Relevance Rating for the PDOs and DLIs.
      In the ICR, the overall rating of Efficacy as “Substantial” is supported under the conclusion that “the
       Program achieved nearly all its objectives, albeit with implementation delays.” Despite the ICR
       discussion on the achievement of both PDO Outcomes, it is not clear how each PDO was assessed for
       the ICR and contributed to the “Substantial” rating (ICR, para 29).
      While the ICR highlighted how the Program responded to the priorities of the federal government, it
       should have also discussed in more detail how the targets were achieved at the provincial levels.
       Similarly, the ICR could have shed more light on PFM coordination between the federal and provincial
       government levels as improving federal-provincial coordination was a key bottleneck to be addressed by
       the government’s PFM reform (ICR, para 4).

                                                                                                    Page 29 of 30
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PFM/accountability to supp. service deli (P157507)



   The ICR notes the evolving country context, including flooding, and the COVID-19 pandemic as external
    factors that disrupted the Program’s implementation. Given that the WB provided consistent support and
    conducted at least ten ISMs and an MTR (on average two missions per year) to ensure monitoring of
    progress, the ICR should have explained the relevance of these external factors to the achievement of
    the Program’s objectives and whether the government’s commitment to the Program was affected by
    these exogenous factors.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                            Page 30 of 30
