     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



                                                                               Report Number : ICRR0024177

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Program Name
 P156777                                  Kenya Urban Support Program

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-61340                                31-Jul-2023                                        289,862,019.10

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jul-2017                              31-Dec-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         300,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                          291,424,305.20                                              0.00

 Actual                                      289,870,401.20                                              0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Vibecke Dixon             Chikako Miwa                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of this Program-for-Results (PforR) Program, as stated in the
   Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) was:

   “To establish and strengthen urban institutions to deliver improved infrastructure and services in
   Participating Counties.”



                                                                                                Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



   The PDO formulation in the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, para 18, page 7), is identical, but specifying
   that the participating counties are in Kenya:

   “To establish and strengthen urban institutions to deliver improved infrastructure and services in
   participating counties in Kenya.”

   While the PDO formulation indicates that “to establish and strengthen urban institutions” is at a lower level in
   the results chain (intermediate level) than what it is expected to lead to, namely “improved infrastructure and
   services” (outcome level), for the sake of clarity of the analysis in this ICRR, the two parts of the PDO
   formulation will be analyzed as two equal parts of the PDO formulation. The objective of this Program is thus
   parsed as follows:

   PDO 1: To establish and strengthen urban institutions in participating counties in Kenya.

   PDO 2: To deliver improved infrastructure and services in participating counties in Kenya.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Kenya Urban Support Program (KUSP) financed key parts of the Government of Kenya’s Urban
   Program (KenUP) across its six thematic areas, including urban institutions, governance, management,
   finance, planning and infrastructure and service delivery. It did so through three separate, but inter-related,
   windows at the national, county and urban levels financed through an Investment Project Financing (IPF)
   component for the national level interventions and a Program for Results (PforR) component for the County
   and Board-level interventions.

   The rationale for using IPF as a financing instrument for parts of this intervention arose from the lessons
   learned from other PforR operations in the country, which suggested the need to provide a high level of
   budget predictability for undertaking national government actions that are critical for the success of the
   Operation as a whole, in particular, the county-level Annual Performance Assessments (APA).

   The program consisted of the following activities (Financing Agreement, Schedule 1, page 4 and the ICR’s
   Theory of Change, Annex 6, page 45):


   A) IPF/Technical Assistance (Appraisal estimate: US$ 30 million, Actual cost: US$ 21.3 million)




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  Window 1: National Level Interventions

        Establish and strengthen the institutional policy framework for urban management
        Support the coordination of urban finances (including the management of the Annual Performance
         Assessments (APAs) and conditional grants)
        Provide backstopping for urban planning, urban infrastructure delivery and for the provision of basic
         urban services

  B) Program for Results (Appraisal estimate: US$270 million, Actual cost: 269.7 million):

  Window 2: County Level Interventions (Urban Institutional Grants, UIG)

  Results Area 2.1: County government commit to address urban development and management issues

        Formulation of urban strategies

  Window 3: Urban Board-level Interventions (Urban Development Grants, UDG)
  Results Area 3.1: Institutional Framework established and operational

        Establishment of urban institutional arrangements (charters, boards, administrations, budget votes,
         investment plans).
        Operationalization of urban boards (hiring of manager, regular meetings, citizen fora, disclosure of
         information).

  Results Area 3.2: Urban planning, infrastructure and service delivery

        Development of urban areas budget
        Development of urban area Integrated Development Plan, Spatial Plan, Waste Management Plan
        Implementation of infrastructure investments in urban areas

  The description of the content of the operation as outlined in the ICR is overall in line with the description
  of the content of the operation in the Legal Agreement, but the ICR has labelled and numbered the activities
  and Results Areas differently, as follows:

        Part I The Program in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Window 2 and
         Window 3 in the ICR’s ToC (ICR Annex 6);
        Part II The Project in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Window 1
         National Level Interventions in the ICR’s ToC (ICR Annex 6);
        Results Area 1 in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Results Area 2.1 in
         the ICR’s ToC (Annex 6);
        Results Area 2 in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Results Areas 3.1 and
         3.2 in the ICR’s ToC (Annex 6)



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



Program cost: The total Program cost was estimated at US$300 million at appraisal, revised to US$291.4
million at restructuring, and final cost was US$289.8 million (ICR financing table, page 2).

Program financing: The intervention was financed through an IDA credit combined IPF and PforR (IDA-
61340).

Borrower contribution: The borrower contribution was estimated to be US$20 million at appraisal (ICR,
Annex 3, page 42), was revised to US$ 17.2 million at restructuring and the actual borrower contribution
was US$ 12.2 million.

Dates: The Program was approved on July 26th, 2017, and became effective 6 months later on January
11th, 2018. The Mid Term Review was completed October 23rd, 2020. The original closing date was July
31st, 2023, and the actual closing date was December 31st, 2023, i.e., a 5-months’ extension. The Program
went through two level-II restructurings; on June 21st, 2021, and on July 20th, 2023.

Other changes: The following changes were made through the two level-II restructurings:

The first restructuring on June 21st, 2021:

      Change in Results Framework
      Reallocation between and/or Change in DLI

This restructuring changed the results framework (RF) to simplify the calculation of indicators. The indicator
“non-motorized transport facilities constructed or rehabilitated under the program” was split into two
indicators to capture non-motorized facilities and roads separately. Similarly, the indicator “street or high-
mast security lights constructed under the program” was split to measure street and high-mast lights
separately. The unit of measurement for the indicator “public works and green urban spaces under
the program” was changed from hectares to numbers due to counting challenges. This restructuring further
moved from an externally led APA to a self-evaluation mechanism subject to independent validation by the
Office of the Auditor General (OAG). (ICR, para 14). This was mainly due to the onset of the Covid-19
pandemic combined with delays in the procurement of the third APA and the pressing timeline for the third
disbursement.

A fourth DLI was added to the framework. This additional DLI was justified in the restructuring paper (RES
46571, paras 11 and 12) by the need to reallocate undisbursed balances of DLI1 (Window 2, UIGs) and
DLI3 (Window 3, UDGs) to a new DLI4 (Window 3, UDGs) (US$ 37,425,836). This allocation to DLI4 was to
strengthen incentives for counties and urban boards to improve urban boards performance, upgrade social
and environmental management and improve overall management of investment projects. In addition. It
was foreseen that the allocation to DLI4 would strengthen overall financial management by counties and
urban boards. Through the new DLI4, County Governments and urban boards were to receive UDGs on the
basis of: (i) fully achieving key institutional and management benchmarks; and (ii) their performance in
meeting urban infrastructure and service delivery standards. The World Bank team informed IEG (August
15th, 2024) that “The new DLI (DLI4) was a blend of the undisbursed balances of DLI1 (Window 2, UIGs)
and the remaining balance of DLI3 (Window 3, UDGs). This reallocation between DLIs was done to
increase and strengthen the incentives for (i) County Governments to make their urban boards and
administrations more operational and functional; and (ii) Counties and urban boards to improve their
management of infrastructure and service delivery. Specifically, the idea was to help strengthen incentives
for counties and urban boards to improve urban boards performance, upgrade social and environmental

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



   management and improve overall management of investment projects. In addition, the allocation to DLI4
   tried to strengthen overall financial management by counties and urban boards. DLI4 was to also make it
   possible for the program to be able to disburse the remaining balances.” It is not clear, however, how and to
   what degree DLI4 would measure anything different or separate from what was covered under DLIs 2 and
   3; it can only be deducted from the Results Framework that the difference might be in the levels
   (national/county/urban, etc.) that are measured by the fourth DLI compared to the others, but this remains
   unclear.

   The second restructuring on July 20th, 2023:

         Change in Loan Closing Date(s)
         Cancellation of Financing
         Reallocation between and/or Change in DLI

   This second restructuring extended the closing date from July 31, 2023, to December 31, 2023, to allow the
   completion of the Environmental, Health and Safety, and Social Safeguards Audit, Value for Money (VfM)
   Audit, and End of Program Evaluation. It also cancelled an undisbursed IPF amount of US$8,575,694.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  Country context

  Between 2004 and 2014, Kenya’s economic growth averaged 5.3%, mainly due to infrastructure
  investments, private sector growth and consumer demand. Despite this growth, infrastructure development
  lagged behind. Rapid urbanization left cities with a huge demand for critical infrastructure and basic services.
  As an example, the proportion of the urban population with access to improved water sources declined from
  92% in 1990 to 82% in 2012. Another highly visible result of poorly managed urbanization processes was the
  expansion of overcrowded informal settlements, where it was estimated that approximately 60% of the urban
  residents lived.

  Government Strategy

  The PDO was fully consistent with Kenya’s urban development goals as stated in the National Urban
  Development Policy (NUDP), Kenya’s Vision 2030 and the Second Mid Term Plan (MTP2). It was
  instrumental to incentivize the establishment of urban institutions after the abolishment of the local
  governments by the 2010 Constitution. It was the first PforR in the Bank that established new urban
  institutions as other Programs incentivize strengthening of well-established municipalities.

  The Government of Kenya (GOK) had recognized the need to manage urbanization as part of its overall
  development strategy, and the Kenya Vision 2030 highlighted rapid urbanization as one of four key
  challenges facing the country. The PDO of the Kenya Urban Support Program (KUSP) was well aligned to

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



and directly supported Kenya’s Vision 2030, as within the Vision’s overarching framework, the urbanization
component of the Second Medium Term Plan (MTP2) 2013-17 aimed to facilitate a sustainable urbanization
process through an integrated urban and regional planning management framework. Aligned to that goal, the
MTP2 identified a series of investment programs to enhance infrastructure, connectivity and accessibility,
safety and security.

The Program’s PDO was further well aligned to and directly supported the implementation of the Urban
Areas and Cities Act (UACA 2011, amended 2016), which presented an incentive to establish basic
institutions required for urban management. Under the 2010 Constitution, local governments were abolished.
Counties took over the revenues and the responsibilities previously assigned to local governments. This
Constitution did not specify, however, how urban areas would be governed and managed, leaving that to
subsequent national legislation. The Urban Areas and Cities Act (UACA) partly addressed this deficit by
providing procedures for chartering cities and municipalities and establishing urban boards. Such urban
boards would have delegated responsibilities for the management of cities and municipalities and would be
accountable to their respective country governments. At the time of appraisal, almost no counties had
established urban boards however, and it therefore appeared essential to make incentives for the creation of
municipal boards to support the devolution process in Kenya. The PDO formulation is clearly and concretely
supporting this process.

Bank Strategy

The PDO is consistent with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Kenya FY23-28
and fully aligned with its Objective 2, to improve public expenditure transparency and effectiveness, as
KUSP supported Kenya’s devolution process through capacity building of county governments and urban
boards. It is also fully aligned with its Objective 5, to extend infrastructure services to the last mile, as KUSP
supported infrastructure investments in secondary cities while strengthening service delivery capacities.
Finally, the PDO was also fully in line with the CPF’s Objective 6, to increase household resilience and
national preparedness for shocks, as KUSP strengthened urban resilience in secondary cities by enhancing
access to drainage and flood protection infrastructure.

Bank and Country Experience

The Operation’s design emerged in the context of Kenya’s devolution process and was informed by the
World Bank’s existing urban operations in the country, complementing the achievements of those projects by
addressing the urban institutional and financial challenges. Through their participation in the implementation
of the previous World Bank-funded Kenya Devolution Support Project (KDSP, P149129), Kenyan county
governments were already familiar with the PforR modalities for disbursement of Program funds, and of
accountability for both funds and results.

Level of PDO

The PDO To establish and strengthen urban institutions to deliver improved infrastructure and services is
clear and pitched at an appropriate level to address a development problem. “To establish and strengthen
urban institutions” is at an intermediate outcome level, and it is clear from the PDO formulation that this is
expected to lead to the outcomes of improved infrastructure and services. As outlined in the ICR narrative
(para 1, page 5), these outcomes were seen to be an effective way to raise welfare and reduce poverty in the
medium to long run, which were the higher-level objectives of this operation.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 23
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)




       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                          New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                County Governments have met Urban Investment Grants (UIG) Minimum Conditions (MC)
                (Window 2: County governments - County governments commit to address urban development and
                management issues).



                Rationale
                This DLI is directly relevant to and aligns well with the PDO as it measures how and to what degree County
                Governments have been established and strengthened to deliver improved infrastructure and services.

                Furthermore, achievement of this DLI milestone clearly triggered improved institutional performance by
                measuring the number of County Governments that had met the Urban Investment Grants Minimum
                Conditions. The three minimum conditions for access to UIG included:

                              1. a signed participation agreement in place;
                              2. a County Urban Institutional Development Strategy (CUIDS) and commensurate budget annexed in
                                 the County Integrated Development Plan (CIDP); and
                              3. UIG of previous year spent in accordance with the eligible menu.

                The UIG supported various activities, including the establishment and delineation of urban institutions
                (preparation of Municipal Charters and urban strategic plans); development of policies and plans related to
                urban planning and development control; solid waste management; induction, training, sensitization forums,
                peer learning, and benchmarking activities; equipping, furnishing, and operationalizing new municipal offices;
                facilitated setting up of systems towards streamlining operations at the urban level; public participation and
                stakeholder forums related to prioritization of investment, budgeting, and preparation of Urban Integrated
                Development Plans. The Beneficiary Assessment notes that improved governance structures and FM
                practices have been observed in beneficiary municipalities due to the UIG.

                This DLI was defined according to the Smart criteria; it is sufficiently specific, achievable, relevant and time
                bound. It aligns very well with the PDO and the Results Framework; the identified indicators under this DLI
                measure the relevant and necessary achievements leading up to and contributing to the counties meeting the
                UIG MCs.



                Rating

                                                                                                                         Page 7 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



High

DLI 2
DLI
County governments have met Urban Development Grants (UDG) Minimum Conditions
(Window 3: Urban boards and counties - Institutional framework established and operational).



Rationale
This DLI is directly relevant to and aligns well with the PDO as it measures how and to what degree urban
boards and counties have been established and strengthened to deliver improved infrastructure and services.

Furthermore, achievement of this DLI milestone triggered improved institutional performance by measuring
the number of urban boards and counties that had met the Urban Development Grants Minimum Conditions.
Some waivers were granted to these conditions, and there were two main implications thereof (ICR, para 39):
(1) some counties were lax in complying with the conditions since they were anticipating waivers, and (2)
counties accessed all their maximum allocation for the first two disbursements; hence, the balance had to be
prorated for the third disbursement.

The minimum conditions for access to UDG included: Municipal status (County Governor granted municipal
charter to eligible urban area); Municipal board appointed; Municipal manager and administration appointed;
Municipal budget vote included in county budget, in which UDG is budgeted; Municipal finance reporting;
Country government’s commitment to participate in KUSP and adhere to its Operations Manual; Urban area
investment plan with projects ready for implementation; Use of previous annual UDG, Municipal absorptive
capacity; and procurement consistent with budget thresholds and contracting procedures.

This DLI aligns well with the PDO and the Results Framework. However, while the DLI was defined according
to the Smart criteria; the DLI verification protocol at appraisal was not sufficiently specific. At appraisal, there
was some ambiguity as 7 MCs and a PS had flexibility, i.e., by stating that, for the first APA (to be conducted
in FY2017–18 and determining UDG allocations to counties for UDG disbursements in FY2018–19), the MCs
and PS would be slightly modified to take into account program start-up (ICR, para 39 and PAD, tables 1.5
and 1.5, pages 36-37). It is unclear what modifications were made. Since the waivers including the details of
modifications made were not adequately documented, it is unclear how many counties received waivers for
which Minimum Conditions. Relevance of this DLI is thus rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Country Governments and urban area institutions have met Urban Development Grants (UDG) Performance
Standards
(Window 3: Urban boards and counties - Urban planning, infrastructure and service)


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)




Rationale
This DLI is directly relevant to and aligns well with the PDO as it measures how and to what degree urban
boards and counties have been established and strengthened to deliver improved infrastructure and services.

Furthermore, achievement of this DLI milestone had the potential to trigger improved institutional performance
by measuring the number of urban boards and counties that had met the Urban Development Grants
Performance Standards.

The Performance Standards for UDGs included:

PS1: There is a publicly available job description for the position of municipal manager.

PS2: Urban board meetings have been held at least once every three months.

PS3: Citizen fora (public consultations between urban board and residents, including plan and budget
consultations) have been held at least once a year.

PS4: Urban board has made key documents publicly available: municipal charter, contact information for
board and key officials, urban IDeP (and other plans, as relevant), budget vote proposal (including
appropriate annexes), and final budget statement. All specific disclosure requirements must be met to trigger
disbursement of UDG 5 percent.

PS5: Urban board publishes its annual calendar of citizens’ fora with urban area residents, including plan and
budget consultations (announced in local media and on county government website).

PS6: Urban board has adopted urban area budget based on the budget ceiling provided by the county as per
UAC Act.

PS7: Urban IDeP submitted by the municipal administrator, and reviewed and approved by the municipal
board.

PS8: Urban spatial plan completed and approved.

PS9: An operational waste collection and disposal plan has been drawn up and adopted/endorsed by the
municipal board.

PS10: Over last 12 months, all UDG-financed projects that were completed were delivered:

        in ways that were compliant with environmental & social safeguards;
        on time (within 3 months of plan);
        according to design and fit for purpose;
        within +/- 5% of the budget.

According to the PAD (table 1.6, page 37), this PS was a target of waiver. It is unclear to what extent
modifications were made to meet this PS. The waiver related to this PS seems to have been critical as there
were many issues related to environmental and social systems and fiduciary systems at country and urban
institutions level during implementation.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 23
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



            While this DLI was also defined according to the Smart criteria; it was not sufficiently specific due to the
            ambiguity with the waivers. The Relevance of this DLI is thus rated Substantial.



            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 4
            DLI
            None at appraisal

            Rationale
                   ---

            Rating
            Not Rated/Not Applicable

            DLI 4 REVISION 1
            Revised DLI
            DLI 4 was added at the first restructuring to separate between Urban Board and Counties (covered by DLIs 2
            and 3) and Country Governments and Urban Area Institutions (DLI 4):
            Participating County Governments and Urban Area Institutions have met UDG Minimum Conditions and
            Performance Standards
            (Window 3, Country Governments and Urban Area Institutions).

            Revised Rationale
            This DLI is directly relevant to and aligns well with the PDO as it measures how and to what degree County
            Governments and Urban Area Institutions have been established and strengthened to deliver improved
            infrastructure and services. Achievement of this DLI milestone triggered improved institutional performance by
            measuring the number of County Governments and Urban Area Institutions that had met the Urban
            Development Grants Minimum Conditions and Performance Standards.

            The minimum conditions and performance standards applicable for this DLI are the same once as those
            described under DLIs 2 and 3.

            This DLI was defined according to the Smart criteria; it is sufficiently specific, achievable, relevant and time
            bound. It aligns very well with the PDO and the Results Framework; the identified indicators under this DLI
            measure the relevant and necessary achievements leading up to and contributing to the counties meeting the
            UDG Performance Standards.



            Revised Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                                                                                                                Page 10 of 23
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)




               OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
               Rationale
               Overall Relevance is rated High, as the PDO remained highly relevant to the CPF and Government priorities
               throughout the Program period. Furthermore, the combination of DLIs was sufficient to drive institutional
               change and to contribute to achievement of the PDO. The DLI targets were strategic and strong enough to
               drive the reform process. Also, the combination of the DLIs at different results levels made up a coherent
               framework and they were consistent with the Theory of Change and capture milestones towards the
               Program’s aspired longer-term outcomes.



               Rating
               High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To establish and strengthen urban institutions in participating counties in Kenya.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change

               An explicit Theory of Change was not established at appraisal, as that was not a requirement at the time. The
               ICR provided a reconstructed Theory of Change (Annex 6). The Theory of Change for this objective (to
               establish and strengthen urban institutions) postulates that inputs such as to establish and strengthen the
               institutional policy framework for urban management; to support the coordination of urban finances (including
               the management of APAs and conditional grants); to provide backstopping for urban planning, urban
               infrastructure delivery and for the provision of basic services; to establish urban institutional arrangements
               (charters, boards, administrations, budget votes, investments plans); and to operationalize urban boards
               (hiring of manager, regular meetings, citizens fora, disclosure of information), would lead to outputs such as
               i) counties provided with guidance and capacity building to support planning, infrastructure delivery and
               service provision; ii) relevant policy reviews and legislation on urban development; iii) County urban
               institutional development strategy formed and urban institutions established. These outputs were in turn
               expected to lead to outcomes such as established and operational urban institutions which can deliver
               improved infrastructure and services in the participating counties.

               The critical assumptions are: 1) Independent consultants undertake annual performance assessment
               following pre-defined performance rating criteria; 2) Timely allocation of county-level grants by the
               government, and 3) Capacity in place to ensure timely recording of all sub-project level data and information.




                                                                                                               Page 11 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



The overall logic of the ToC is sound, despite the formulation of some of the outputs and outcomes in the
figure as inputs (e.g., “support the establishment of institutional framework” is formulated as an input but
identified in the ToC figure as an outcome). There are no logical gaps in the ToC.

Outputs

      45 counties qualified for the Urban Investment Grants (UIG), achieving the target of 45. Based on APA
         3, all 45 counties met the three minimum conditions for access to UIG.
        4 guidelines on planning, infrastructure, and basic service delivery prepared and made public on
         Ministry of Transport, Infrastructure, Housing, and Urban Development (MTIHUD) website, not
         achieving the target of 4. Of the 4 guidance notes, two support establishing urban institutions and
         citizens’ participation in urban governance, (i.e., (i) the Urban Boards Induction and Training
         Guidebook and (ii) the Citizen Forum Handbook). The Solid Waste Management guidelines and Urban
         Resilience guidelines were also finalized. In addition, the Participatory slum upgrading, and urban
         mobility guidance notes are in draft form and are expected to be finalized in the second phase of the
         Program, KUSP2.
        54 urban areas for which citizen fora (public consultations between urban board and residents,
         including plan and budget consultations) have been held at least once a year, exceeding the target of
         35.
        54 municipal solid waste policies and plans were prepared and adopted, exceeding the target of 10.
         SWM Capacity enhanced with coverage and collection improved at the urban level due to UDG
         support. Over 5 percent of the total UDG investments have been aligned towards improving the
         collection and handling of solid waste, with over 30 municipalities leveraging on the UDG to finance
         the purchase of SWM equipment and boost collection and coverage.
        51 urban spatial plans completed, exceeding the target of 8. The capacity to prepare and approve
         urban spatial plans greatly improved from 21 municipalities under APA 1 to 41 municipalities under
         APA 2 and 51 municipalities under APA 3. Some counties leveraged on the UIG to finance the
         preparation of spatial plans and development control tools. Other counties utilized the UIG to prepare
         land use plans for other emerging urban areas.
        57 urban Integrated Development Plans (IDePs) completed, exceeding the target of 35. The capacity
         to prepare and implement Urban Integrated Development Plans continuously improved from 20 in
         APA 1 to 46 in APA 2 and 57 in APA 3.
        The Annual Performance Assessment (APA) results for Urban Investment Grants (UIG) and Urban
         Development Grants (UDG) allocations were made on time, i.e., before the end of the FY and prior to
         startup of the next FY, as targeted; target achieved. The third and final Annual Performance
         Assessment (APA 3) was successfully concluded. The process was led by the Office of Auditor
         General (OAG) who proved efficient in executing the task. The APA 3 results were used to inform the
         final disbursement of the PforR component in June 2021.

Outcomes

      77 urban areas have approved charters, established boards, appointed urban managers, and a
       budget vote (measures establishment of urban institutions), exceeding the target of 35.
      57 urban areas utilize at least 50 percent of the budget intended for their urban investments,
       exceeding the target of 17.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)




      57 urban areas have an approved Annual Investment Plan and Urban Area plans, exceeding the
       target of 15.

The reported achievements at output level, such as number of urban plans and policies developed, the
number of urban areas qualified for UIGs and the increasingly positive APA results contributed to the
achievements of the expected outcomes such as urban areas with approved relevant plans and policies. It is
also clear from the ICR that new urban institutions that did not exist before, were established under the
program, although the number of new vs. strengthened institutions is somewhat unclear in the reporting. The
documented achievements (many of which exceeded the target values) have contributed to a Substantial
achievement of PDO 1, as urban institutions in participating counties in Kenya have been established and
strengthened.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To deliver improved infrastructure and services in participating counties in Kenya.

Rationale
Theory of Change

An explicit Theory of Change was not established at appraisal, as that was not a requirement at the time. The
ICR provided a reconstructed Theory of Change (Annex 6). The Theory of Change for this objective (to
deliver improved infrastructure and services) postulates that inputs such as the development of urban areas
budgets, urban area integrated development plans, spatial plans, waste management plan, and the
implementation of infrastructure investments in urban areas would lead to outputs such as urban institutions
with adequate planning instruments in place and investments made in waste management, drainage,
connectivity infrastructure, urban economic infrastructure, fire and disaster management. These outputs were
expected to lead to outcomes such as urban institutions performing effectively in delivering urban
infrastructure and services measured by an achievement of the Urban Development Performance Standards.
This would lead to the long-term outcome of improved infrastructure and services in participating counties.

The critical assumptions were the same as under the first objective; 1) Independent consultants undertake
annual performance assessment following pre-defined performance rating criteria; 2) Timely allocation of
county-level grants by the government, and 3) Capacity in place to ensure timely recording of all sub-project
level data and information.

The overall logic of the ToC is sound and there are no logical gaps in the ToC.

Outputs

      218 kilometers of roads constructed or rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 100 kilometers.
       Connectivity infrastructure has been prioritized by the beneficiary municipalities for investment using
       UDG funding, with 67% of the total UDG investments financing connectivity infrastructure, including

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



         roads, pedestrian walkways and cycle paths, bus parks, parking facilities, road signage, and street
         lighting. The 218km of road upgrading works includes the provision of associated infrastructure such
         as storm water drains, footpaths, bicycle lanes, landscaping, road furniture, and signage.
        225 kilometers of nonmotorized transport facilities constructed or rehabilitated under the program,
         exceeding the target of 100 kilometers. This included walkways and cycle paths which were
         completed and operationalized as standalone infrastructure or as part of road upgrading works. The
         stand-alone NMT infrastructure, amounting to 113 km, directly benefits over 100,000 urban residents,
         with the completed NMT facilities and road rehabilitation works benefitting over 350,000 urban
         residents with improved safety and security for pedestrians and cyclists and improved accessibility
         and connectivity noted.
        246 kilometers of drainage systems built or rehabilitated under the program, far exceeding the target
         of 10 kilometers.
        5,241 streetlights installed, exceeding the target of 1,000.
        128 high-mast security lights installed under the program, exceeding the target of 30. These high-mast
         security lights are directly benefitting over 100,000 urban residents. The use of renewable energy
         sources, including solar and wind, has been demonstrated and is supported.
        25 markets and upgrading of market stalls have been completed and operationalized within the
         various municipalities, exceeding the target of 4.
        22 public green urban spaces were created, exceeding the target of 10. These completed and
         operationalized urban recreational parks are benefiting over 190,000 urban residents living within 2
         km radius from the parks.
        96% UDGs for the previous FY were spent in accordance with the eligible investment menu,
         exceeding the target of 90%.
        Additionally, over 5,000 parking facilities and 12 bus parks benefiting over 100,000 urban residents
         within 3 km radius have been constructed and operationalized (not included in the RF, hence no target
         value).

Outcomes

3.6 million people provided with improved urban living conditions, exceeding the target of 3.5 million (of which
50% women, target achieved).

The created and upgraded markets are directly benefiting over 10,000 local traders with improved facilities for
trade and directly benefitting over 400,000 urban residents living within 3 km walking distance from the
markets. The Value for Money Audit found that markets deliver up to 13% return on investment for
municipalities with significant socio-economic outcomes, such as increased employment, improved economic
stability, increased access to goods and services, lower-cost options for the community, additional revenue
generation for municipalities, and enhanced reliability and transparency in service provision.

The road works that were completed and operational under the program (218 kilometers) are benefiting
directly over 200,000 urban residents with improved safety and security for pedestrians and cyclists and
improved accessibility and connectivity.

The 5000 parking facilities and 12 bus parks are directly benefiting over 200,000 urban residents with
improved safety and security for pedestrians and cyclists and improved accessibility and connectivity.



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  Over 14 municipalities have invested mostly in solar-powered street lighting systems, contributing to
  enhanced business opportunities, enhanced business operation timings, improved security, and improved
  standards of living. Over 1 million urban residents have directly benefitted from this intervention.

  Summary and justification for the rating

  While the Results Framework lacked an identified PDO-level indicator for this objective (improved
  infrastructure and services), the Intermediate Results Indicator reflecting the number of beneficiaries of the
  overall improved infrastructure investments and services indicates good outcomes. Furthermore, additional
  relevant outcomes were reported by the ICR (not reflected in the Results Framework). Some of these were
  grounded in evidence found in the Value-for-Money Audit, and while other reported outcomes were not
  supported by evidence (such as monitoring data, etc.), it is plausible that the well documented outputs from
  this program have contributed to the reported outcomes such as improved safety and security, improved
  accessibility and connectivity and enhanced business opportunities and enhanced business operation
  timings. This, coupled with the fact that most output targets were exceeded, warrants a Substantial rating of
  the achievement of this objective, as this demonstrates improved infrastructure and service delivery in
  participating counties in Kenya.



  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Both objectives were substantially achieved, so the overall Efficacy rating is Substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy for Kenya is rated High. The DLIs
were appropriate for realizing the outcomes. Relevance is thus rated High. Achievement of the two objectives is
rated Substantial as most target values of relevant indicators were either achieved or exceeded. The overall
outcome rating is therefore Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)




6. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk: The current fiscal transfer system does not directly fund urban boards. The current structure
of county and urban governance, coupled with the predominantly rural nature of most counties, places urban
areas at a funding disadvantage. Most urban boards have no budgets for operations and maintenance
(O&M), leading to the degradation of public assets. Insufficient, over-used and under-maintained
infrastructure discourages private investments and undermines productivity and competitiveness. This is a
potential risk to future financing of urban boards.

Government ownership/commitment Risk: Government ownership risk is low, as the government has
shown a high level of commitment and continues to do so also under the follow-on program KUSP2. KUSP2
will further strengthen the capacities of urban institutions to improve the delivery of relevant services.

Technical Risk: KUSP has supported building capacity in counties and municipalities in different areas.
Counties now have the minimum fiduciary staff to support the programs and municipalities. There is a risk
that this capacity building will not be sustained, as the counties and municipalities are experiencing high staff
turnover. There is thus a need for continuous capacity building to sustain the development outcomes.

Environmental Risk: KUSP supported extensive infrastructure investments at the urban areas level, which
required considerable safeguards capacity building at the county and urban areas level. However, the
Program suffered from numerous E&S issues as described in previous sections. There is a risk that E&S
compliance may be weak or weaken unless close collaborative working arrangements with key regulatory
agencies to i) ensure that Municipalities comply with environmental permit conditions and ii) provide capacity
building to municipalities and counties to manage environmental, health and safety risks based on national
laws and regulations are ensured.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Operation’s design was well prepared and emerged in the context of Kenya’s devolution process and
  was well aligned to it. It was furthermore informed by the WB’s existing urban operations in Kenya,
  building on lessons learned from those projects in addressing the urban institutional and financial
  challenges. The operation was designed with a combination of a PforR instrument and an IPF instrument
  as other PforR operations in the country had experienced the need to provide a high level of budget
  predictability to ensure national government actions critical for the success of the Operation as a whole,
  and this concerned county-level APAs in particular.

  The PDO formulation was clear and could realistically be achieved within the operation’s timeframe. The
  Results Framework was concise and complementary with the DLIs, and the M&E framework was well
  designed to ensure routine monitoring and evaluation. Capacity building was built into the operation to
  ensure smooth implementation.



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  Overall, the World Bank team supported the GoK in preparing a well-designed project that responded to
  their priorities. The design was appropriate in scope and within the GoK’s institutional framework. Minor
  shortcomings included the lack of a PDO level indicator to measure the outcome of the second objective
  coupled with many indicator targets set at a very low level of ambition, in addition to the ambiguity
  regarding the flexibility granted for some MCs and PSs for UDGs.

  Quality at entry is therefore rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank Team conducted 14 Supervision Missions; three in the first and last year of the program’s
 operation and twice annually during the four years in between. As demonstrated by the ICR, the WB’s
 supervision was timely, responsive, and results focused. It was mostly carried out by a Country-office-
 based team. TTLs changed only once during the life span of the operation. In addition to the TTLs, three
 short-term consultants were hired to monitor implementation and provide real-time support and guidance to
 the client.

 The WB’s implementation support was hands-on and pragmatic in terms of i) disseminating required
 knowledge and best practices; ii) co-facilitating review and evaluation measures; iii) identifying
 sustainability measures; and iv) adjusting the design to reflect the GoK’s policy.

 Reporting was provided jointly for the PforR and the IPF. The MTR was comprehensive and instrumental in
 agreeing to improvements in implementation for the following restructuring. The timely restructurings
 adjusted the RF, DLI matrix and financing amounts through cancellations that adjusted the PforR and IPF
 funding in line with revised needs. Reporting was succinct, timely and thorough, and ratings were well
 documented in ISRs. The team was especially effective in working with the client to identify actions
 required to ensure the sustainability of the Program’s achievements beyond the implementation period.

 There were some minor shortcomings, however, in lengthy procurement periods due to the World Bank’s
 procurement processes and staff rotation. Furthermore, the team failed to document outcomes in the
 Quality Assurance Reviews (QAR). Although QARs were conducted by reviewing the APA reports, and
 results were documented in Aide Memoirs and in the ISR reports, the thrust and meaningful centrality of
 the QAR to a P4R was lost in the project cycle.

 Overall, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO formulation is sound and clear. The Results Framework shows the link between the activities,
 outputs and intermediate outcomes expected to contribute to the achievement of the PDO. While the
 second part of the PDO (improved infrastructure and services) lacked an PDO-level indicator (which is a
 shortcoming), the Intermediate Results Indicator reflected the number of beneficiaries of the overall
 improved infrastructure investments and services. The Intermediate Results Indicators captured well the
 contribution of the activities and outputs towards achieving the expected outcomes (as demonstrated in
 section 4, Efficacy). The indicators were specific and measurable and for the most part, also achievable.

 A minor shortcoming was that some of the targets set at appraisal were very low compared to the actual
 achievements.

 The DLI verification protocols could beneficially have been better defined at Appraisal to ensure a rigorous
 verification process which would capture both quantitative and qualitative aspects of the DLI achievements.
 The protocol included a description of the data source, the independent Annual Performance Assessment
 team, the Program Technical Committee and the Program Steering Committee as the verification entities. It
 also included a description of the annual procedures to evaluate the achievement.

 The M&E design and arrangements were well embedded institutionally with the monitoring and reporting
 taking place at both the national and county levels of government. The Annual Performance Assessments
 were to be carried out by an independent verification agency to verify the DLIs.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E took place at both the national and county government levels during implementation. At the county
  level, data was collected from the relevant county- or urban board departments to report on program
  implementation and to capture the relevant data on urban governance, infrastructure and services
  delivered under the program. The participating counties prepared progress reports twice a year and M&E
  specialists at the State Department of Housing and Urban Development (SDHUD) consolidated the data
  into a single progress report. The M&E specialist also provided training and backstopping support to the
  county/urban staff to ensure comprehensive and timely reporting. A Geo-Enabling Monitoring and
  Supervision (GEMS) tool was rolled out for adoption by counties and municipalities.

  The first restructuring led to modifications in the APA methodology and implementation. The onset of the
  Covid-19 pandemic combined with delays in the procurement of the third APA and the pressing timeline
  for the third disbursement, necessitated a shift in approach. The restructuring allowed moving from an
  externally led APA to a self-evaluation mechanism subject to independent validation by the Office of the
  Auditor General (OAG), i.e., the first and second APA were done by an external consulting firm and the
  third APA was conducted by the OAG.




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  However, counties accessed all their maximum allocation for the first two disbursements for DLIs thanks
  to the waivers. It is thus unclear to what degree the verification procedures for DLIs were appropriately
  conducted in the first two APAs.

  There were some minor shortcomings in late and incomplete reporting from counties and municipalities.
  Also, due to high staff turnover in some counties and urban areas, extra training in the use of the GEMS
  tool was needed during implementation.

  In addition to the Annual Performance Assessments (APA), and the M&E progress reporting, results were
  monitored through three evaluations; one Beneficiary and Economic Asset (BEA) study, an End of
  Program Evaluation (EPE) and a Value-for-Money study (VfM). In addition, a complimentary technical
  infrastructure visit was used to monitor results and implementation progress at local levels.



c. M&E Utilization
  The Results Frameworks and Monitoring reports were used routinely during the Implementation Support
  Missions. As a PforR operation, reliable and up-to-date monitoring data verified by an external agent
  was critical for triggering disbursements. Hence, the Implementation Support Missions also reviewed
  progress against the DLI matrix and assessed the likelihood of achievement of the remaining DLIs.

  M&E data was used to inform project management and decision-making. At MTR, M&E data led to
  restructuring so resources could be reallocated between DLIs 1 and 3, in addition to changes in the
  Results Framework, such as adding a fourth DLI for better assessment of project outcomes.
  Furthermore, the M&E data was used to inform the design of the follow-on program KUSP2.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Safeguards

   The Program did not trigger any Safeguard policies, as they do not apply to the PforR part of the Program,
   and the IPF entailed only TA (correspondence with the Bank team August 15th, 2024).

   Regarding the PforR components, the Program Action Plan (PAP) (ICR, annex 1C) included some actions
   to strengthen the government’s environmental and social management system. However, improvements in
   the environmental and social management systems were monitored by yes/no binary variables in the PAP
   which might have been inadequate considering that there were 567 grievances registered.

   The ICR (page 15) reports, however, that compliance with overall E&S safeguards was rated Moderately
   Satisfactory as the program experienced several safeguard challenges. The ICR reports on non-compliance



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



  with specific policy requirements for functional environment and social safeguards systems according to the
  Bank’s PforR Financing Policy.

  Some of the challenges included: i) commencement of subprojects without the National Environment
  Management Authority (NEMA) approvals; ii) non-compliance with occupational health and safety (OHS)
  requirements at most construction sites; iii) weak grievance systems and citizen feedback that allow for a
  transparent, timely and efficient redress process; and iv) inadequate skills by county officers on program
  requirements with respect to environment, health and safety and social compliance.

  The program did, however, make progress in addressing most E&S risks. The municipalities increased the
  presence of E&S specialists, although continuous capacity building was necessary.

  Grievances

  GRM systems at County and National levels were continuously strengthened and supported through the
  program. A total of 567 Grievances were registered, mainly related to workmanship, displacements, health
  and safety, environment non-compliance, labor disputes, procurement and governance and disputed
  access. Of these, 529 (93%) were resolved and closed at that level and the rest were still in resolution
  process or pending court resolutions at the time of the submission of the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  Financial Management was overall rated Moderately Satisfactory, with periods of Moderately
  Unsatisfactory ratings due to delays in the internal audit reviews, delays in the transfer of funds from
  County Revenue Fund (CRF) to SPA and Financial Management weaknesses at counties related to
  unsupported expenditure and high staff turnover.

  Despite achieving 100% disbursements of conditional grants, there were some challenges related to
  infrastructure investments, especially with respect to the financing gap from multi-year investments. The
  program submitted timely and acceptable IFRs for the IPF component. Delays in the submission of audit
  reports were experienced in the first three years, but were submitted timely during the last three years.
  Three of the six audited reports (for 2019, 2020 and 2023) had qualified opinions, but the ICR does not
  provide any further information regarding what the issues were or how they were resolved. The Bank team
  clarified in its correspondence to IEG (August 15th, 2024) that the qualified opinions were regarding
  inaccuracies in financial statements, and that the issues were resolved, without providing any further
  information as to what the issues were. As the IPF could only fund activities completed by the closure date
  of December 31, 2023, and payments made by April 30, 2024, the program closed with undisbursed
  balances.

  Procurement
  At the national level, procurement fell under the IPF modality, adhering to the WB Procurement Guidelines
  on IPF. Despite some challenges with lengthy procurement periods at the SDHUD, the IPF component
  was able to deliver tools, training and technical assistance to support the Counties and Urban Areas. Minor
  shortcomings were delays in the issuance of extensions for ongoing consultancies, delays in payments to

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



   consultancies and service providers, and lengthy procurement periods due to WB procurement staff
   rotations.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   N/A



d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The following lessons were reported in the ICR, here with some amended language:

Comprehensive and continuous capacity building in a hybrid PforR and timely monitoring
can help reduce delays and improve the Program’s results. For PforRs, it is key that the
government has the resources to provide the needed capacity-building and program management
support. In the context of Kenya, adding a national-level DLI would not have guaranteed that a
sufficient budget was allocated, so the IPF modality offered a solution. It also allowed the Bank to
provide more hands-on support in implementing capacity building and TA.

Including national-level agencies responsible for E&S standards in Program design can
mitigate ESS issues by supporting oversight. KUSP supported extensive infrastructure
investments at the urban areas level, which required considerable safeguards capacity building at
the county and urban areas level. However, the Program suffered from numerous E&S issues as
described in previous sections. Close collaborative working arrangements with key regulatory
agencies to i) ensure that Municipalities comply with environmental permit conditions and ii) provide
capacity building to municipalities and counties to manage environmental, health and safety risks
based on national laws and regulations may enhance compliance.

Partnering with accurate stakeholders and providing hands-on support may contribute to the
Program’s success. During implementation, the National Program Coordination Team (NPCT)

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



engaged closely with relevant national departments and agencies and had a pool of technical
experts to provide hands-on training and capacity building. NPCT worked closely with Council of
Governments to strengthen inter-governmental relations, coordinate capacity-building activities and
policy and legislative review and development, and provide support for program coordination,
including social risk management and FM. The strong engagement with Council of Governments
became an integral element of KUSP success by troubleshooting problems and enhancing
coordination and communication with Counties and Municipalities.

A robust APA process may enhance the Program's success. Several factors challenged the
APA process in KUSP, such as lacking QAR documentation, MC and PS waivers granted without
proper documentation, the finance agreement not clearly linking the definition of the MCs and PSs to
the POM (and agreed changes not revised in the POM), and some political interference by the
Program Steering Committee with the results of the APA. Keeping these challenges in mind for
future project designs may enhance implementation and results.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the Program. The narrative supports the ratings for the most
part. The ICR is relatively candid, predominantly accurate and generally aligned to the Program development
objective and is focused on results. The ICR’s lessons are useful and well written, and they are based on
evidence outlined in the ICR.

There are some shortcomings, however.

There are minor discrepancies in the figures related to project and component costs (planned and actual)
between the narrative in the ICR (e.g., Table 1 on page 7, para 52 on page 17, and other places) and the Table
provided on Financing (page 2) and the Program Expenditure Summary Table presented in Annex 3 (this also
has internal discrepancies), which in total gives an unclear overview of the planned and actual costs of the
program and its components, including outstanding/undisbursed funds and the current status. The Bank team,
clarified (Sept 30th, 2024), however, that the inconsistency between the US$289.8M (datasheet from the Portal
on the ICR page 2 – not editable) and US$291 (ICR Annex 3 could have been due to the exchange rate used
by the Client Connection and the Operations Portal, especially for canceling the undisbursed IPF amount. The
rate applied in translating counterpart funds was Kshs 140 to a dollar. Additionally, the final expenditure
reconciliation was finalized in Kenya shillings as guided by OPCS. The discrepancies do not detract from the
overall financial integrity of the report.

While the description of the content of the operation as outlined in the ICR is overall in line with the
description of the content of the operation in the Legal Agreement, the ICR has labelled and numbered the
activities and Results Areas differently; Part I The Program in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is
referred to as Window 2 and Window 3 in the ICR’s ToC (ICR Annex 6); Part II The Project in the Legal
Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Window 1 National Level Interventions in the ICR’s ToC (ICR

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kenya Urban Support Program (P156777)



Annex 6); Results Area 1 in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Results Area 2.1 in the
ICR’s ToC (Annex 6); Results Area 2 in the Legal Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) is referred to as Results
Areas 3.1 and 3.2 in the ICR’s ToC (Annex 6). While the description of the operation differed from the one in
the Legal Agreement, it is in line with the description of the intervention in the PAD, and this is therefore
considered a minor shortcoming only.

Overall, the Quality of ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 23 of 23
