     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023706

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128534                                   CM Social Safety Nets

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                  Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52240,IDA-62230,IDA-D2980             31-Aug-2018                                          98,917,702.56

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Mar-2013                               30-Dec-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           109,973,562.43                                               0.00

 Actual                                       100,164,410.19                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Disha Zaidi                Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement dated April 2, 2014, Schedule 1, the objective of the project was "to
   support the establishment of a basic national safety net system including piloting targeted cash transfers and
   public works programs for the poorest and most vulnerable people in participating areas within the Recipient's
   territory."

   The project development objectives (PDO) remained unchanged throughout the project, but changes were
   made to PDO-level indicators and end target values as part of both a 2017 Additional Finance (AF) and a

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



   2022 restructuring. Through the lifetime of the project, five out of the six original outcome indicators had their
   baseline and end targets revised, one of the outcome indicators was split into two separate indicators, and a
   new outcome indicator was added. As these revisions represented no change in the project’s scope, a split
   rating methodology is not warranted for this Review.

   The ICR Review assessed objectives as formulated in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and Financing
   Agreement, and not as in the ICR. This Review parses the objectives into three distinct objectives: (1) Support
   the establishment of a basic national safety net system in participating areas within the Recipient's territory;
   (2) Pilot targeted cash transfers for the poorest and most vulnerable people in participating areas; and (3)
   Pilot public works programs for the poorest and most vulnerable people in participating areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Dec-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three components at appraisal:

   Component 1: Laying the Foundations of a Safety Net System and Supporting Project Management
   (US$7.8 million allocated; 2017 AF: US$15.2 million; US$20.1 million disbursed). This component was to
   help the government develop systems to coordinate and manage safety net programs for the poor and
   vulnerable (subcomponent 1.1), and was to provide support for the management, coordination, and
   monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities for the entire project (subcomponent 1.2).

   As part of the 2017 AF, the name of this component was adjusted to "Development of a national safety net
   system and project management support," and the component was allocated an additional US$15.2 million.

   Component 2: Cash Transfer Program with Accompanying Measures to Boost Household
   Productivity (US$74 million allocated; 2017 AF: US$37.7 million; US$69.9 million disbursed) This
   component was to support the development and implementation of a pilot cash transfer program and
   provide support and boost productivity of chronically poor households. The aim was to stabilize basic
   consumption of these households and have them avoid negative coping mechanisms.

   As part of the 2017 AF, the name of Component 2 was adjusted to "Cash Transfer Program," and three
   subcomponents were added. Subcomponent 2.1 added populations such as refugees, extended project
   coverage to new communes and South and South-West regions as part of regular cash transfers, and
   therefore increased the total number of households benefiting from the regular cash transfer program.
   Through subcomponent 2.2, the usage of emergency cash transfers was formalized, following a faster and

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



  easier targeting mechanism for the refugees and new communes that were added. Subcomponent 2.3
  introduced three modifications: (a) an Early Childhood Development (ECD) component; (b) activities that
  fostered human capital protection, and (c) a feasibility study on providing psycho-social care.

  Component 3: Public Works Pilot (US$13 million allocated; 2017 AF US$7.1 million; US$10.2 million
  disbursed). This component was to develop and pilot a Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) program to
  help vulnerable households with exogenous shocks (such as droughts or floods). The component was to
  finance small community-level projects, such as the rehabilitation of small infrastructure and soil
  conservation activities, that would provide about 60 days of work to selected beneficiaries.

  As part of the 2017 AF, the name of the component was adjusted to "Labor-intensive Public Works," and
  refugees were added as an eligible beneficiary group. There was also an increase in the number of other
  direct LIPW beneficiaries, and mobile creches were added to take care of preschool children of women
  LIPW beneficiaries.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$50 million, using
  a Specific Investment Loan lending instrument for a five-year time frame starting in FY13. Of the US$50
  million, US$27.05 million was recommitted from three other projects: the closed Cameroon Education
  Development Capacity Building Project (US$2.7 million); the closed Cameroon Transparency and
  Accountability Capacity Development Project (US$9.4 million); and the ongoing Cameroon Energy Sector
  Development Project (US$15 million) (PAD, p. 11). At appraisal, the government's contribution was
  estimated to be approximately US$5 million for taxes, duties, and other "real expenditure," including the
  cost of four key staff of the Safety Net Unit/Unit de Gestion du Projet.

  The government requested an AF in 2017 of US$60 million, including a US$30 million grant from the IDA18
  sub-window for refugees and a US$30 million credit from the IDA18 national allocation sub-window. The
  IDA18 sub-window for refugees was created in response to demand from refugee-hosting countries, such
  as Cameroon, for development assistance and concessional financing to help advance policy and
  institutional reforms and support countries addressing the refugee situation. The AF intended to extend the
  social safety nets to regions hosting refugees, as well as to other regions affected by poverty and fragility.
  The Financing Agreement (IDA credit 6223 CM and Grant D2980 CM) for the AF was signed on April 9,
  2019. The AF became effective on June 27, 2019, and covered the period 2019–2022. The AF was closed
  on December 30, 2022.

  The total estimated project cost was therefore US$110 million. US$100.16 million was actually disbursed,
  with the difference attributable to exchange rate fluctuations.

  Dates. The project was approved on March 21, 2013, and became effective on June 27, 2014. The midterm
  review was held in February 2017. The project underwent four restructurings (listed below), received AF in
  2017, and closed on December 30, 2022, four years after its original closing date of August 31, 2018.

  Restructurings:




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



       1. March 18, 2016: The closing date of the project was extended from August 31, 2018, to December
          31, 2019. This restructuring was required for the project to have sufficient time to reach the intended
          number of beneficiaries.
       2. December 18, 2017: This restructuring included rollout of emergency cash transfers, introduction of
          mobile creches to enable young mothers to participate in the LIPW program, inclusion of a new ECD
          component focused on family practices in health and hygiene, and the introduction of performance-
          based bonuses to incentivize government staff (civil servants) assigned to the project
          implementation unit (PIU).
       3. November 11, 2021: Changes included reducing the duration of cash transfer payments, increasing
          benefits levels, and adjusting frequency of payments, with duration of benefits being reduced from
          24 months to 12-18 months.
       4. October 31, 2022: Cash transfers were included for households enrolled in the regular and
          emergency cash transfer programs in specific cities/urban areas to reduce the effects of shocks
          related to rising food prices and other basic necessities. Cash transfers were also rolled out to
          refugee and host communities in selected project regions. The refugee communities were included
          as part of AF 2017, since the Government of Cameroon met all three criteria to access financing
          through the regional sub-window on refugees and host communities, including: (i) Cameroon hosts
          about 339,000 refugees; (ii) the World Bank Group, in consultation with the United Nations High
          Commissioner for Refugees, determined that Cameroon complies with a framework for protecting
          refugees that is adequate for the purpose of the IDA 18 Refugee Sub-Window; and (iii) the
          government had formulated a strategic approach to move towards long-term solutions that benefit
          refugees and host communities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The objectives were highly relevant to the country's context and aligned with government and
Bank strategy.

Country context: At the time of project appraisal, even though Cameroon had seen a decade of economic
growth, national poverty incidence had remained almost unchanged, and the absolute number of poor had
increased. This was reflected in the slow decrease of poverty as a percentage of population, from 40.2
percent in 2001 to 37.5 percent in 2014. Poverty incidence had declined in urban areas from 17.9 percent
to 8.9 percent during the same time frame. In rural areas, however, the percentage of poor had increased
from 52.1 percent to 56.8 percent (Country Partnership Strategy, CPS, FY17-FY21).

At the time of project appraisal, there was no national social protection strategy in Cameroon, nor were
there any coordinated mechanisms for providing targeted support to the poor. Cameroon had low levels of
social protection expenditure by regional standards, with total social protection expenditure at only 0.23
percent of gross domestic product (GDP) at the time, with around 80 percent of this being spent on
emergency programs implemented in response to shocks such as droughts and floods. This was well below
the regional average (3.8 percent of GDP) and that of neighboring countries, such as the Central African
Republic (which was at 2.8 percent of GDP). Given the low levels of expenditure on existing social safety



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



               net (SSN) programs, there were many gaps in coverage. The vast majority of poor and vulnerable
               households had no access to any form of SSN programs (ICR, p. 6).

               The government had shown a commitment to tackling poverty through social protection in the lead-up to
               project appraisal. The 2012 Cameroon Social Safety Nets report (Cameroon Social Safety Nets,
               2012, World Bank, Washington, DC) had shown that an efficient social protection system could reach all
               chronically poor in Cameroon with the introduction of a small monthly targeted transfer at a cost of
               approximately 0.7 percent of GDP (2010 prices). The government's national development strategy for 2020-
               2030 includes eliminating poverty in rural areas, in particular in the northern regions, as one of its three
               focus areas.

               Alignment with Strategy: The project aligned with the main constraints identified by the 2016 Systematic
               Country Diagnostic and the FY17-FY21 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), which comprised 12
               objectives clustered around three focus areas, including one on "addressing multiple poverty traps in rural
               areas" with a focus on northern regions. This focus area further comprised five objectives, including
               “expanded social safety nets.” This set of outcomes was to contribute to addressing the deficit in human
               development that affects northern regions in particular, weakening the resilience of communities that faced
               economic, environmental, and conflict-related shocks. The 2019 Performance and Learning Review (PLR)
               of the CPF increased focus on the displaced and their host communities, specifically citing this project as
               key in bringing continued support during a period of conflict, fragility, and complex human capital
               challenges. The PLR extended the CPF by one year. The Bank is currently preparing a new CPF.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support the establishment of a basic national safety net system in participating areas within the Recipient's
                             territory

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change underpinning the first objective held that activities on targeting, building and
                             strengthening a management information system (MIS), and building and implementing a safety net institution
                             in Cameroon would lead to the establishment of a basic national safety net system.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             A cash transfer payment system was developed under the project, with the payment system ensuring that
                             funds were not misused by requiring payments to be made in public, beneficiaries to sign on to secure
                             payment statements that included fingerprints, and the records of each payment to be signed by three parties

                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



including a representative from the community, the payments agency, and the PIU. Each beneficiary
was provided with a project card that contained their photo and a digital fingerprint.

The project achieved its target of developing a functional monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system that
provided methods and tools to collect data for field teams and also allowed for production of monthly and
quarterly reports on project activities. The quality control mechanisms that were part of the M&E system also
helped with rollout of new interventions and played an important part in securing the AF.

19,143 refugee households were registered in the MIS, exceeding the target that 10,000 refugee households
would be registered. The target on refugees registered in the MIS for the LIPW/cash for work program was
partially achieved, with 5,780 refugee households registered, against an end target of 17,000 refugee
households.

The project partially achieved expected results on frequency of publication of monitoring reports, with only 16
monitoring reports were produced over nine years, against an end target of 18 reports over nine years.

Ony 18.17 percent of the total program budget was spent on program management, exceeding the original
target of 30 percent and the revised target of 20 percent.

82.6 percent of registered grievances related to delivery of project benefits were addressed, exceeding the
target of 80 percent of grievances addressed.

Outcomes

Although the development of a comprehensive, permanent safety net institution was not achieved, the project
developed an effective targeting mechanism for cash transfer programs and established an MIS system that
managed targeting and registration of beneficiaries as well as updates to beneficiary information.
The targeting mechanism encompassed three approaches: (a) geographical targeting to determine
participating regions, departments, and municipalities; (b) community targeting to identify eligible households
in beneficiary villages; (c) a proxy means test (PMT), which helped determine whether or not households
were eligible, based on correlates with income and poverty. The MIS system managed all targeting and
registration of beneficiaries, updates of beneficiary information, and payment and data reconciliation. The
government also developed a social protection strategy that allowed for a longer-term vision for social
protection in the country.

There were 1.17 million direct project beneficiaries covered by the cash transfer and public works programs,
exceeding the original target of 420,000 and revised target of 834,000 beneficiaries. Of these, 52.3 percent
were women, exceeding the original target of 50 percent and revised target of 51.9 percent.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Pilot targeted cash transfers for the poorest and most vulnerable people in participating areas

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)




Rationale
The theory of change underlying the second objective emphasized that financing of transfers for a pilot cash
transfer program (using the project-supported targeting mechanism and MIS), provision of technical
assistance for the design and development of measures to maximize the impact of the transfers on the
welfare and productivity of beneficiary households, information campaigns aimed at registration, and
individual training activities covering financial literacy and income-generating activities would support the
implementation of piloted targeted cash transfers for the poorest and most vulnerable people in targeted
areas.

Outputs and intermediate results

85,000 households benefited from the regular cash transfer program, exceeding the original target of 40,000
and revised target of 82,000 households. Of these, 5,161 were refugee households, not reaching the target of
8,000 refugee households. All beneficiary households (100 percent, including refugee beneficiary
households) participated in accompanying measures, exceeding the target of 80 percent of households. 86.8
percent of beneficiaries of the regular cash transfer program received payments on time, exceeding the target
of 80 percent of households.

34,500 households benefited from the emergency cash transfer program exceeding the target of 18,000
households. Of these, 8,286 were refugee households, exceeding the target of 2,500 refugee households.
70.19 percent of beneficiaries of the emergency cash transfer program received payments on time, not
reaching the target of 80 percent of households.

The ICR identified delays for some payments, attributable to the baseline survey being carried out in some
municipalities before the first payment, the security situation in the North-West, and difficulties in replenishing
the designated account due to suspension at the country portfolio level.

Only 9.61 percent of expenditures for the cash transfer program were spent on program management,
exceeding the target of a 20 percent share.

The indicator on beneficiary households of regular cash transfers who adopted essential family practices was
not measured at project completion, and hence it was not possible to determine if this target (80 percent) was
achieved.

Outcomes

Outcomes associated with the second objective captured the extent to which the project reached intended
(targeted) beneficiaries. The share of beneficiary households of both the cash transfer and public works
programs who live below the poverty line was reported in the ICR as 93.3 percent, exceeding the target of 70
percent.

No data were collected on the per capita consumption level of households benefiting from cash transfers, and
therefore consumption effects are not known.

As the targeting of beneficiaries under this objective was measured directly, demonstrating that cash transfer
recipients were the poorest and most vulnerable people, achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Pilot public works programs for the poorest and most vulnerable people in participating areas

Rationale
The theory of change underlying the third objective emphasized that financing of wages for a public
works program (using the project-supported targeting mechanism and MIS), provision of materials for
program activities, and technical assistance to flesh out the design of the program pilot would support the
implementation of piloted public works program for the poorest and most vulnerable people in targeted areas.

Outputs and intermediate results

3.68 million effective days were worked under the public works program, exceeding the original target of 1.8
million and revised target of 3.18 million days. There were 60,500 direct beneficiaries of the public works
program, exceeding the original target of 30,000 and revised target of 53,000 beneficiaries. Of these, 5,696
were refugees, not reaching the target of 8,500 refugee beneficiaries. Over half (51.6 percent) of all public
works beneficiaries were women, exceeding the target of 50 percent.

Only 45.56 percent of public workers program workers were paid on time, falling far short of the target of 80
percent of workers.

479 new community assets were created or existing assets maintained under the public works program,
exceeding the original target of 200 and revised target of 315 community assets.

51.2 percent of expenditures for the public works program were spent on program management, not reaching
the target of a 50 percent share.

Outcomes

While the project reached the targeted number of beneficiaries, and community assets were created as
planned, payments to workers were not made on time. Furthermore, as noted under Objective 2, the extent to
which the workers supported were the "poorest and most vulnerable," per the objective, was not directly
measured. The ICR (p. 20) noted that the public works programs were geographically targeted, with the "most
deprived" municipalities in the country (defined according to chronic poverty, education levels, and access to
drinking water) invited to submit applications for micro-projects, but no information was presented to indicate
that the project beneficiary workers or households within those communities were the poorest or most
vulnerable. In the absence of actual data on successful targeting of the intended beneficiary population,
achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project put in place essential building blocks for the establishment of a basic national social safety net
                            system, and it piloted a cash transfer program targeted at the poorest and most vulnerable people. The first
                            two objectives were therefore substantially achieved. However, although many targets were reached in
                            piloting a public works program, the ICR did not provide data demonstrating that the beneficiary population
                            specified in the objective, the poorest and most vulnerable people, were reached. Achievement of the third
                            objective is therefore rated Modest. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The economic rate of return was not calculated at appraisal or closing. The ICR assessed efficiency of the
   project in terms of targeting efficiency and administrative costs.

   Regular cash transfers were cost efficient. Only 9.6 percent of expenditures went towards program
   administration costs (ICR, pp. 19, 40). Targeting efficiency in the context of beneficiary households for regular
   cash transfers was also high, since 93.3 percent of beneficiary households lived below the poverty line, which
   was well above the project target of 70 percent. Beneficiary targeting for regular cash transfers is attributed to a
   combination of geographic targeting, community-based targeting, and PMT, which allowed for a high level of
   targeting efficiency.

   For emergency cash transfers, management expenses were at 12.4 percent of the total program budget, well
   below the end target of 15 percent. The emergency cash transfers also relied on and built on the targeting
   mechanism that was used for regular cash transfers, hence increasing efficiency in targeting.

   There were challenges, however, associated with cost-effectiveness of the LIPW program. Administrative
   expenses amounted to over half of costs. According to the ICR, these costs are attributable to efforts to protect
   workers through the purchase of personal protective equipment for each beneficiary, provision of child care
   (mobile creches) for young mothers in order to attract female beneficiaries (ICR, p. 20), and the costs of
   assessing micro projects and hiring non-governmental organizations to oversee risk management and
   implementation. Other considerations that affected the efficiency of the LIPW were the high labor intensity of
   micro projects that were ultimately considered eligible for public works implementation, as all of these were
   labor-intensive activities like maintenance of roads and tracks, cleaning of sanitation facilities, and water and soil
   conservation activities.



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



The total administrative costs of the project were 18.2 percent of total disbursements (US$19.98 million out of
US$110 million). This percentage is considered higher than comparable projects, which have average
implementation costs around 15 percent, but was lower than the 20 percent target set in the results
framework. There was also evidence of implementation inefficiency stemming from early delays, and issues
related to financial management and procurement (see Section 10b) and safeguards (see Section 10a).

However, the project team provided new information on leveraging of additional funds from the government and
the French Development Agency (AFD), such that IDA financing of administrative costs cross-subsidized
program activities funded by others, thereby strengthening cost efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context and aligned well with the country strategy. The
project also aligned with the FY17-FY21 CPF's first focus area that included social safety nets. Relevance is
therefore rated High. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, with two objectives achieved, but with caveats, as
there is no direct evidence that the public works program supported by the project reached the poorest and
most vulnerable people. Achievement of the third objective was therefore rated Modest. Efficiency was
Substantial, with evidence of some implementation inefficiencies. Taken together, these ratings are indicative
of moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, producing an overall
Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



The ICR identified several key internal as well as external risks for the medium and long term. Internally, the
lack of a permanent SSN institution within the government constitutes a major risk, since currently the model
is very PIU-heavy for implementation. Challenges are also associated with the fact that social assistance
continues to be heavily financed by international donors, with the government covering only a quarter of all
social assistance spending. Even though the government has allocated CFAF 18 billion in 2023, the
disbursement of funds has been challenging.

In terms of external risks, there have been several challenges related to increased frequency of shocks
including food insecurity, natural disasters, conflict, and forced displacement, all of which are further adding
hardships for those living in poverty and in need of social assistance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This design of this project drew upon the Bank's 2012 Cameroon SSN report ("Social Safety Nets,"
  Report Number 70530-CM), which assured that overall project objectives were relevant, and that
  technical, financial, and economic aspects in design were robust. Project implementation arrangements
  took into consideration implementation capacity and included a cross-ministerial social protection
  Steering Committee within the Ministry of Economy, Planning, and Regional Development.
  However, there was a lack of readiness for implementation by the Government of Cameroon, and hence
  challenges were experienced in the design and implementation phases. There were also gaps in
  M&E plans around data collection, and timelines of indicators in the results framework were not clear,
  which led to revisions of indicators and targets and contributed to the need for subsequent restructurings.
  Risks such as food security issues, safeguards risks related to gender-based violence (GBV), and
  accidents during LIPW activities were also underestimated during project appraisal (ICR, p. 30).

  The project became effective one year after the scheduled date in June 2014 due to delays in obtaining
  legal agreements. Additional information from the project team suggests that the one-year lag is a
  recurrent issue in the Bank’s portfolio in Cameroon and not unique to this project only with the country
  having lengthy national review and approval procedures that follow signing of loan agreements. Despite
  efforts by Bank country management to proactively work with the government to accelerate internal
  review and approval procedures, the time lag remained beyond the control of the Bank preparation and
  supervision teams. Given gaps and challenges that had to be addressed by the project, including
  subsequent restructurings, but taking into consideration the country context related delays that are
  experienced across the portfolio, the quality-at-entry rating is Moderately Satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)




b. Quality of supervision
 Bank supervision from project design through implementation maintained strong focus on development
 impact, with the task team making sure that mid-course corrections and revisions were made as needed in
 order to achieve outcomes. There were significant procurement performance issues, which created
 multiple challenges and led to financial management performance ratings at Moderately Unsatisfactory
 levels during large parts of project implementation. However, the Bank team put forth many action plans to
 address these issues. The Bank also made sure there was a grievance redress mechanism that would
 effectively address environmental and social challenges. Bank supervision included many visits to LIPW
 sites to oversee how contracted non-governmental organizations were managing environmental and social
 risks. There were consistent supervision missions that helped with project implementation, including virtual
 missions during the COVID-19 pandemic. The task team leader being based in Cameroon towards the end
 of project implementation also helped address bottlenecks that would have been hard to handle remotely
 during the COVID-19 pandemic. There were also shortcomings related to environmental safeguards
 compliance, including accidents and fatalities at project sites in the months prior to project closure, leading
 to a safety audit being required post-closure to identify the root causes of the accidents and formulate a
 corrective action plan (see Section 10a).

 Further information on the three fatalities showed that one fatality in the PWs program was due to a snake
 bite, with first aid provided and the victim taken to a hospital. The Bank took action by providing antivenom
 serum to all project sites after this incident. The second fatality was in a traffic accident for a woman who
 was going to collect payments from the cash transfer program, and this fatality is mentioned in the security
 audit undertaken by the Bank. A third incident was a GBV related death of a beneficiary whose husband
 wanted control over the cash transfer. The GBV related death could potentially be attributed to the project,
 but the impact of GBV based confounding factors cannot be overlooked. Nonetheless, the Bank reported
 significant follow-up to the GBV incident with the Bank undertaking a multi-year collaboration with the Africa
 Gender Innovation Lab, including an intervention to reduce Intimate Partner Violence among cash transfer
 beneficiaries, and an impact evaluation to measure its effectiveness. Feedback from the treatment group
 on the intervention, which included a radio novella and illustrated IEC materials, was positive, and the
 intervention was continued in a follow-on safety net project. Hence the Bank’s follow-up on the GBV
 incident triggered a series of work on GBV in cash transfer beneficiaries.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, project M&E was well designed. PDO-level indicators were clearly identified in the results
 framework, capturing both qualitative and quantitative indicators, and reflecting the theory of change (note
 that the theory of change was created ex-post for the ICR). For example, since the project aimed to

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



 develop a national safety net system for the first time through the "creation and implementation of a new
 permanent social safety net institution within the government," this was a qualitative yes/no indicator. Other
 main PDO-level indicators tracked effective targeting for the cash transfer program and the public works
 program, and the establishment of an MIS system for effective targeting and tracking of project
 beneficiaries (PAD, p. 29). However, there were some challenges with data availability for PDO-level
 indicators related to the share of households below the poverty line and per capita consumption levels for
 the beneficiary population, given that they required baseline consumption data from the impact evaluation
 survey, which delayed rollout of cash transfer payments in some cases. Other PDO-level indicators were
 insufficiently disaggregated to provide useful information at the program level.

 An M&E system was established early in the project implementation cycle and covered regular monitoring
 of all activities, process evaluations, targeting assessments, and both internal and external audits. Small
 beneficiary surveys and spot checks were also implemented for program performance, targeting, and
 payments. These efforts permitted the PIU’s M&E officer to report progress against most all of the project’s
 PDO-level indicators and against most of its intermediate indicators.

 Other studies that were part of bigger M&E efforts included: (a) an impact evaluation of the initial pilot cash
 transfer; (b) a quantitative baseline household survey completed by the INS (National Institute of Statistics/
 Institut National de la Statistique), as well as (c) two studies focused on GBV aspects, a qualitative study
 and an impact evaluation led by the Bank's Gender Innovation Lab. These studies provided important
 evidence related to the project but were not directly associated to indicators in the results framework.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project's results framework was updated with indicators that were refined or added, and with targets
  adjusted due to the AF. M&E data were collected and analyzed in a consistent and robust manner
  through an M&E system that was established early in the project implementation cycle. Progress reports
  by the M&E officer of the PIU provided data for most PDO-level indicators and intermediate indicators.

  Due to the 2016 restructuring and 2017 AF, the results framework incorporated a set of indicators
  that reflected new activities and beneficiary groups. As part of this restructuring, the project extended
  benefits to the refugee population in Cameroon and focused on boosting female participation rates in
  project activities. New activities included the rollout of emergency cash transfers, mobile creches for
  young mothers who would participate in the public works program, and an ECD component on family
  practices in hygiene, health, and education (ICR, p. 14). Specifically in the context of indicators, the
  addition of these new populations and components led to the PDO-level indicator tracking the share of
  beneficiary households living below the poverty line being spilt into two sub-indicators
  tracking beneficiaries in the cash transfer program and the LIPW program separately. A new PDO-level
  indicator was added to track essential family practices in beneficiaries who received regular cash
  transfers. Intermediate indicators were also adjusted to incorporate the addition of new activities like
  emergency cash transfers as well as the addition of new beneficiary groups like refugees.

  There were also challenges in data collection for some intermediate indicators. The data on percentage
  of beneficiary households living below the poverty line for the cash for work program was not collected
  until the final Implementation Status and Results Report, implying that the PIU had little understanding of
  targeted activities for LIPW until project closing. There were also issues related to indicators like project
  management expenses, which was revised midway through project implementation, and the indicator on

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



  beneficiary households of regular cash transfers that adopted family practices, which was not measured.
  There were also challenges in tracking refugee beneficiaries who were LIPW workers.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, available data on project results and performance were adequate to measure achievement of
  the PDO, with the exception of information on targeting of the public works program. The monitoring of
  project data led to changes like decisions around the reduction of the cash transfer from 24 months
  to 12-18 months, and also changes to the frequency of payments for the cash transfer program. Insights
  from M&E data and analysis were also reflected in the midcourse correction on addition of mobile
  creches for the LIPW program so that more women could be part of the public works program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as a Category B project and triggered six safeguard policies of the World Bank.
   These were: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and
   Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The restructurings and AF did not trigger any additional safeguards policies.

   Various safeguard instruments were prepared to help with potential risks triggered by the policies and to
   mitigate those risks. For example, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
   prepared in 2012 to determine any adverse environmental and social impacts under subprojects that were
   part of Component 3 on LIPWs such as reforestation and soil conservation activities, rural road
   maintenance, and small irrigation systems. This ESMF was updated as part of the 2018 restructuring with
   environmental challenges associated to adding refugees and new regions as part of the project. There were
   other safeguard instruments prepared and disclosed in 2012, including a Resettlement Policy Framework,
   Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, and Pest Management Plan.

   For environmental safeguards, the main risks were related to the LIPW beneficiaries, and the project put in
   place mitigation measures such as hiring safeguards specialists within the PIU, assigning environmental
   focal points, assessing and categorizing the risks of each micro-project, and contracting non-governmental
   organizations to monitor and report back on risks and any incidents (ICR, p. 28). Various trainings were
   conducted on environmental issues with field staff and other stakeholders. Despite these measures, many
   accidents and fatalities were recorded at project sites in the last four months before the project closed. It
   was decided that a safety audit would be undertaken after the project closed to identify the causes of the
   accidents and propose a corrective action plan. There were also issues related to the lack of use of
   personal protective equipment for project beneficiaries. The ICR (p. 28) reported that the overall
   environmental safeguards rating at project closure was Moderately Satisfactory.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



   In the context of social safeguards, the main risks related to GBV were transfers to households, triggering
   physical violence on female household members who were often reported to be beaten by the male in the
   household so that he could keep control over use of cash transfers or the money that came through the
   LIPW. The ICR reported that the GRM functioned effectively in such cases, with counseling as well as
   psychosocial support provided to households that reported such incidents. The ICR (p. 28) reported that the
   social safeguards rating at project closure was Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   There were several challenges reported with project financial management (FM). These
   challenges were due to several factors, some of which were explained in a 2017 external audit, including
   concerns related to manual production of financial statements instead of using relevant software, non-
   compliance with the seven-day deadline for justifying advances on mission expenses, and absence of
   reconciliation between the inventory of fixed assets and the designated account, among other things. Even
   though there were actions taken as part of the AF in 2018, including the opening of two separate
   designated accounts, customizing of the accounting software to keep track of AF activities, and updating of
   the procedures manual, the final FM review identified continued issues through project closing (issues at
   project closure included a lack of supporting documents in the filing system). Despite the challenges, the
   ICR rated the project's FM as Moderately Satisfactory (p.29).

   On procurement, risk was assessed as high due to corruption, especially in public works activities, and due
   to the PIU’s limited experience in implementation of World Bank-financed projects. Even though a
   Procurement Action Plan was mapped out, there were implementation challenges around staff capacity
   training. Eventually, procurement performance was reported as Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, p.29), after
   briefly dropping to Moderately Unsatisfactory in 2018 as the procurement specialist was not able to keep
   up with the timelines set out in the Procurement Plan and update the progress of various activities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               Shortcomings in efficiency and
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               inadequate evidence that the

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



                                                                              public works program reached
                                                                              the poorest and most vulnerable
                                                                              people.
                                                                              Gaps in implementation
                                                                              readiness at project launch, and
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   shortcomings related to
                                                                              safeguards monitoring and
                                                                              compliance.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 33-34) included several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
re-stated by this ICR Review:

      Pilot programs can pave the way for cash transfers and public works programs to
       address needs of poor and vulnerable populations. This was the first operation of its type
       in Cameroon, a country that is relatively new to the SSN agenda. It showed that both cash
       transfers and public works programs can be successfully implemented and, in the case of the
       cash transfer program, achieve and exceed targets for reaching poor and vulnerable
       populations.
      The establishment of an MIS system upfront to identify and track beneficiaries
       can be effective, alongside increasing beneficiaries to refugee communities, even though it
       took time for the government to take ownership of the SSN agenda.

      Gender sensitivity can be enhanced by giving consideration to childcare for women,
       and by addressing gender-based violence (GBV) issues. The project provided childcare
       for women through mobile creches that were added as part of support to female LIPW
       workers and were considered beneficial.

       Gender-responsiveness and sensitivity was also seen in Bank follow-up to a gender-based
       violence (GBV) fatality in a beneficiary household. This incident triggered the Bank
       undertaking a multi-year collaboration with the Africa Gender Innovation Lab including
       qualitative research on integrating Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) prevention into social
       safety net programs, development of an intervention to reduce IPV among cash transfer
       beneficiaries in Cameroon, and an impact evaluation to measure its effectiveness. Feedback
       from the treatment group of the intervention was positive, and the intervention was continued
       as a follow-on safety net project. The Bank’s follow-up on the GBV incident which triggered a
       series of work on GBV in cash transfer beneficiaries is noteworthy.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                 Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM Social Safety Nets (P128534)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of the project's performance, and was candid, internally consistent, and
evidence-based. It clearly explained why there were changes made to the results framework by adding or
disaggregating indicators and explained several aspects of these changes based on the ICR Guidelines
for M&E design and implementation. Lessons were insightful, taking into consideration both successes and
challenges based on project experience. Overall, the ICR was concise and followed guidelines, along with citing
additional studies undertaken for the project like the impact evaluation on gender-based violence. There were
some shortcomings in the adequacy of data, especially related to procurement issues. Most importantly, the
ICR made unsupported assumptions about targeting of the public works program based on data collected on
beneficiaries of the cash transfer program.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 17
