     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0024233

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P128768                                      BF-Electricity Sector Support Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52910,IDA-54910,IDA-60680,IDA-           30-Sep-2018                                        117,667,231.90
 H9660

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jul-2013                                  30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              121,834,748.47                                              0.00

 Actual                                          117,667,231.90                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Maria Shkaratan              Dileep M. Wagle               Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Original Project Development Objective (PDO) was “(i) increasing access to electricity, (ii) improving the
   reliability of electricity supply; and (iii) improving efficient use of energy in targeted areas” (Financing
   Agreement, page 5). The PDO was stated identically in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (PAD, page
   vii).



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



   The PDO was not revised.

   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective will be
   assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To increase access to electricity,

   PDO 2: To improve the reliability of electricity supply,

   PDO 3: To improve efficient use of energy in targeted areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jun-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component 1 Improving the reliability of energy supply: (cost at appraisal: US$15.39 million; actual
   cost: US$56.02 million) was to finance the construction of two turnkey diesel power stations of at least 7.5
   MW each, to support electricity supply to two regional growth poles, Fada N’gourma and Ouahigouya. The
   component also included provision of related technical advisory services.

   Component 2 Increase electricity access in target areas: (cost at appraisal: US$25.59 million; actual
   cost: US$43.25 million) was to finance grid expansion and installation of electricity connections in about
   forty communities through: (i) existing and new 33kV transmission lines, and (b) the existing 34.5 kV Bobo-
   Dioulasso – Ouagadougou line. In line with FDE’s (Electrification Development Fund’s) practice, the
   component could also finance connection charge subsidies. The connections would be installed for
   households, schools, clinics, local administration facilities, recreation centers, and other customers.

   Component 3 Improving efficient use of energy in target areas (cost at appraisal: US$4.70 million;
   actual cost: US$3.7 million) was to finance (i) strengthening the institutional, legal and regulatory
   framework for demand-side management and energy efficiency, including in public lighting; (ii) investments
   in energy efficient equipment (energy saving lamps in households and public lighting); (iii) energy efficiency
   awareness campaigns, education, and communication; (iv) Lighting Africa activities including, inter alia:
   capacity training on off-grid lighting in rural areas, awareness campaigns on solar lanterns, and deployment
   of twenty five thousand lanterns to public schools.


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



  Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (cost at appraisal: US$5.49
  million; actual cost: US$14.7 million) was to finance: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity of the
  FDE, National Power Utility SONABEL, and General Directorate of Energy (DGE) to support energy service
  expansion; (ii) strengthening the capacity of energy service providers including energy services
  cooperatives, local communities, NGOs, and private sector small- and medium-size enterprises; (iii) studies
  to improve the energy mix and increasing the share of renewable energy (RE); (iv) institutional support to
  DGE, SONABEL and FDE; and (v) support to DGE for coordinating the Project.

  Physical and Price Contingencies: at appraisal: US$1.7 million; at closure: US$0.0.

  Revised Components:

  The components were revised, as described in detail in section 2.e under “Restructurings”.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$52.87 million, and the actual disbursement was US$117.67
  million, an increase of US$64.8 million. This difference is explained by the following: (i) two additional
  financings (AFs), US$115 million in total, which increased the total Project cost to US$167.87 million; (ii) the
  cancellation of US$36 million in financing due to the termination of a Component 1 activity, which reduced
  Project cost to US$131.87 million; and (iii) At IEG’s request, the team provided information that the rest of
  the difference (US$14.2 million) is explained by the cancellation of contracts for civil works and the
  fluctuations of the exchange rate (which increased Project costs in US$ terms).

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by four IDA credits. The credit approved at appraisal
  amounted to US$50.0 million. The actual disbursement at closure was US$117.67 million.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: The Borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$2.87 million at
  appraisal, and constituted US$5.79 million at closure.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on July 30, 2013, and became effective on February 27, 2014.
  The MTR review was on February 15, 2019. The Project was restructured six times: (i) on July 15, 2014; (ii)
  on November 2, 2016; (iii) on June 27, 2017; (iv) on May 9, 2019; (v) on June 29, 2021; and (vi) on May 13,
  2023. The original closing date was September 30, 2018. The Project was extended four times, for the total
  of four years and nine months (or 57 months), to June 30, 2023, which was the date of the Project’s actual
  closure.

  Restructurings: The Project had six restructurings:

  Restructuring 1 (July 15 2014) was to approve the first additional financing (AF1) in the amount of US$35
  million in order to implement additional activities, as follows: (i) grid expansion and connecting additional
  communities; (ii) installation of hybrid mini-grids and Solar Home Systems (SHS) in rural communities; (iii)
  installation of multifunctional platforms (to support income generation activities in poor localities); (d)
  institutional capacity building at SONABEL; and (e) support to DGE in promoting private participation in
  energy sector.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



Restructuring 2 (November 2, 2016) involved the following main changes:

     i. Changes in Components leading to a reduced Project scope and a related reallocation of funds
         across components, without a change in the total Project cost. Specifically:

      Construction (under Component 1) of one of the two greenfield 7.5 MW thermal power plants (in
         Ouhigouya) was cancelled due to a significantly higher than anticipated costs (US$17.0 million per
         plant versus US$7.5 million) (Restructuring Paper, page 13); there were plans to link Ouhigouya to
         the national grid instead (Restructuring Paper, page 12);
        The implementation of SONABEL’s new strategic plan was removed from Component 3 due to slow
         progress;
        Activities under Component 2 (new distribution lines and household/community connections) were
         scaled up.
        The following new activities were added to Component 4: operationalization of a Revenue Protection
         Program (including the introduction of smart meter systems) and of a customer call center; and
        Financing was reallocated across components: physical contingency funds were fully used to
         increase the cost of Components 1 and 4.

     i. Main changes in the Results Framework (RF):

      To reflect the cancelation of the Ouhigouya plant construction and of the SONABEL strategic plan
       implementation, thee intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were removed: “Peak demand met in
       each city when standing alone (islanding) (Ouahigouya)”; “Generation Capacity of Conventional
       Generation constructed under the project “Ouahigouya)”; and “Elaboration of SONABEL's strategic
       action plan”.
      Three IRI targets under Component 2 were increased: for the IRI “Distribution lines constructed
       under the project (km)” from 500 km to 870 km; for the IRI “Number of households connected to
       electricity under the project” from 3,000 households to 11,135 households; and for the IRI
       “Community electricity connections under the project (conventional grid)” from 50 connections to 120
       connections.
      The IRI “Number of communities connected to electricity” was removed because it was replicating
       the IRI “Community electricity connections under the project (conventional grid)”.
      Three new IRIs were added under Component 4: Agreement between the Government and
       SONABEL on selected binding operation performance indicators (yes/no); “Implementation of the
       customer management software (yes/no)”; and “Elaboration of fuel audit and action plan (yes/no).

     i. Change in Implementing Agency: following the DGE’s split into three parts, a new Project
         Implementation Unit (PIU) was formed, across the three new DGE entities.

(iv) Reduced Government counterpart contribution: institutional support to DGE, SONABEL and FDE, as
well as Project management, which were to be financed by the Borrower, will now be financed by IDA.

(v) Change in the closing date for the original credit (and therefore for the Project overall) for 12 months,
from September 30, 2018 to September 30, 2019.

Restructuring 3 (June 27, 2017) was to approve the second additional financing (AF2) in the amount of
US$80 million, to introduce solar resources in the energy mix; reinforce the network to integrate more

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



intermittent solar power; and provide related technical assistance (TA) and transaction advisory services.
The RF was re-designed, with very few original indicators remaining and many new added. The following
main changes were made:

     i. Changes in components leading to an increase in Project scope, to be financed by the AF2:

      Under Component 1, the following activities would be added:
           o Construction of two solar photovoltaic (PV) plants (30 MW in total, cost US$39.1 million));
               and
             o Transmission and distribution grid improvements to allow for the integration of the solar PV
               energy (cost US$32.9 million).
      Under Component 4, the following activities would be added: (i) transaction advisory services to
       support private participation in the energy sector and (ii) solar PV-related capacity building for the
       Ministry of Energy, SONABEL, and the FDE.

     i. The Results Framework was re-designed, with seven out of 16 indicators dropped and 15 new
        indicators added (five PDO indicators and 10 IRIs). The RF was updated for several reasons,
        including to reflect the AF2 activities, consider the World Bank’s new corporate results indicators,
        and incorporate indicators on beneficiary feedback and gender.
    ii. Change in the closing date for 21 months, from September 30, 2019 to June 30, 2021.

Restructuring 4 (May 9, 2019) was to amend the Financing Agreement to correct the wording of the
withdrawal condition, which was preventing the client from accessing proceeds to honor contractors’
invoices, and to consolidate all past amendments (of November 2016 and June 2017). No other changes
were made.

Restructuring 5 (June 29, 2021) was to extend Project implementation and revise the schedule
accordingly, due to the deteriorated security and the COVID-19 impact. The closing date was extended by
18 months, from June 30, 2021, to December 31, 2022.

Restructuring 6 (May 13, 2023) involved the following main changes:

(i) Change in Components: the construction of two solar PV plants and two substations was cancelled
because the contractor was unable to perform the task due to the growing insecurity at project sites
(Restructuring Paper, page 6) and the increasing costs (ICR, page 15). Considering the Project’s closure
date, it was too late to start a bidding process to hire another firm.

(ii) Cancellation of financing for the construction of the solar plants and substations led to the reduction of
the total Project cost by US$36 million.

(iii) Relocation of funds was needed to cover cost overruns (in the amount of US$867,666) in the
construction of the Fada thermal plant and in some other categories of expenses.

(iv) Changes in Results Framework: due to the cancellation of the solar PV plants and substations, the PDO
indicator “Generation capacity of renewable energy constructed (MWp)” and the IRIs “Transformers HV
(90/33) installed under the project” and “Implementation of customer management software” were dropped.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



   (v) Change in the closing date for six months, from December 31, 2022 to June 30, 2023.

   Split evaluation. The Project was revised six times, and four of the revisions involved a reduction in the
   Project’s scope, necessitating a split evaluation. This review applies split evaluation twice and assesses
   three projects: Original, Revision 1, and Revision 2. The first split is applied at the third restructuring of June
   2017, when the Project was substantially revised: (i) some of the activities were downsized and some
   scaled up; (ii) new major activities were added; and (iii) the RF was significantly re-designed, with seven out
   of 16 indicators dropped and 15 indicators added (five of them at the PDO level). The RF re-design alone
   calls for a split evaluation: the old RF is no longer relevant for efficacy evaluation. The Revision 1 Project
   combines those changes with a reduction in scope that was applied at the second restructuring of
   November 2016. The second split is applied at the sixth restructuring of May 13, 2023, when the scope of
   the Project was reduced because the major activities added during the third restructuring were cancelled.
   The Revision 2 Project combines this change with a reduction of one target at the fourth restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At Project appraisal, Burkina Faso was characterized by one of the best
development outcomes in West Africa, as measured by the 3.78 Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA) score, maintained since 2010. GDP growth was 6.5 percent in 2012 and 5.8 percent in
2013. The electricity sector was dominated by thermal power, creating energy dependence (on imported
fuel) and leading to high electricity prices. Growing demand required an increased and reliable supply of
electricity at a low cost. The national electrification rate was 14 percent - 40 percent in urban areas and
under 3 percent in rural areas - and increased access, specifically in rural areas, was one of the top
priorities for the Government. Other key priorities included increased generation capacity, reduced energy
dependence, reduced cost, improved tariff and subsidy policy, improved energy efficiency, and increased
availability of RE. However, after 24 years of relative stability, the political and security situation gradually
worsened between 2011 and 2014, culminating in protests that led to the ousting of the country’s president
in October 2014 and the establishment of a transitional government. In September 2015, the country
experienced a military coup-d’état, followed by elections in November 2015. Since the end of 2016, the
security situation has deteriorated, with regular military interventions, terrorist attacks, hijacking of vehicles,
targeted assassinations, and kidnappings. In FY2020-25, Burkina Faso was classified by the World Bank as
a country in a fragile and conflict-affected situation (FCS).

Relevance to Government Strategies during implementation and at closure. The Project was aligned
with the third Axis of the 2016–2020 National Plan for Social and Economic Development (Plan national de
développement économique et social, PNDES), Stimulate the sectors with growth potential for the economy
and employment, Strategic Objective 4 Develop quality and resilient infrastructure, to promote the structural
transformation of the economy and Strategic Objective 5 Reverse the environmental degradation trend and
sustainably ensure the natural and environmental resource management. These objectives included
improved “quality, reliability and accessibility of the infrastructure” and developed “capacities to mitigate and
adapt to the harmful effects of climate change.”

Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at closure. The Project was aligned with the WBG’s
Burkina Faso Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2018-23, specifically with the Focus Area 1

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 26
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



               Accelerate sustainable private-sector led growth for job creation, Objective 1.2 Improve energy access,
               which emphasized the importance of reduced energy dependence, increased electrification, and improved
               affordability of electricity service through introducing solar resources, reinforcing the network to allow for
               integration of intermittent solar power, and promoting IPP projects, among other measures (CPF, page 25).
               Under this Objective, the CPF aims at boosting installed electricity capacity, improving supply reliability for
               both urban and rural areas, and increasing energy efficiency (CPF, page 48). The objectives of the AF2 for
               the Project are emphasized in the CPF as part of its electricity sector strategy.

               Previous sector experience. At appraisal, the Project complemented two previously approved investment
               operations in Burkina Faso: the Power Sector Development Project (P069126, approved in FY2005, closed
               in FY2013), which financed the interconnection between Bobo Dioulasso and Ouagadougou (linking Cote
               d‘Ivoire and Burkina Faso) and demand-side management activities in public buildings; and the Energy
               Access Project (P078091, approved in FY2008, closed in FY2015) which financed grid rehabilitation,
               expansion, and intensification in urban and peri-urban areas, access expansion of electricity services in
               urban, peri-urban, and rural areas. The Project was also aligned with four lending operations under the
               West African Power Pool Program, aimed at strengthening interconnections and facilitating power
               exchange in the region.

               The objectives were pitched at the correct level considering the country’s situation at appraisal. However, in
               the following years, the level of security in the country deteriorated, and in FY2020-25, Burkina Faso was
               classified as an FCS country. The objectives became overambitious considering the FCS context. Based on
               the above and considering the full alignment between the Project objectives and the World Bank country
               strategy at closure in particular, the relevance of the objectives is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1: To increase access to electricity.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD; it was prepared for the ICR (ICR,
                             page 9). It showed causal links from Project activities to outputs and outcomes, and to the PDO outcomes. To
                             achieve the three PDO objectives, the Project supported the following activities: (i) construction of power
                             plants and HV power lines; (ii) grid extension in target areas and connections in target communities; (iii) policy
                             and institutional strengthening and energy efficient equipment installation; and (iv) capacity development of
                             relevant agencies and energy service providers. The expected outcomes of these activities were: (i)
                             conventional power plants, substations, and HV power lines constructed; (ii) target rural localities electrified;
                             (iii) efficient equipment replaced old equipment, solar lamps distributed; (iv) strategic plan adopted, studies

                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



and training completed, offices equipped. The achievement of the intermediate outcomes would ultimately
result in the following PDO outcomes: (i) people provided with new or improved electricity service; (ii) outages
reduced, transmission transfer capacity increased; and (iii) efficiency of electricity use increased. The critical
assumptions were listed; they focused on such important conditions for the achievement of the objectives as
the availability of funding for O&M, enhanced dialogue among the stakeholders, and improved and
modernized policy.

While the ICR’s ToC provided a comprehensive description of the Project’s logic from inputs to PDO
outcomes, listing all important elements of the big picture, the causal links could be improved through a
presentation of the interconnections across the results chains at the intermediate outcome level and from the
intermediate outcomes to specific PDO outcomes. Also, most of the results listed in the column “Intermediate
Outcomes” are stated at the output level (listing products, e.g., “meters installed,” “solar lamps distributed,”
and “sector staff trained”), which would be relevant for the column “Outputs” in the ToC; a re-formulation that
would show how the outputs were to be applied to lead to PDO outcomes (to solve the problem) would be
relevant here. In addition, the issue of results attribution could have been noted in the ToC: the ICR reported
that several development partners (including the AfDB, AFD, and EU) financed activities intended to result in
improved electricity supply reliability and reduced outages, in parallel with the reviewed Project, and the
attribution of such results to specific projects is not certain.

The efficacy under Objective 1, Original Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Distribution lines constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 500 km). The achievement at
closure is unknown because this indicator was later dropped and replaced by the following indicators:
“Distribution lines MV constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 533.6 km), and “Distribution
lines LV constructed under the project (km) (baseline: zero, target: 1,073.8 km)”. At closure, both indicator
targets were exceeded. Therefore, it is logical to conclude that the original indicator was exceeded.

2. Three IRIs measuring new electricity connections – “Number of communities connected to electricity,”
“Number of households connected to electricity under the project,” and “Community electricity connections
under the project (conventional grid)” - were dropped and replaced by the following corporate results
indicators: “New community electricity services under the project” (baseline: zero, target: 1,035 people);
“People provided with access to electricity services under the project by household connections-grid”
(baseline: zero, target: 15,687 people); and “People provided with access to electricity services under the
project by household connections - off-grid” (baseline: zero, target: 1,400 people). The targets for the new
indicators were substantially achieved at the levels of 97 percent, 92 percent, and 84 percent, respectively.
While the achievement of the original indicators’ targets is unknown, it is reasonable to believe that since the
new indicator targets were substantially reached, the original indicators were also substantially reached.

3. “Solar lanterns deployed in public schools (off-grid)” (baseline: zero, target: 25,000 lanterns). The
achievement was 25,000 lanterns. The target was achieved.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Direct Project Beneficiaries (number)” (target: 168,291 people), “Direct Project Beneficiaries, female
(target: 51.7 percent)”. These indicators were later dropped, and the achievement at closure is unknown.


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



2. “People provided with access to electricity under the project by household connection” (baseline: zero,
target: 18,000 people). The achievement at closure is unknown because this indicator was later dropped and
replaced by the corporate results indicators, as described under “Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes” above.
Since the targets for the new indicators were substantially achieved, at the levels of 97 percent, 92 percent,
and 84 percent, it is possible to conclude that the original indicator was substantially achieved.

Rating. The Original Project mostly achieved its intended Objective 1 results, and its efficacy rating is
Substantial, with minor shortcomings. Specifically, the Project substantially achieved one PDO indicator target
(the number of people connected to electricity), but the achievement of the other PDO target (the number of
project beneficiaries) is unknown because the indicator was later dropped. Regarding the IRI targets (on
distribution lines constructed and communities/households connected to electricity), it is possible to conclude
that they were either exceeded or substantially reached.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 1: To increase access to electricity.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The efficacy under Objective 1, Revision 1 Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Distribution lines MV constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 533.6 km). The
achievement at closure was 745.9 km. The target was exceeded.

2. “Distribution lines LV constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 1,073.8 km). The
achievement at closure was 1,083.3 km. The target was exceeded.

3. “Households provided with an electricity connection in rural areas under the project” (baseline: zero, target:
17,087 households). The achievement at closure was 15,643 households. The target was 92 percent
achieved (substantially achieved). The gender specific sub-indicator (female-headed households) was also
92 percent achieved (substantially achieved).

4. “Additional generation capacity under the project (off-grid) (Corporate Results Indicator) (MW)” (baseline:
zero, target: 690 MW). The achievement at closure was 715 MW. The target was exceeded.

5. “New community electricity services under the project (Corporate Results Indicator)” (baseline: zero, target:
1,035 services). The achievement at closure was 1,005 services. The target was 97 percent achieved
(substantially achieved).


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



6. “People provided with access to electricity services under the project by household connections - grid
(Corporate Results Indicator)” (baseline: zero, target: 15,687 people). The achievement at closure was
14,465 people. The target was 92 percent achieved (substantially achieved).

7. “People provided with access to electricity services under the project by household connections - off-grid
(Corporate Results Indicator)” (baseline: zero, target: 1,400 people). The achievement at closure was 1,178
people. The target was 84 percent achieved (substantially achieved).

8. "Solar lanterns deployed in public schools (off-grid) (baseline: zero, target: 25,000 lanterns). The
achievement at closure was 25,000 lanterns. The target was reached.

PDO outcomes:

1. “People provided with new or improved electricity service” (baseline: zero, target: 786,046 people). The
achievement at closure was 566,015 people. The target was 72 percent achieved (partially achieved).

2. “Cumulative increase in transmission transfer capacity in project areas (MW)” (baseline: zero, target: 75.2
MW). The achievement at closure was 75.2 MW; the target was reached.

3. “Availability of transmission lines in the project area (percentage)” (baseline: 95.1 percent, target: 97.6
percent). The achievement was 97.6 percent; the target was reached.

Rating. The Revision 1 Project mostly exceeded, reached, or substantially achieved its intended Objective 1
results (with the exception of one PDO target, which was partially reached), and its efficacy rating is
Substantial, with minor shortcomings. The Project reached its two PDO indicator targets (on transmission
transfer capacity and availability of transmission lines), but only partially achieved the third one (on people
provided with new or improved service). Regarding the IRI targets, three of them were exceeded (on
construction of distribution lines), one reached (solar lanterns’ deployment), and four substantially achieved
(on household electricity connections/services).



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
PDO 1: To increase access to electricity.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The following PDO indicator’s target was reduced:




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



The target for the indicator “People provided with new or improved electricity service (Corporate Results
Indicator)” was reduced from 786,046 people to 466,246 people. The achievement at closure was 566,015
people. The new target was exceeded.

Rating. The Revision 2 Project’s efficacy rating under Objective 1 is Substantial. The Project exceeded,
reached, or substantially reached all its intended results. The ICR also shows that the outcome indicators
were largely, but not necessarily fully, achieved (ICR, Table 5, page 17).



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To improve the reliability of electricity supply.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1.

The efficacy under Objective 2, Original Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

There were no output/intermediate outcome indicators under Objective 2, Original Project.

PDO outcomes:

1. "Generation Capacity of Conventional Generation constructed under the project: Fada plant (MW)"
(baseline: zero, target: 7.5 MW). The achievement at closure was 7.5 MW. The target was reached.

2. "Generation Capacity of Conventional Generation constructed under the project: Ouahigouya plant (MW)”
(baseline: zero, target: 7.5 MW). The activity was later dropped, and the target was not achieved.

3. “Peak demand met in each city when standing alone (islanding): Fada (percentage)” (baseline: 15.4
percent, target: 79.6 percent). The indicator was later dropped, and the achievement at closure is unknown.

4. “Peak demand met in each city when standing alone (islanding): Ouahigouya (percentage)” (baseline: 33.5
percent, target: 77.8 percent). The activity was later dropped, and the target was (hence) not achieved.

Rating. The Original Project partially achieved its intended Objective 2 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. One of the four PDO targets was reached (construction of the Fada generation plant); another one
was not achieved (construction of the Ouahigouya generation plant); and the remaining two indicators (on
peak demand) were later dropped, and their target achievement is unknown.




                                                                                                Page 11 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 2: To improve the reliability of electricity supply.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The efficacy under Objective 2, Revision 1 Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Transmission lines HV constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 222km). The
achievement at closure was 213 km. The target was 96 percent achieved (substantially achieved).

2. “Transformers HVa (90/33) installed under the project (number)” (baseline: zero, target: 6 transformers).
The activity was later dropped due to the cancellation of the related activity (Restructuring Paper of May 13,
2023, page 10), and the target was (hence) not achieved.

PDO outcomes:

1. "Generation Capacity of Conventional Generation constructed under the project: Fada plant (MW)"
(baseline: zero, target: 7.5 MW). The achievement at closure was 7.5 MW. The target was reached.

2. “Generation Capacity of renewable energy constructed (MWp)” (baseline: zero, target: 30 MWp). The
activity was later dropped, and the target was therefore not achieved.

3. “Power outages per year in substations constructed by the project (number)” (baseline: 129 outages,
target: 2 outages). The achievement at closure was 2 outages. The target was achieved.

Rating. The Revision 1 Project partially achieved its intended Objective 2 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. Two of the three PDO targets were reached, while the third one (an important target, measuring the
construction of the solar PV plant) was not achieved. Similarly, one of the two IRIs was substantially reached,
while one (also related to the solar PV plant activity) was not achieved.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
PDO 2: To improve the reliability of electricity supply.


                                                                                                 Page 12 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The efficacy under Objective 2, Revision 2 Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Transmission lines HV constructed under the project (km)” (baseline: zero, target: 222km). The
achievement at closure was 213 km. The target was 96 percent achieved (very nearly achieved).

PDO outcomes:

1. "Generation Capacity of Conventional Generation constructed under the project: Fada plant (MW)"
(baseline: zero, target: 7.5 MW). The achievement at closure was 7.5 MW. The target was reached.

2. “Power outages per year in substations constructed by the project (number)” (baseline: 129 outages,
target: 2 outages). The achievement at closure was 2 outages. The target was achieved.

Rating. The Revision 2 Project mostly achieved its intended Objective 2 results, and its efficacy rating is
High. Two PDO targets were reached, while the IRI was very nearly reached.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3: To improve efficient use of energy in targeted areas.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1.

The efficacy under Objective 3, Original Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Number of households retrofitted with energy efficient equipment” (baseline: zero, target: 3,000
households). The indicator was later dropped, and the achievement of the target is unknown.

2. “Number of public sector energy staff (including DGE, FDE and SONABEL’s) and energy service providers
trained on key thematic areas” (baseline: zero, target: 167 staff). The achievement at closure was 378 staff.
The target was exceeded.




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



3. “Feasibility studies for Bon, Bontioli, and Folonzon, Gongourou dams are available (Yes/No)” (baseline:
zero, target: four studies). The achievement at closure was three studies. The target was 75 percent
achieved.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Total capacity (kW) of installed equipment replaced by more efficient equipment” (baseline: zero, target:
2,250 kW). The achievement at closure was 574.4 kW. The target was 26 percent achieved (barely
achieved).

Rating. The Original Project partially achieved its intended Objective 3 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. The Project barely achieved its PDO outcome (on the capacity of energy efficient equipment
installed), and the achievement of its outcome level IRI target (on households retrofitted with energy efficient
equipment) is unknown. The two output/input-level IRI targets (on number of staff trained and on the
availability of the feasibility studies) were exceeded and partially achieved, respectively.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 3: To improve efficient use of energy in targeted areas.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The efficacy under Objective 3, Revision 1 Project, was assessed using the following indicators:

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Implementation of the customer management software (Yes/No)”. The activity was later dropped due to
the cancellation of the related activity (Restructuring Paper of May 13, 2023, page 10), and the target was not
achieved.

2. “Number of households retrofitted with energy efficient equipment” (baseline: zero, target: 3,000
households). The indicator was later dropped, and the achievement of the target is unknown.

3. “Number of public sector energy staff (including DGE, FDE and SONABEL’s) and energy service providers
trained on key thematic areas” (baseline: zero, revised target: 400 staff). The achievement at closure was 378
staff. The target was 95 percent achieved (substantially achieved).

4. “Feasibility studies for Bon, Bontioli, and Folonzon, Gongourou dams are available (Yes/No)” (baseline:
zero, revised target: three studies). The achievement at closure was three studies. The target was reached.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



5. “Agreement between the Government and SONABEL on selected binding operation performance
indicators (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

6. “Elaboration of fuel audit and action plan (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

7. “Recruitment of transaction advisory firm with requisite legal, financial, economic, and technical expertise to
support the Government on assessment and negotiation of energy IPPs (Yes/No)”. The target was reached.

8. “Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey completed, published (Yes/No)”. The target was not reached.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Total capacity (kW) of installed equipment replaced by more efficient equipment” (baseline: zero, the
target was revised from 2,250 kW to 574.4 kW). The achievement at closure was 574.4 kW. The target was
reached.

Rating. The Revision 1 Project partially achieved its intended Objective 3 results, and its efficacy rating is
Modest. There were three outcome level results indicators, and while the target for one of them - the PDO
indicator on the capacity of energy efficient equipment installed - was reached (after it was scaled down 3.9
times), the target for another one – an intermediate outcome level IRI target, on implementation of customer
management software - was not reached, while the third indicator – on the number of households retrofitted
with energy efficient equipment – was dropped, and the target achievement is unknown. Four out of five
remaining IRIs were input-based (i.e., a firm was recruited, a beneficiary survey was completed, feasibility
studies are available, and an agreement with SONABEL on performance indicators was reached), and one
was output-based (number of staff trained); all of them were non-quantitative. Most of the Yes/No targets for
the input- and output-level indicators were reached.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
PDO 3: To improve efficient use of energy in targeted areas.

Revised Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1, Original Project.

The following IRI was dropped: “Number of households retrofitted with energy efficient equipment”. No
other changes to the RF were made.

Rating. Even though the project substantially achieved the targets, the outcome indicator was limited to the
capacity of equipment replaced, and the key indicator on use i.e. the households retrofitted with energy
efficient equipment was dropped. The Revision 1 Project partially achieved its intended Objective 3 results,
and its efficacy rating is Modest.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 26
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original Project:

                            For the Original Project, the rating for efficacy is Modest. While the results on access to electricity (Objective
                            1) were mostly achieved, those on the reliability of the electricity supply (Objective 2) and the efficient use of
                            electricity (Objective 3) were partially achieved. Importantly, under Objective 2, the intended PDO target to
                            construct the Ouahigouya generation plant was not achieved (the task was cancelled); and under Objective 3,
                            the PDO outcome on the capacity of energy efficient equipment installed was only 26 percent reached.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            For the Revision 1 Project, the rating for efficacy is Modest. While the results on access to electricity
                            (Objective 1) were mostly exceeded, reached, or substantially achieved, the results on the reliability of the
                            electricity supply (Objective 2) and the efficient use of electricity (Objective 3) were partially achieved. An
                            important PDO target under Objective 2 – the construction of the solar PV plant – was not achieved because
                            the task was terminated; and under Objective 3, one of the three outcome targets was not achieved (on the
                            implementation of customer management software), while another one was dropped, and its achievement at
                            closure is unknown.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            For the Revision 2 Project, the rating for efficacy is Substantial. The Project exceeded, reached, or
                            substantially reached all its intended results under Objectives 1 and 2, and partially reached the Objective 3
                            results.




                                                                                                                               Page 16 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
a. Economic Analysis:

At appraisal (PAD, pages 19-21). The economic analysis was conducted separately for Component 1 and
Component 2. For Component 1, Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was estimated at 16.3 percent, and
the NPV at US$8.0 million. A 10 percent discount rate was used. The switching value (the EIRR equaling the
discount rate) would be reached with a 28 percent reduction in benefits. The benefits were estimated as the
value for electricity users of increased reliability of supply (measured by the probability of load shedding and of
the cost of unserved energy) and of energy security. The cost consisted of the Project cost, contingencies, and
operating costs (fuel and O&M) through the life of the generation plants to be constructed. For Component 2, the
EIRR was estimated at 13.5 percent, and the NPV of US$10.2 million. A 10 percent discount rate was used. The
switching value would be reached assuming a 42% increase in bulk supply costs. The benefits were estimated
based on the willingness to pay (WTP) of rural electricity users. The costs included all investment costs (of the
transmission and distribution networks, wiring in buildings, and metering), and operating costs (mainly O&M and
the bulk purchase of electricity at currently applied tariffs). The EIRR was not calculated for Components 3 and
4. The combined EIRR for Components 1 and 2 was 14.4 percent, and the NPV was US$18.2 million (ICR, page
64).

Since the EIRRs for Components 1 and 2, as well as the combined estimate, were above the opportunity cost of
capital (discount rate), the Project was economically efficient.

At closure (ICR, pages 63-67). The economic analysis at closure estimated the EIRR for the Project at 15.8
percent and the NPV at US$67.6 million. When GHG emission reductions were included, the EIRR increased to
the range from 17.3 percent to 18.7 percent, and the NPV from US$75.5 to US$83.3 million, depending on the
level of the shadow price of carbon used. The analysis was applied to the completed activities, as appropriate,
and used a similar approach to the appraisal-level one, with the following modifications: (i) instead of the WTP-
based estimates, the cost of diesel self-generation was used; (ii) a (lower) discount rate of two percent was
applied, as per the 2016 World Bank guidelines; (iii) the analysis included the benefits form GHG emission
reduction, as per the World Bank guidelines of 2017.

Since the project's EIRRs were above the opportunity cost of capital (discount rate), it was economically
efficient.

b. Administrative Efficiency:

The Project was significantly delayed and closed 57 months (four years and nine months) beyond the originally
planned date; and while several activities were added (funded by the AFs), other activities were scaled down.
The reasons for the delays and the scale-down were both external and internal. The external factors included
the FCS context during the last four years of Project implementation (including two military coups in 2022, when
the OP 7.30 was triggered and all pending payments were paused); the political events in 2014-15, which led to
the repeated disruptive changes among senior government officials, and the DGE, FDE, SONABEL, and PIU;
and COVID-19. The internal factors included weaknesses in handling environmental and social safeguards and

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



fiduciary aspects of Project implementation by the PIU, exacerbated by the incomplete funding of the PIU by the
counterpart. This led to weak Project coordination and leadership needed to address the implementation
bottlenecks. (ICR, page 22)

The Project experienced some cost overruns; the most significant one related to the construction of the Fada
generation plant, where the cost estimate at appraisal was US$7.5, while the updated estimate at the second
restructuring was US$17.0 million. Also, as the ICR pointed out, the Project was unable to use the financing in
full: the disbursement at closure constituted 72 percent of the approved funding, mainly due to the cancellation
of the solar PV plants’ construction late in the Project’s implementation (ICR, page 19).

On balance, considering the economic viability of the Project, but also taking into account the delayed
implementation, the cost overruns, and the incomplete disbursement of the approved funding, Project’s
efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     77.50
 Appraisal                                                 14.40
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     84.40
 ICR Estimate                                              15.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                              Original Project:   Revision 1 Project:       Revision 2 Project:
Relevance of objectives       High
Efficacy                      Modest              Modest                    Substantial
Efficiency                    Modest
                              Moderately
Outcome                                           Moderately Unsatisfactory Moderately Satisfactory
                              Unsatisfactory
Outcome value                 3                   3                         4
Amount disbursed, US$ million 22.05               89.55                     6.07
Disbursement percentage       18.74%              76.10%                    5.16%
Weight value                  0.56                2.28                      0.21
Total weight                  3.05
Overall outcome rating        Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




Based on the shares of the disbursed funds before the third restructuring of June 2017 (US$22.05 or 18.74
percent); between the third and the sixth (of May 2023) restructurings (US$89.55 million or 76.10 percent), and
after the sixth restructuring (US$6.07 or 5.16 percent), the overall Project outcome rating is Moderately
Unsatisfactory* (0.1874 * 3 + 0.761 * 3 + 0.0516 * 4 = 3.05).

* Based on a six-point scale, where: 1 = Highly Unsatisfactory, 2 = Unsatisfactory, 3 = Moderately
Unsatisfactory, 4 = Moderately Satisfactory, 5 = Satisfactory, and 6 = Highly Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political. The volatility of the political situation has negatively affected the Project and, if the security in the
Project areas does not improve, the sustainability of the outcomes might suffer due to a reduced access to
the created physical assets, which require O&M for proper functioning.

Government and key stakeholder ownership. Following the third restructuring in June 2017, the Project
was reoriented towards supporting energy sector transformation through financing RE investments.
Sustainability of the outcomes in this area depends on the Government potentially shifting “its focus towards
adopting a dialogue among key stakeholders and their potential agreement on a consensual agenda for
energy sector modernization and diversification, including a major role for renewable energy and the private
sector” (ICR, page 28). However, this dialogue needs to be developed and actively coordinated, while at
Project closure, there was no clear leadership to support this process.

Financial. Considering fiscal constraints, funding the O&M for the assets built by the Project might be
problematic. In this case, it would be necessary to find an alternative source of financing, such as from
development institutions.

Institutional. Limited capacity of the government institutions involved in Project implementation was one of
the factors of the Project’s low administrative efficiency up to the Project’s closure. Going forward, the
sustainability of the Project’s outcomes depends on enhanced institutional capacity of relevant government
agencies and continued efforts to support it.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
   The Project’s design reflected core sector needs, outlined in the Government and World Bank strategies,
   and was based on lessons from the previous WB projects in the country, focusing the Project on

                                                                                                          Page 19 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



  improved reliability of electricity supply, increased access, and enhanced energy efficiency. The design
  rightly included technical assistance, in addition to investments in physical assets. The ICR reported that
  Project implementation and M&E arrangements were well thought through and logical (ICR, page 27).

  However, the Project's implementation readiness was insufficient. Specifically, the PIU was not prepared
  to efficiently and effectively support the implementation, and the related risks were not mitigated at
  design, manifesting themselves during implementation. Specifically, the PIU was inadequately staffed (in
  terms of both the headcount and expertise) and did not have the required level of knowledge about the
  safeguards and fiduciary management. Also, PIU funding was not secured: the counterpart was
  responsible for the full financing of the PIU, but considering the existing fiscal issues, there should have
  been a back-up arrangement. The ICR pointed out that there was insufficient clarity regarding tax
  exemptions for the firms selected to execute project activities (ICR, page 27).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reported that the Bank team provided frequent and comprehensive implementation support, with
 regular meetings and missions. A total of 10 Aide Memoires were filed on the basis of implementation
 support missions, and 17 ISRs were filed. The World Bank team supported the PIU during implementation
 in many ways, including helping to process the AF restructurings, and supporting the Borrower and the PIU
 during the periods of heightened insecurity. (ICR, page 27) During the first years of implementation, the FM
 management was strong, relying on an experienced financial team. The World Bank team restructured the
 Project six times (this included two AFs), with the effort to adapt to the changing circumstances and
 improve implementation and reporting (including through a re-design of the RF).

 At the same time, there were multiple implementation deficiencies (as pointed out in section 5.b of this
 review), as follows. The Project was considerably delayed (by 57 months in total); experienced cost
 overruns (most significantly, in the Fada plant construction); and had to cancel important activities,
 including the construction of the Ouhigouya plant and of the solar PV plant. While some of the factors of
 these shortcomings were outside of Project control, including the deteriorated security situation and
 COVID-19, other factors were internal and included: (i) weaknesses in handling environmental and social
 safeguards and fiduciary aspects of Project implementation by the PIU, leading to the suspension of the
 rural electrification activities by 11 months (ICR, pages 19, 22, 25, 26, 28, 30); (ii) issues with recalling
 advance payments, leading to a litigation between the suppliers and the Government (ICR, pages 26, 30);
 and (iii) the insufficient clarity regarding tax exemptions, leading to delays, including the suspension of the
 Fada plant construction until the applicable fiscal regime was clarified (ICR, pages 27, 29-30). At the end,
 the Project was unable to use the approved financing in full: the disbursement at closure constituted 72
 percent of the approved funding (ICR, page 19). In addition, all Aide Memoires prepared for 2019–2023
 were delayed (ICR, page 27).



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD, was sufficiently linked to the PDO and the
 ToC, and was comprehensive yet manageable. The PDO outcome indicators reflected all expected Project
 outcomes. The intermediate indicators were linked to the PDO indicators, providing more details. The
 indicators measured both objective results and beneficiary satisfaction with different aspects of the Project.
 All of the RF indicators were quantitative, time-bound, and attributable to the Project.

 The ICR reported that the quality of the RF indicators was adequate, however, as mentioned in the
 discussion of the ToC in section 4 of this review, there was the following issue with results’ attribution in the
 Objective 2 PDO indicator measuring power outages: several partners, including the AfDB, AFD, and EU,
 contributed to the same objectives of electricity sector development as the reviewed Project, and in case of
 utility-level indicators (such as power outages), the attribution should be to several projects. The indicator
 of power outages could have been supplemented by the indicator(s) measuring voltage stability and/or
 frequency of interruptions, thus adding new outcome level indicators of supply reliability to the RF, although
 the attribution issues would apply to these indicators too. In addition, the RF measurement of the
 achievement of Objective 3 (improved efficiency of energy usage) could have been improved: the only
 outcome indicator both at approval and at closure was “Total capacity (kW) of installed equipment replaced
 by more efficient equipment”, and it could have been specified better through presenting details on what
 types of equipment was installed.

 The M&E implementing arrangements were appropriate. The M&E system was supported by SONABEL,
 ABER (Burkina Faso Agency for Rural Electrification (Agence Burkinabè de l’Electrification Rurale), and the
 PIU, who were responsible for carrying out the M&E activities for the components under their respective
 oversight. The PIU was responsible for presenting the required reports on implementation progress, to be
 validated by the Steering Committee. The DGE was responsible for leading, in a participatory manner, the
 process of developing an M&E Manual. The M&E system included an impact evaluation (randomized
 controlled trial) to measure the impact of NET and a process evaluation on GBV that included qualitative
 and quantitative data analysis. (ICR, page 23)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that during implementation, the effectiveness of the M&E system improved. When the
  DGE was split into three entities in 2016, implementation responsibility, including M&E reporting, was
  transferred to a new cross-cutting PIU. This increased the autonomy of the Project, as the activities were
  distributed among the different entities according to their specific areas of responsibility, and the
  effectiveness of the Project implementation was enhanced. The M&E system was also strengthened with
  three focal points for monitoring activities and reporting to a single entity, and three representatives of the
  different departments at the steering committee. (ICR, page 23)


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



  The Project went through a re-design of the RF at the third restructuring of June 2017. Three other
  restructurings also involved RF modifications. While the modifications improved the RF and adjusted it
  considering the new activities (introduced with the AFs) and new WB corporate indicators, they also
  made the ability of the RF to track results throughout Project implementation very limited. (ICR, page 23)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the M&E was instrumental to adapting the Project to a changing environment. The
  M&E data was critical to convey implementation progress in ISRs and Aide Memoires. (ICR, page 24)

  Based on the above, the M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category B (Partial Assessment), and the following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental and
   Social Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The following environmental and social safeguard instruments were prepared
   before appraisal: (i) in relation to the electricity infrastructure needed to connect new communities: the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
   and (ii) in relation to the construction of the Fada power station, the Environmental and Social Impact
   Assessment (ESIA). These documents were updated for the AF1 and AF2. (ICR, page 24)

   During implementation, there were delays with the preparation of the safeguards instruments by SONABEL,
   due to the insufficient capacity and a failure to recruit experts on time. In 2019, the Project experienced an
   11-month suspension of Component 2 activities due to the noncompliance with environmental and social
   safeguard requirements in specific rural electrification location. The suspension was lifted once the
   safeguards instruments (the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and the Resettlement Action Plan
   (RAP)) for the relevant locations were finalized and approved by the World Bank. It is worth noting that the
   PIU did not flag the breach of starting civil works prior to the finalization of the safeguards instruments. In
   addition, 11 ESIAs and three RAPs were only approved by the Bank and released in April and July 2021.
   Following the October 2021 implementation support mission, all remaining environmental and social
   safeguards documents were approved and disclosed. (ICR, page 24-25) By Project closing, the overall
   environmental and social compliance was rated Moderately Satisfactory.

   There was an accident at a power line construction site on March 12, 2022, resulting in a leg amputation.
   The affected person was a subcontractor. An action plan with corrective measures was prepared by the PIU
   and approved by the World Bank. Financial compensation to the victim was issued, in agreement with the
   victim and his family. (ICR, page 25) At IEG’s request, the team clarified that the action plan specified
   several preventive measures on construction sites, including the following: skills verification, provision of

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



  detailed safety instructions, preparation of the site (clearing obstacles and installing signs), and
  maintenance of handling equipment. Responsibilities for monitoring the implementation of the action plan
  were assigned.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  b.          Fiduciary Compliance

  Financial management (FM). The ICR reported that during the first years of implementation, the FM
  management was strong, relying on an experienced financial team, and achieved: (i) the certification of
  Project accounts without reservations; (ii) a sufficient disbursement rate; and (iii) regular transmission of
  Financial Monitoring Reports. However, there were some issues, including missing supporting documents
  for specific expenses, resulting in a Moderately Satisfactory rating for FM. The rating was upgraded to
  Satisfactory, following the timely submission of audited financial statements and regular financial reports,
  and it was Satisfactory at Project closing. The final audit report was unmodified (the auditor’s final opinion
  was unqualified). The cash balance in the Designated Account was refunded to IDA. All the liabilities were
  paid according to the final audit report. However, at Project closure, the advances to suppliers that were
  expected to be returned due to the non-completion of the work (approximately US$4.452 million) were
  pending recovery. This situation led to litigation between the suppliers and the Government, underscoring
  the importance for the Government to request reliable warranties before making any advances. (ICR,
  pages 25-26) At IEG’s request, the team clarified that at the time of the preparation of this review, the
  advances have been in large part reimbursed, while some of the non-completed civil works (in rural
  electrification) was being carried out; however, the amount of CFA 982,442,150 (approximately US$1.67
  million) was still subject of litigation.

   Procurement. The ICR reported that The Bank’s procurement team conducted regular support missions.
  The FSRDC team included a Procurement Specialist at the national level and Procurement Officers in
  each of the four provinces. Procurement arrangements set forth in the Project’s legal agreement were
  functional throughout the Project, and the Project was in compliance with the procurement rules. (ICR,
  page 26)

  However, there were significant delays in procurement, as well as contract cancellations. The main factors
  were as follows: (i) the country’s security context; (ii) insufficient stuffing in the implementing agencies; and
  (iii) cost disputes with the recruited companies. The latter concerned the construction of the solar PV plants
  and four contracts pertaining to rural electrification activities. Regarding the solar plants, the recruited
  contractor terminated the contract on April 21, 2022, because of the disagreement on costs with the
  Borrower. The advance payment that had been made could not be recalled, and the matter was being
  litigated at the time of the ICR completion. The rural electrification activities were cancelled due to low
  performance and security concerns. The Project’s procurement rating was Moderately Satisfactory
  throughout implementation. (ICR, page 26)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---

                                                                                                     Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately            Moderately                  Shortcomings in quality of
Bank Performance
                                 Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              supervision
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 28-29):

1. In the FCS context, over-ambitious projects have limited chances to fully reach the
intended outcomes, and the best approach might be re-focusing them on simplified,
achievable objectives early-on. The reviewed Project was already ambitious at approval, as it
simultaneously aimed at: (i) improved energy reliability, (ii) increased energy access, and (iii)
enhanced energy efficiency (at approval); while also launching complex and innovative rural
electrification activities (installation of hybrid mini-grids and Solar Home Systems (SHS), a new
activity under AF1). Its ambition increased with the new activities added at the third restructuring of
November 2016: construction of two solar PV power plants; support to the Ministry of Energy in the
negotiations of the independent power producer (IPPs)/public-private participation (PPP) projects;
and facilitating solar PV integration into the network. During 2014-2020, the security situation in
Burkina Faso was deteriorating, and in FY2020-25 it was classified as an FCS country; as such, the
Project’s aspirations were now out of reach. The Bank team could have considered scaling down the
Project’s objectives much earlier, when the security situation started to deteriorate, to avoid a
situation when critical targets are not reached.

2. Project implementation significantly depends on the effectiveness of the PIU, and
strengthening the implementation structures and human resources, as well as securing
reliable PIU financing, is critical to avoid delays and inefficiencies. In the reviewed Project, the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staffing and financing issues were a significant factor in
implementation delays; and the PIU’s weakness in relation to the safeguards and fiduciary
management, exacerbated by the insufficient funding of the PIU by the counterpart, led to weak
project management, delays, and, ultimately, missed intended targets. Better considerations of the
institutional anchoring of the Project and of the reliability of PIU funding at the time of Project
preparation would have been a good mitigation strategy.

3. In the FCS context, fiduciary issues require heightened attention, including in relation to
the contract payment terms. In the reviewed Project, procurement and financial management (FM)

                                                                                                     Page 24 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)



were challenging throughout Project implementation, especially when the OP 7.30 was triggered by
military coups and all pending payments and processing of withdrawal applications were paused.
Settling procurement and FM issues contributed to implementation delays; and the problem with the
non-reimbursed advances made to contractors often could not be resolved.

4. Capacity building to support the safeguards’ compliance, provided prior to the start of
Project implementation, can be a critical measure mitigating implementation delays and
ensuring that the resources needed for the compensation of persons affected by the project
are available on time. The reviewed Project experienced an 11-month suspension in 2019 due to a
noncompliance with environmental and social safeguard requirements: the preparation of
safeguards instruments was delayed, and the works for rural electrification under Component 2 had
to be suspended until the safeguards instruments (Environmental Management Plan
(EMP)/Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)) were prepared and approved by the World Bank. Moreover,
the PIU did not flag the breach caused by the start of the works in location for which safeguards
instruments were not finalized.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided sufficient technical details to understand the value-added of the Project, the context of
Project implementation, the factors of Project performance, main outcomes, and various aspects of Project
implementation, including operational efficiency, M&E quality, and safeguard and fiduciary compliance. It
delivered a good quality efficiency analysis (Annex 4). The ICR had internal consistency, and suggested
lessons that are useful for future lending operations in FCS countries.

The split analysis could have been strengthened by also assessing the results against the original project,
rather than just starting from the third restructuring of June 2017. As a result, two cases of the Project’s
significant scale-down were overlooked: (i) the cancellation of the Ouhigouya plant construction in November
2016, affecting the achievement of the Reliability Objective; and (ii) the scale-down (by 3.9 times) of the target
for the PDO indicator “capacity of equipment replaced by more efficient equipment” in June 2017, affecting the
achievement of the Efficiency Use of Energy Objective.

On balance, considering the wealth of information the ICR provides, the rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 25 of 26
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BF-Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)




                                                                               Page 26 of 26
