     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024188

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P147438                                  MN Export Development Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mongolia                                 Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58790                                30-Jun-2021                                         14,242,234.42

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jul-2016                              31-Dec-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           20,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            15,147,071.94                                             0.00

 Actual                                        14,483,008.89                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero          Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (page 8) and the Financing Agreement (page 5), the project
   development objective of the Mongolia Export Development Project was "to support Mongolian small and
   medium size firms (SMEs) in the non-mining sectors to strengthen their export capabilities and expand access
   to export markets."




                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



   According to the Second Restructuring Paper (page 1), the revised project development objective was "to
   support Mongolian small and medium size firms (SMEs) in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export
   capabilities, expand access to export markets and to provide relief support for the COVID-19 recovery."

   This ICR Review will evaluate this project using the following objectives:

   1. To support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.
   2. To support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export markets.
   3. To provide relief support [to SMEs in the non-mining sector] for the COVID-19 recovery.

   A split evaluation will be conducted because some indicators and outcome targets were revised during the
   second restructuring.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The final project design had four components (after three restructurings).

   Development of a New Line of Export Finance Products (US$10.74 million estimated at appraisal,
   including US$0.74 million in Government contribution, US$1.5 million estimated at restructuring, US$0.6
   million disbursed by closing) supported knowledge transfer and capacity building at the Agriculture
   Reinsurance Joint Stock Export Insurance Subsidiary (Ag Re) -- reorganized as the Mongolian National
   Reinsurance Joint Stock Company (Mongolian Re) -- for the development of export credit insurance
   and other trade finance products. A sub-component to establish an Export Insurance Subsidiary at Ag Re to
   operate an Export Insurance Facility and provide trade finance and consulting services -- with the project
   injecting US$9 million, and the Government, US$740,00, as the equity into the new SOE -- was cancelled at
   the second restructuring. Instead, export credit insurance would be provided to SME exporters by private
   insurance companies, which would be reinsured by Mongolian Re.

   Export Competitiveness and Market Access Enhancement (originally Export Competitiveness
   Enhancement, before restructuring) (US$8.5 million estimated at appraisal, US$12 million estimated at
   restructuring, US$8.9 million disbursed by closing) supported: (a) trade and export policy enhancement
   (originally training and research on foreign trade); (b) international market competitiveness enhancement
   (added at the second restructuring); (c) a Productive Partnership Scheme to provide financial support to
   interconnected SMEs organized in clusters around a business line or in a geographic area; and (d) a
   COVID response measure (added at the second restructuring) to support SMEs (which had experienced
   revenue downfalls exceeding 50 percent in April-May 2020) to preserve jobs. A sub-component creating a
   Matching Grants Facility to support the implementation of SME export development plans (quality testing
   and certification, product adaptation, export fairs, national and international marketing tours, business

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN Export Development Project (P147438)



  strategy and planning, and production management) -- to be funded by this project at US$6 million -- was
  dropped at the second restructuring in favor of the Productive Partnership Scheme, with the same US$6
  million allocation.

  Strengthening Certification Services and Quality Management (added at the second restructuring
  (US$4 million estimated at restructuring, US$3.2 million disbursed by closing) supported upgrades to the
  quality of international certification services to help exporters meet international product quality standards.

  Project Implementation Support (US$1.54 million estimated at appraisal, US$2.5 million estimated at
  restructuring, US$1.6 million disbursed by closing) supported the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which
  was responsible for ensuring compliance with World Bank procurement and financial management
  guidelines, and for project monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The project was estimated to cost SDR 14.3 million (US$20 million equivalent) at appraisal.
  The project cost was reduced to US$15.1 million at the third restructuring.

  Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit to Mongolia
  of SDR 14.3 million (US$20 million). The IDA cancelled US$4.9 million of the credit at the
  third restructuring. The final disbursed amount was US$14.5 million.

  Borrower Contribution. The borrower was to contribute US$780,000 to the project -- US$740,000
  as equity investment in the proposed Export Insurance Subsidiary at Ag Re, and US$40,000 as counterpart
  for Project Implementation Support. The creation of the Export Insurance Subsidiary was dropped, however
  (see Section 2.D). Meanwhile, no accounting was made in the ICR of the borrower contribution for Project
  Implementation Support.

  Dates. The project was approved on July 7, 2016, became effective on December 22, 2016, was
  restructured on December 19, 2019, on August 28, 2020, and on December 28, 2023, and closed on
  December 31, 2023, two-and-a-half years after the original closing date of June 30, 2021.

  Restructuring. All three project restructurings were Level-2 restructurings.

        The first restructuring, in December 2019, with US$2.52 million disbursed (17.4 percent of the final
         project cost): (a) changed the project implementing agency from the Ministry of Finance to the
         Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light Industry (MOFALI), following the issuance of Government
         Resolution No. 87 in April 2019 placing all government SME projects under the consolidated
         oversight of the MOFALI; (b) changed the definition of SMEs (i.e., categories of SMEs and their
         turnover and balance sheet thresholds) from that used in Mongolia
         ("Law on Small and Medium Enterprises") to that used in the European Union ("European
         Commission Recommendation of 6 May 2003 Concerning the Definition of Micro, Small, and
         Medium-Sized Enterprises"); (c) recognized the institutional restructuring (including the expansion of
         powers) of the Ag Re), the implementing agency for the first project component, into Mongolian Re,
         following the issuance of Government Resolution No. 303 in October 2018; and (d) revised the
         project financial management, disbursement, and procurement arrangements.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



        The second restructuring, in August 2020, with US$2.52 million disbursed (17.4 percent of the final
         project cost): (a) changed the project development objective to support the Government’s response
         to the COVID-19 pandemic (see Section 2.A); (b) changed the results framework -- revised the four
         original outcome indicators (PDO-level) and their targets and added two new outcome indicators
         (see Section 4); (c) revised the first project component -- the option for Mongolian Re to transfer all
         or part of its financial risks to an international reinsurer would be explored; (d) revised the second
         project component, including by substituting a Productive Partnership Scheme for a Matching Grants
         Facility; (e) added a new project component -- Strengthening Certification Services and Quality
         Management -- with an allocation of US$4 million to help SMEs comply with international product
         quality standards (see Section 2.D); and (f) extended the project closing date by two-and-a-half
         years.
        The third restructuring, in December 2023, with US$13.64 million disbursed (94.2 percent of the final
         project cost), cancelled US$4.9 million of the project funds, reducing the IDA credit from US$20
         million to US$15.1 million




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraints to Development. The project objectives would address binding constraints to
Mongolia's aspiration for a diversified economy and sustainable economic growth. The Mongolia:
Systematic Country Diagnostic (World Bank, 2018) asserted that "Mongolia has experienced undeniable
progress, but it has done it through growing instability and hence in an unsustainable manner because
it has generated few "genuine savings" to diversify the future of the economy and has yet to create
“intangible capital” to manage the volatility of a mineral commodity-based economy."

      Mongolia, which had almost tripled its GDP in the recent decade from US$4.2 billion in 2007 to
       US$11.2 billion by 2016, was heavily reliant on large-scale mining, which accounted for 25 percent
       of GDP (potentially 30 percent of GDP when the Oyu Tolgoi copper-gold-silver mine reached full
       production), 73 percent of foreign direct investment, and 90 percent of exports. But mining: (a)
       rendered the economy susceptible to commodity price swings (a sharp 38 percent fall in global
       commodity prices caused an economic downturn in 2014-16) and boom-and-bust cycles (there were
       three recessions and six International Monetary Fund (IMF) programs in two-and-a-half decades);
       (b) increased the pollution of air, water, and pasturelands, which, if not reversed or contained,
       would hinder growth and wellbeing in the long run; and (c) contributed little to jobs -- employed only
       4 percent of the labor force of 1.3 million in 2016.
      A large part of the economy was also highly linked to foreign trade, with exports rising more than
       twofold from US$1.9 billion in 2007 to US$4.9 billion in 2016 and imports from US$ 2.2 billion to
       US$3.3 billion. Total trade (exports plus imports) constituted 86 percent of GDP and net exports
       (exports minus imports) contributed 1.3 percentage points to GDP growth of 1.5 percent in 2016. But
       like the overall economy, exports were undiversified, heavily concentrated in mining, and focused on
       a single market -- Mongolia sent 79 percent of all goods exports to China in 2016.
      SMEs in the non-mining sectors -- agriculture, manufacturing, and tourism -- offered opportunities to
       diversify the economy and exports. SMEs comprised 98 percent of all registered business entities
       and employed half of the total workforce. But SMEs in Mongolia (a) often lacked the capacity and

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MN Export Development Project (P147438)



                                        the skills to expand their business; (b) were underserved by the financial system and struggled with
                                        stringent bank loan collateral requirements, short-term loan maturities, and a dearth of suitable
                                        financial products; and (c) obtained little support for business development services, let alone for
                                        export development.

               Country Development Priorities. The project objectives were consistent with the country's development
               priorities. Vision 2050 - Long Term Development Policy of Mongolia (State Great Khural, 2020) espoused
               the principles of "sustainable economic growth beneficial to all. Specifically, the Government development
               plan aimed to "create an export-oriented economy" (Objective 4.2), "develop a multi-pillar and inclusive
               financial system" (Objective 4.3), "join the economic and trade integration in the region and facilitate trade"
               (Objective 4.4), and "develop internationally competitive micro, small and medium enterprises and increase
               employment" (Objective 4.5). Adopted earlier in 2013, the Export Promotion Program aimed to expand the
               Government-supported export finance and non-financial services to exporters -- export credit, insurance,
               guarantees, foreign market research, compliance with technical standards, and economic diplomacy and
               product promotion. Approved in 2018, the Mongolian Export Program aimed to "create a stable environment
               for export goods production, and export trade legal, investment, financial and tax setting, and to diversify
               export of non-mining products, and facilitate export trade" in the near term (2018-2020) and to "increase an
               export of high-value goods, which meet international standard requirements, to extend the scope of export
               markets and to access new markets" in the medium term (2021-2022).

               World Bank Group Country Strategy. The project objectives were aligned with the World Bank Group's
               country strategy in Mongolia. The Country Partnership Framework for Mongolia for the Period FY21-
               FY25 (CPF) supported the country's development goals organized around three focus areas: strengthening
               economic governance, boosting competitiveness, and improving the quality of life. The project objective to
               support SMEs in the non-mining sectors to strengthen their export capabilities and to expand access to
               export markets was aligned with the second CPF focus area, specifically with CPF "Objective 2.3 -
               Increasing productivity in non-mining sectors." The project objective to provide relief support to SMEs in the
               non-mining sector for the COVID-19 recovery was aligned with the third CPF focus area, specifically with
               CPF "Objective 3.3 - Enhancing efficiency and sustainability of social protection systems."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support Mongolian small and medium size firms (SMEs) in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export
                             capabilities.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)



Theory of Change. Matching grants to an SME require the grantor to match a portion of the funds raised for
an SME project, securing the SME's commitment to the project objectives. The Matching Grant Facility
supported by this project would fund SME export development plans covering a range of activities including
quality testing and certification, product adaptation, export fairs, national and international marketing tours,
business strategy and planning, and production management. Among these activities, product quality testing
and certification was vital to the export drive to help SMEs meet international product quality standards. The
domestic market, however, lacked capable certification services, and it was imperative to upgrade
the country's technical capacity to provide quality assurance services including by properly equipping testing
laboratories. The objective of these interventions would be to strengthen the capabilities of SMEs to export,
the achievement of which would be measured by the number of SMEs that started to export and that
successfully obtained international quality certifications.

Outputs. The project did not achieve the target for the two output indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.

      There were no export revenues by beneficiary SMEs of the Matching Grants Facility, failing to meet
       the target increase in export revenues of 10 percent by closing. The Marching Grants Facility was
       scrapped at the second restructuring.
      There was no evidence to determine the number of actual direct beneficiaries under all project
       components, because there was no data on the indicator to meet the target of 120. This output
       indicator was dropped at restructuring.

Outcomes. The project did not achieve the target for the two outcome indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.

      No SME obtained an internationally recognized quality certification following support from the
       Matching Grants Facility, failing to meet the target of 15 by closing. The Marching Grants Facility was
       scrapped at the second restructuring.
      Although the ICR reports that the number of SMEs that started to export following participation in the
       project activities was 31 by closing, exceeding the original target of 15, this was attributed to
       participation in the Productive Partnership Scheme (see Section 4 - Objective 1 Revision 1) rather
       than in the Matching Grants Facility, which was dropped at the second restructuring.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change remained the same after restructuring (see Objective 1) except for
the conversion of the Matching Grants Facility for individual SMEs into a Productive Partnership Scheme for
clusters of interconnected SMEs organized around a business line or in a geographic area. The cluster


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)



approach would encourage SMEs in the same industry or area to work closely together, with the strategic
collaboration among SMEs serving to help the businesses grow, innovate, and become more competitive.

Outputs. The project partially achieved the targets for the two output indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.

      The number of clusters supported by the Productive Partnership Scheme was 10 by closing,
       only halfway achieving the target of 20. The ICR adds that the uptake by beneficiary SMEs of the
       cluster approach was less than planned. There were few clusters or associations at the start of the
       project and the Productive Partnership Scheme did not support activities leading to cluster formation.
       Many participant producers that failed to create export trade clusters by project closing were still
       working to enter into cooperation agreements with other factories.
      The number of SMEs that benefitted from accredited reference laboratories was 12 by closing,
       achieving only 20 percent of the target of 50. The 12 SMEs used the services of accredited reference
       laboratories supported by the project. The ICR adds that the installation of laboratory equipment in the
       Central Leather Testing Laboratory at the Research and Development Center of the MOFALI had not
       been completed by project closing.

Outcomes. The project achieved the targets for the two outcome indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their export capabilities.

      The number of SMEs that obtained internationally recognized quality certifications following support
       from the project (all project components and activities) was 33 by closing, exceeding the revised target
       of 25. According to the ICR, a total 23 SMEs in the meat processing, tannery, and textile industries
       received technical assistance (e.g., in-depth gap analyses against relevant standards, and support for
       upgrading) from the third project component alone. Of these, 10 obtained international certifications --
       six meat processing SMEs from the Gulf Cooperation Council Accreditation Center (based in Saudi
       Arabia) -- against the Halal standard, two tannery SMEs from the Leather Working Group (based in
       the United Kingdom), and two textile SMEs from OEKO-TEX Service GmbH (based in Switzerland) --
       against the OEKO-TEX Standard 100. Relatedly, the Project Implementation Unit reported that the
       project delivered 40 capacity building events attended by 3,934 participants, apart from online lessons
       that reached 7,569 learners.
      The number of SMEs that started to export following participation in the project activities was 31 by
       closing, exceeding the revised target of 30. According to the ICR, the Productive Partnership
       Scheme supported 207 SMEs with approximately US$5 million in assistance for a range of activities,
       including market research, product development, the purchase of equipment, and the implementation
       of International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standardization processes. The Mongolia
       Customs General Administration reported that the new exports included meat products, other
       livestock-based products, and plastic goods.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)




Objective
To support Mongolian small and medium size firms (SMEs) in the non-mining sector to expand access to
export markets.

Rationale
Theory of Change. A new line of export finance products, including export credit insurance from an Export
Insurance Subsidiary of Ag Re, would address the constraints posed by the limited set of export finance
instruments available in Mongolia and help improve access to finance for SMEs, which were poorly served by
the financial system. Export credit insurance would protect exporters from losses arising from commercial risk
-- the insolvency of the buyer, payment default by the buyer, and any rejection of delivered goods that
otherwise complied with agreed contractual terms -- and political risk -- war and civil disturbances, the
cancelation of an export license, foreign currency conversion risk, transfer risk, and trade restrictions. Apart
from trade finance, research and training on foreign trade would help SME exporters to explore and exploit
trade opportunities across a wide range of potential markets. The objective of these interventions would be to
expand the access by SMEs to export markets, the achievement of which would be measured by the number
of export finance products developed and the export volumes achieved by beneficiary SME exporters.

Outputs. The project did not meet the targets for the three output indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export markets.

      There was no evidence to determine the growth of non-China exports of project beneficiary SMEs,
       because there was no data on the indicator to meet the target growth of 20 percent by closing. This
       output indicator was dropped at restructuring.
      There was no evidence to determine the number SMEs benefitting from export insurance
       contracts issued by the Export Insurance Subsidiary, because there was no data on the indicator to
       meet the target of 25 by closing. The creation of the Export Insurance Subsidiary was cancelled at
       restructuring, and this output indicator was dropped.
      There was no evidence to determine the increase in export revenues for SMEs benefitting from export
       insurance or guarantee contracts issued by the Export Insurance Subsidiary, because there was no
       data on the indicator to meet the target increase of 10 percent by closing. The creation of the Export
       Insurance Subsidiary was cancelled at restructuring, and this output indicator was dropped.

Outcomes. The project did not achieve the targets for the two outcome indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export markets.

      Although the ICR reports that export volumes by project beneficiary SMEs increased by 38.7 percent
       by closing in 2023, exceeding the original target increase of 15 percent, this was attributed to
       participation in the Productive Partnership Scheme (see Section 4 - Objective 1 Revision 1) rather
       than in the Matching Grants Facility, which was dropped at the second restructuring.
      The number export finance products developed by Mongolian Re (formerly Ag Re) was one --
       the export credit insurance -- by program closing in 2023, failing to meet the original target of two
       products.



Rating
Negligible

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)




OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export markets.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change remained essentially the same after restructuring, except
that Mongolian Re, which succeeded Ag Re, would no longer create an Export Insurance Subsidiary but itself
reinsure export credit insurance extended by private insurance companies to SME exporters. Foreign trade
research and training would also be restructured to include the development by the Government of a coherent
trade policy and its associated legislation and to support the implementation of the Mongolian Export
Program. In addition to the number of export finance products developed and the export volumes achieved by
beneficiary SME exporters, the number of new export markets reached by beneficiary SME exporters would
measure the degree to which the objective to expand access to export markets had been achieved.

Outputs. The project achieved the target for the first and partially achieved the target for the second of two
output indicators defined for the objective to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to
export markets.

      The increase in export revenues by beneficiary SMEs in the Productive Partnership Scheme was 38.7
       percent, exceeding the target of 25 percent. (Note - this output indicator appears to be the same as
       the outcome indicator for this objective).
      The number of firms benefitting from export insurance products was four by closing, only
       negligibly meeting the target of 50.

Outcomes. The project achieved the targets for the three outcome indicators defined for the objective
to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export markets.

      Export volumes by project beneficiary SMEs increased by 38.7 percent by closing in 2023, exceeding
       the the revised target increase of 25 percent. According to the ICR, exports by 207 beneficiary SMEs
       in the Productive Partnership Scheme rose from around US$107 million in the baseline to US$149.1
       million in 2023. Exports by the SMEs consisted of wool and leather products, clothing, and food. The
       Mongolian Customs General Administration reported that export volumes by these beneficiary SMEs
       dipped in 2000 but recovered sharply, after the first year of the COVID-19 pandemic, through 2021-
       2023.
      The number of new export destinations reached by project beneficiary SMEs was 62 by closing in
       2023, exceeding the target of 20. According to the ICR, beneficiary SMEs reported stable market
       conditions in the U.S. but less stable conditions in Europe. The reporting SMEs also attributed their
       improved market access to support received from the project for product development, market
       promotion, and participation in international expositions. The Mongolian General Customs
       Administration reported that the most significant new market gains were made in 2022 at 24 and 2021
       at 16.
      The number export finance products developed by Mongolian Re was one -- the export credit
       insurance -- by program closing in 2023, meeting the revised target of one. The ICR added that seven
       SMEs had received non-binding proposals for export credit insurance by 2023, but that further
       negotiations were needed to close the insurance policy transactions with three domestic insurers.
       Other exporting SMEs, while expressing interest in export credit insurance, could not readily obtain

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)



       the product because their foreign buyers could not meet the insurers' underwriting criteria or lacked
       the requisite information to support a credit insurance application.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide relief support to SMEs in the non-mining sector for the COVID-19 recovery. - Not applicable

Rationale
There were only two original objectives. This objective was added at restructuring.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide relief support to SMEs in the non-mining sector for the COVID-19 recovery.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change. Mongolia's Unemployment Insurance Fund, created under the Law on Unemployment
Benefits from the Social Insurance Fund in 1994, provided unemployment benefits to a workers who had paid
insurance premiums but only in the case where the worker was dismissed from a full-time job. A COVID-19
response measure, added to this project at the second restructuring, would obviate this problem and would
provide a monthly allowance to employees of SMEs which had experienced revenue downfalls exceeding 50
percent in April to May 2020. The benefits would be conveyed to help preserve jobs at SMEs, which were the
largest employer of the workforce in Mongolia. The number of SMEs supported by this measure and the
amount of unemployment insurance payments conveyed would measure the degree of achievement of the
objective to provide relief support for the COVID recovery.

Outputs. The project achieved the target for the output indicator defined for the objective to provide relief
support to SMEs in the non-mining sector for the COVID-19 recovery.

      The number of SMEs supported by the COVID-19 measure was 332, exceeding the target of 300.

Outcomes. The project achieved the target for the outcome indicator defined for the objective to provide relief
support to SMEs in the non-mining sector for the COVID-19 recovery.

      The total unemployment insurance contribution payments made to SMEs in the non-mining sector was
       US$1.5 million by 2023, meeting the target. According to the ICR, the Unemployment Insurance Fund
       disbursed US$1.5 million to employees of SMEs across two districts as a COVID-19 relief measure to

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MN Export Development Project (P147438)



                                     help sustain employment during the pandemic. The temporary relief to eligible SMEs and workers -- a
                                     monthly allowance of approximately US$72 per insured employee for three months between April and
                                     July 2020 -- protected 8,206 jobs in the SME non-mining sector. Relatedly, the National Statistics
                                     Office reported that beneficiary SMEs in the Productive Partnership Scheme reported employing
                                     almost 10,000 workers in 2023, a 41.5 percent increase from 6,923 workers in 2016.



                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the objective to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their
                            export capabilities is rated negligible, and to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to
                            export markets, negligible. The overall efficacy is rated negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The degree of achievement of the objective to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to strengthen their
                            export capabilities is rated substantial, to support SMEs in the non-mining sector to expand access to export
                            markets, substantial, and to provide relief support to SMEs in the non-mining sector for the COVID-19
                            recovery, high. The overall efficacy is rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. No economic efficiency analysis was conducted for this project, which focused
   primarily on technical assistance and capacity building to enhance the export capabilities and market access for
   supported SMEs in the non-mining sector.

   Operational Efficiency. Project implementation lagged throughout the project duration, mired by: (a)
   procurement difficulties (see Section 10.B); (b) activity disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic; (c) a high

                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MN Export Development Project (P147438)



turnover rate of government staff at the Project Implementation Unit (see Section 9.B), and (d) the passage of
the State Savings Law, which aimed to limit the increase of the public debt-to-GDP ratio in response to the
economic crisis triggered by the pandemic -- the law slowed down the pace at which debt-funded expenditures
could be incurred. Nonetheless, all project activities, finalized after the second restructuring, were completed.
Prior to restructuring, 74.2 percent of the original IDA credit was disbursed. After restructuring (i.e., after the
cancellation of US$4.9 million), 95.6 percent of the final IDA credit was disbursed (see Section 2.E). The project
was completed two-and-a-half years after the original closing date but closed as scheduled after the time
extension granted at the third restructuring.

Given the shortcomings in operational efficiency, the efficiency is rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Based on a split evaluation, the outcome of the project is rated moderately satisfactory.

                                                      Original                    Revision 1
                                                                                  (Second Restructuring)
Relevance of Objective                                High
Efficacy:
Objective 1: To support SMEs in the non-mining        Negligible                  Substantial
sector to strengthen their expert capabilities.
Objective 2: To support SMEs in the non-mining        Negligible                  Substantial
sector to expand access to export markets.
Objective 3: To provide relief support [to SMEs in    NA                          High
the non-mining sector] for the COVID-19 recovery.
Overall Efficacy                                      Negligible                  Substantial
Efficiency                                            Modest
Outcome Rating                                        Unsatisfactory              Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MN Export Development Project (P147438)



Outcome Rating Value                                  2                           4
Amount Disbursed, US$ million                         2.52                        11.96
Disbursement, %                                       17.4                        82.6
Weight Value                                          0.35                        3.30
Total Weights                                         3.65
Overall Outcome                                       Moderately Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Mongolia might not see continued progress with SME development and export development unless the
business environment for SMEs and exports improves materially. While this project aimed to address
constraints to SME development and export development in the non-mining economy at the micro-level, with
quality assurance initiatives and export insurance products, macro policy action would still be necessary to
boost the country's potential, diversify its economy, and promote private activity. The World Bank cites
several policy priorities that will help mitigate the risk posed by a weak business environment -- Doing
Business reforms, Trade Across Borders reforms, and the development of non-bank financial institutions for
microfinance, leasing, and insurance (World Bank, Country Partnership Framework for Mongolia for the
Period FY21-FY25) as does the IMF -- the enactment of the Investment Law to improve the investment
climate, the opening the banking sector to foreign investors to boost financial development, reductions in
exchange rate pressures to improve external competitiveness, and the expansion of vocational training
to enhance labor productivity (IMF, 2023, Mongolia - Staff Report on the 2023 Article IV Consultation).

The provision of product quality testing and certification services to SME exporters may not be sustainable in
the medium and long-term if left entirely as a government service. Institutional capacity is weak in public
agencies, as they find it difficult to recruit and maintain qualified and competent professionals. An option for
the Government would be to consider turning product quality and testing services to private sector service
providers. Private organizations will find it easier to attract qualified professionals, purchase and maintain
laboratory testing equipment and supplies, and convey certification services on a strictly commercial basis.
Also, private service providers may be better positioned to relate with importers in foreign markets,
which may have questions about the local quality assurance process and are searching for credible
information from other than government bodies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Export Development Project (P147438)



Analytical Underpinning. Project design was informed by analytical work pertaining to various aspects
of export development.

      On trade promotion programs: Hashim and Hassan, 2008, ”Internationalization of SMEs: Options,
       Incentives, Problems and Business Strategy,” Malaysian Management Review, Vol 43, No. 1;
       Volpe Martincus, 2010, Odyssey in International Markets: An Assessment of the Impact of
       Trade Promotion in Latin America; and Gourdon et al., 2011, "Can Matching Grants
       Promote Exports? Evidence from Tunisia’s FAMEX II Programme;” in World Bank, 2011, Where
       to Spend the Next Million? Applying Impact Evaluation to Trade Assistance.
      On export promotion and productivity: Hallward-Driemeier, Iarossi, and Sokoloff, 2002, “Exports
       and Manufacturing Productivity in East Asia: A Comparative Analysis with Firm-Level Data”;
       NBER Working Paper; and Francis and Collins-Dodd, 2004, "Impact of Export Promotion
       Programs on Firm Competencies, Strategies, and Performance: The Case of Canadian High-
       Technology SMEs", International Marketing Review, Volume 21 Issue 4.
      On SMEs: Lkhagvasuren and Huo, 2014, “Analysis of the Returns of Small and Medium-Sized
       Enterprises in Mongolia”, Journal of Finance and Accounting; and International Finance
       Corporation, 2014, SMEs and Women-Owned SMEs in Mongolia.

Lessons from Related World Bank Operations. In designing this operation, the World Bank drew on
lessons learned from past and ongoing World Bank projects supporting export development elsewhere.
According to the Program Document, the following lessons were explicitly incorporated in project design:
(a) "simple project with actionable components" -- the project would have two (later three) components
with straightforward implementation arrangements; (b) "senior leadership" -- the management team for
the Multi-sectoral Technical Assistance Project would staff the Project Implementation Unit; (c)
"international partnering" -- AgRe (later Mongolian Re) would enter into twining partnerships
with experienced export credit insurance companies and export credit agencies elsewhere; (d) "flexibility"
-- the project could be restructured in response to changed priorities; and (e) "broad benefits" -- the
project focused on selected aspects of export development with the broadest possible impact.

Operational Links and Mitigation Measures. The World Bank considered the overall risk to be
substantial, with at least two risks -- political and governance, and macroeconomic -- rated high.

      The governance framework and institutional capacity were weak in Mongolia, marred by heavy
       political interference and a high rate of turnover of key government staff. Elections in mid-2016
       were likely to elevate political and governance risk. To mitigate the risk, the World Bank planned
       to provide enhanced project implementation support to the implementing agencies focused on
       capacity building to ensure that governance structures met international standards. A Project
       Steering Committee would be established to provide strong leadership and oversight.
      The undiversified Mongolian economy was at risk to adverse developments in the global
       economy, the economy of its principal trading partner (China), and global financial market
       conditions. The World Bank planned to continue its surveillance of the economy in collaboration
       with the IMF and committed to assist with mitigation measures in cooperation with other
       development partners.

Shortcomings at Entry. Project design suffered from some deficiencies: (a) technical design was based
on the Government's Export Promotion Program of 2013, which advocated the expansion of government-
supported export finance programs but neglected to fully consider the role of the private sector in export
development; (b) the World Bank could have delayed the approval of the project after the Parliamentary

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



  elections in June 2016 to discern any changes to government priorities.-- the governing Democratic Party
  lost to the Mongolian People's Party, robbing the Export Promotion Program and this project of its
  political champion.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision. The World Bank supervised the project regularly, twice a year on average, and prepared 14
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over the seven-year life of the project, or two ISRs a
 year, the average for Investment Project Financing operations. The World Bank also completed at least 11
 Aide Memoires for implementation support missions; the Aide Memoires were highly detailed. The World
 Bank fielded a competent team of specialists in private sector development, SME development, the
 financial sector, agriculture finance, procurement, and financial management, with experience in supporting
 private sector development projects in similar country settings. Two task team leaders (TTLs) sequentially
 managed the project, a normal turnover rate for a project of seven-year duration; the second TTL, an
 international staff, relocated to Ulaanbaatar in September 2021, an important step in moderating project
 implementation risk. The World Bank intensified its support in areas where implementation lagged, and
 capacity was weakest -- procurement.

 The World Bank performed its project supervision and implementation support functions credibly,
 notwithstanding: (a) political difficulties -- the change in Government in mid-2016 after project approval
 weakened political support for the project; (b) a high turnover rate among staff at the Project
 Implementation Unit -- inexperienced new staff faced a steep learning curve about World Bank operational
 processes; (c) the scandal in 2018 -- the misuse of Government special funds for SME development
 imposed a reputational risk on the Government, and, by extension, to this project; (d) the outbreak of the
 COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 caused activity disruptions and mobility restrictions; (e) the Russian
 invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 discouraged SMEs in tourism -- pre-pandemic in 2018-2019, a
 quarter of a half million tourists arriving Mongolia annually were from Russia; and (f) the passage of the
 State Savings Law in April 2022, in response to the pandemic, impeded the withdrawal of the proceeds of
 the IDA credit (see Section 5).

 Adaptation. The World Bank restructured the project thrice in response to changed conditions and
 evolving priorities. Specifically, the World Bank: (a) changed the implementing entity after the issuance of
 Government Resolution No. 303 in October 2018 and the implementing agency after the issuance
 of Government Resolution No. 87 in April 2019; (b) adopted the European Union definition of SMEs
 because the Mongolian definition proved too limiting; (c) inserted a COVID response measure to help
 SMEs and SME workers affected by the pandemic; and (d) converted the Matching Grants Facility for
 individual SMEs into a Productive Partnership Scheme for interconnected SMEs to focus on business
 collaboration. Of these, the adoption of the cluster approach, while based on the sound concept of
 business collaboration, raised questions ex-post as the strategy was untested in Mongolia and should have
 been piloted before implementation. There were also shortcomings in M&E implementation (section 9).




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Appraisal Document defined a results framework -- of four original outcome indicators (PDO-
 Level Results) and six output indicators (Intermediate Results), and their targets, data sources, and
 reporting agencies -- to measure the degree of achievement of the project objectives. The results
 framework was revised at the second restructuring, producing a final set of six outcome and five output
 indicators (see Section 2.E and Section 4).

 The M&E plan called for the Project Implementation Unit (originally at the Ministry of Finance and later at
 the MOFALI) to perform the M&E function for the project. The Government would prepare Project Reports,
 each covering a period of one semester, and submit them to the World Bank within forty-five days from the
 end of each reporting period.



b. M&E Implementation
  To implement the M&E plan, the Project Implementation Unit prepared an evaluation framework, which
  included: (a) progress reporting formats and frequencies; (b) the tracking of procurement and financial
  management processes; (c) collecting and sharing lessons learned with stakeholders; and (d)
  capturing feedback on project implementation and results.

  The M&E task was performed by an M&E specialist at the Project Implementation Unit who worked
  closely with the project coordinators for the Productive Partnership Scheme, at Mongolian Re (for export
  credit insurance), and in capacity building and training bodies.

  M&E implementation lacked field verification of the results and outcomes reported by beneficiary SMEs of
  the Productive Partnership Scheme, until an independent monitoring firm was hired in January 2023. The
  independent monitor initially covered 76 sub-project beneficiaries from 2016 to 2018, when the
  project was managed by the Ministry of Finance. The firm was rehired in October 2023 to cover 31 sub-
  project beneficiaries from 2021 to 2023, when the project was managed by the MOFALI. The verification
  exercise took a year and was completed in December 2023. The use of an independent external monitor
  was an important innovation of M&E implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Detailed M&E data collection by the Project Implementation Unit about grant applications and
  disbursements in the Productive Partnership Scheme was useful in revising the Productive Partnership
  Scheme Implementation Manual in February 2022 and June 2022. The composition of the committee

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



  evaluating grant proposals was changed. The process for handling grant applications was revised. And
  a responsibility matrix was added to delineate the explicit roles of officials authorizing the grants.

  The much-delayed independent verification of results reported by beneficiary SMEs of the Productive
  Partnership Scheme was a significant shortcoming, with knock-on effects on M&E utilization. The
  problem was significant because the Productive Partnership Scheme impinged on the final values of
  many results indicators. It became difficult for the Government to credibly assess the results self-
  reported by SMEs, according to the ICR. It also became difficult for the World Bank to track progress
  with the project and report them in the required ISRs. The ICR added that although corrective measures
  were implemented after the independent monitoring firm was hired in January 2023 (and the task
  completed in December 2023), the intervention came late in the project cycle to improve M&E utilization.

  Overall, the M&E is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards. The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment category FI
   project ["project provides funds to a bank, credit institution, etc. for on-lending at FI’s own risk"] at appraisal
   and triggered five environmental safeguards policies -- OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment, OP/BP
   4.04 - Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.36 - Forests, OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples, and OP/BP 4.12 -
   Involuntary Resettlement. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and
   disclosed locally and at the World Bank InfoShop following consultations with stakeholders. Safeguards
   compliance was consistently rated satisfactory during project implementation, including in the last ISR of
   June 2023. Productive Partnership Scheme sub-projects were screened to ensure compliance with relevant
   environmental laws and regulations, according to the ICR: (a) a minimum two site visits were conducted for
   73 sub-projects classified as Environmental Assessment category B ["some type of environmental
   assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope and flexible in structure, reflecting corresponding
   the limited environmental impacts of the project and the anticipated relatively straightforward mitigation"] to
   ensure compliance with World Bank guidelines; (b) all category B sub-projects were required to develop
   site-specific Environmental Management Plans and Monitoring Plans; and (c) an environmental and social
   safeguard consultant at the Project Implementation Unit monitored compliance with Environmental
   Management Plans and Monitoring Plans.

   Social Safeguards. A Grievance Redress Mechanism was established for this project using the project
   official website, social media, and other channels to receive complaints from parties who could claim
   adverse impacts from project activities on their business, communities, or the environment. The Project
   Implementation Unit maintained a Grievance Redress Mechanism log and designated staff to address
   issues. Four grievances were filed during the life of the project and were addressed adequately, according
   to the ICR.




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. Procurement performance was rated moderately satisfactory throughout most of
   project implementation, including in the last ISR of June 2023. The Consultant Qualification-Based
   Selection (CQS) or Individual Consultant (IC) methods were used for consulting services. Meanwhile,
   project participants in the Productive Partnership Scheme used "simplified procurement methods" allowed
   by the Productive Partnership Scheme Implementation Manual. Overall, project procurement was delayed
   by six months because of the slow pace of preparation of procurement terms of references (TORs), a vital
   instrument specially for service procurement. For the first project component, the Development of a New
   Line of Export Finance Products, Mongolian Re provided valuable technical inputs for the preparation of
   the procurement TORs.

   Financial Management. Financial management performance was rated satisfactory throughout project
   implementation, including in the last ISR of June 2023. All 23 quarterly Interim Financial Reports were
   submitted to the World Bank on time. All five Audit Reports had an unqualified opinion. Staffing for the
   financial management function was adequate. Some shortcomings with financial management were noted,
   however, early during implementation, including drags with training, poor upkeep of primary documents,
   and delayed submission of expenditure statements. The use of a Financial Management Manual and
   continuous implementation support by the World Bank, including a review, in September 2022, of
   arrangements for project closing, helped improve financial management performance.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                             Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                              There were shortcomings at
                                                                              entry (see Section 8.A) and with
                                                                              implementation, specifically with
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory   the introduction of the cluster
                                                                              approach for the Productive
                                                                              Partnership Scheme (see
                                                                              Section 8.B).
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial



                                                                                                Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MN Export Development Project (P147438)



12. Lessons

Three lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Export development and SME development require more than interventions at the enterprise
level and would benefit from an enabling business environment buttressed by policy
reform. This project focused on micro-level activities like quality assurance and export insurance,
which, while important, would be more effective in the context of a competitive business environment
that supported private sector development. This project also added two activities at the second
restructuring -- trade and export policy enhancement and international market competitiveness
enhancement -- although their outcomes and targets were not explicitly defined and measured.
Policy and business regulatory reforms in critical areas, including trade facilitation, access to
finance, and skills upgrading, would be relevant to export development and SME development.

Export development projects need to consider the role of private enterprises and
organizations in the export drive. In this project, the Government and the World Bank made a
strategic decision at restructuring to shift the provision of export credit insurance to SME exporters
from a proposed new SOE, Export Insurance Subsidiary at Ag Re, to private insurance companies
instead, with the SOE, Mongolia Re, providing reinsurance, following similar models in East Asia.
Elsewhere, this project focused on the provision of Productive Partnership Scheme grants by the
Project Implementation Unit at the MOFALI and quality assurance services by the Research and
Development Center also at MOFALI. Many project interventions in an export development project
can be provided by the private sector, including business development services by private
management consultants (e.g., business development service providers employed by development
partner SME programs in the country), quality assurance services by private testing laboratories and
certification services, and trade finance products by private banks and non-banks.

Export development projects would benefit from the careful design, scoping, and piloting of
planned interventions. In this project, the cluster approach to SME development, while based on
the sound concept of business collaboration, was not readily adopted by SMEs, as only 10 of
a target 20 clusters of interconnected SMEs benefitted from the Productive Partnership Scheme.
The cluster approach should have been tested well before implementation. In the same manner, the
World Bank and governments should carefully study and scope proposed interventions and their
alternatives, including whether export development should focus on SMEs or large enterprises, a
selected set or a broad range of industries, government agencies and SOEs or private service
providers and financial intermediaries, and government funding or co-financing by the private sector.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Export Development Project (P147438)



The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations.
Considering the three changes to the project activities, the output and outcome indicators, the project cost
and financing, and the project schedule, the ICR presents a detailed account of the evolution of the project.
The efficacy assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets.
The efficiency assessment is supported by adequate evidence. The ICR presents ample evidence to support its
assessment of the Bank’s performance at design and implementation. The ICR draws lessons that would be
valuable to the design of future projects focused on export development and SMEs. Overall, the quality of the
ICR is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 20 of 20
