     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024112

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P147839                                    PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                            Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0740,TF-14369,TF-A1131                30-Nov-2020                                           9,464,958.78

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2015                                31-Oct-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             9,474,000.00                                    6,114,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              9,767,061.97                                    5,899,083.08

 Actual                                          9,541,007.60                                    5,899,083.08




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.xi) and the Financing Agreement of October 2, 2015
   (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to strengthen early warning, resilient investments, and financial
   protection of the participating countries”.

   During the project restructuring in 2021, the PDO was revised to “strengthen early warning and resilient
   investments of participating countries” to be better aligned with project activities.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



   The original objective will be parsed as follows:

        I. To strengthen early warning of participating countries;
       II. To strengthen resilient investments of participating countries; and
      III. To strengthen financial protection of participating countries.

   The revised objective will be parsed as follows:

          I. To strengthen early warning of participating countries; and
         II. To strengthen resilient investments of participating countries



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  18-Feb-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project was the first phase of the program and included the following parts as stated in the Financing
   Agreement (p. 5). Since the PAD was a joint programmatic appraisal document for the six projects (four
   national, two regional), it was broader than the legally binding Financing Agreement. Therefore, the ICR,
   and this Review use the information in the Financing Agreement to describe the areas of engagement.

   Part 1: Strengthening Early Warning and Preparedness (appraisal estimate US$2.29 million, actual
   US$3.0 million):

   Sub-component 1.1: Impact Forecasting: This sub-component was to finance the development of
   operational hazard models to forecast impacts of extreme events including tropical cyclones, storm surges,
   flooding at sub-national levels, and incorporating these models into the participating countries’ multi-hazard
   warning platforms.

   Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening preparedness for response: This sub-component was to finance a
   program of activities designed to strengthen the preparedness and response capacity within each
   participating country for climate- and disaster-related emergencies, including provision of technical

   assistance and advisory services and development of a platform to provide access to the range of
   knowledge, training and education material on early warning and preparedness.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



  Sub-component 1.3: Post-disaster recovery: This sub-component was to finance a program of activities
  designed to enhance the Pacific Community’s (SPC’s) capacity for undertaking post-disaster needs
  assessments (PDNAs).

  Part 2: Risk Reduction and Resilient Investments (appraisal estimate US$5.71 million, actual
  US$3.76 million): This part included four sub-components:

  Sub-component 2.1 Strengthening multi-hazard risk information systems and development of decision tools:
  This sub-component was to finance a program of activities designed to strengthen multi-hazard spatial risk
  data and information systems, including development of modern digital information and data decision
  support/tools.

  Sub-component 2.2: Testing decision support systems: This sub-component was to finance a program of
  activities designed to test and apply decision support systems for resilient planning and investments at the
  national level.

  Sub-component 2.3: Decision-making tools for community-based approaches: This sub-component was to
  finance the development of decision-making tools for integrated community-based approaches to resilience
  for disaster and climate change, including pre-feasibility studies for priority community investments and a
  regional atoll islands study.

  This sub-component was dropped after the Mid-Term Review since it was decided that several tools and
  good practices in community resilience already existed in the region.

  Sub-component 2.4: Knowledge sharing: This sub-component was to finance the development of effective
  and innovative processes to share knowledge and information with participating countries.

  Part 3: Program/Project Implementation Support (appraisal cost: US$1.47 million; actual cost:
  US$2.37 million). This component was to strengthen the capacity of SPC for a) project implementation and
  b) provision of implementation support to the participating countries, including the establishment and
  maintenance of a regional Program Support Unit (PSU).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$9.79 million. Actual cost was US$9.13 million.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA grant in the amount of US$3.68 million (of which US$3.58
  million disbursed) and a Trust Fund (TF) (TF-A1131) in the amount of US$5.79 million (of which US$5.66
  million disbursed). According to the World Bank team (communication with IEG on August 30, 2024), the
  project received a Project Preparation Grant (TF-14369) of US$320,000 that was closed before project
  implementation started. Of this grant US$0.12 million had not yet been recovered from the first
  disbursement advance at the time the ICR was finalized.

  Borrower contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contribution.

  Dates: The project was restructured three times:



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



         On June 21, 2019, the project was restructured (level 2) to: i) extend the closing date by 23 months
          to October 31, 2022 to allow for the implementation of the technical components which had been
          delayed due to failures to procure technical positions to assist with implementing the components; ii)
          modify components; iii) drop an intermediate outcome indicator under component 2: iv) modify
          disbursement estimates; and v) change the name of the recipient agency.
         On February 18, 2021, the project was restructured (level 1) to: i) modify the PDO to ensure that the
          PDO is realigned with the actual activities supported under the project; and ii) revise intermediate
          outcome indicators to ensure that activities are reprioritized to better address the needs of the
          participating countries as well as add new intermediate outcome indicators.
         On October 11, 2022, the project was restructured (level 2) to extend the closing date by 12 months
          to October 31, 2023, to allow for the completion of project activities which had been delayed due to
          the Covid-19 pandemic and the 2022 Hunga Tonga-Hunga Ha’apai volcano eruption.

   The project became effective on June 19, 2015. The original closing date was November 30, 2020, and the
   actual closing date was October 31, 2023, i.e., a 35 months (2 years and 11 months) extension.

   Split Evaluation: The scope of the project was reduced, the objective was changed, and several indicators
   were dropped and replaced by new indicators during the first restructuring in 2019 and the second
   restructuring in 2021. Therefore, this review will conduct a split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country/region and sector context. At the time of project appraisal, the Pacific Island Countries (PICs)
were amongst the most vulnerable nations in the world in terms of climate change impact and natural
hazards including cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanic eruptions as well as flooding and drought. As
a result of climate change, a growing population, and increased land scarcity, this vulnerability (climate
change and intensely populated areas) was expected to increase. While PICs had been strengthening early
warning and preparedness as well as mainstreaming climate and disaster resilience, they lacked
knowledge and financial capacity to generate sufficient economies of scale to develop effective early
warning, risk transfer mechanisms and in translating resilient plans effectively into sector investments.

The Pacific Resilience Program (PREP) was developed in 2015 as a multi-phase series of projects with
complementary regional and national activities. The program included three pillars: i) strengthened early
warning; ii) strengthened resilient investments; and iii) strengthened financial protection. Phase 1 of the
program included Samoa, Tonga, Republic of the Marshal Islands (RMI), and Vanuatu. The projects in
Samoa and Tonga focused on all three pillars while the projects in RMI and Vanuatu only focused on pillar
iii. At the regional level there were two projects. In one project SPC provided support to participating PICs in
early warning and resilient investments and in another project the Pacific Island Forum Secretariat (PIFS)
focused on financial protection and regional coordination. This project only focused on sub-objectives i) and
ii). Sub-objective iii) was done by a different project.

Alignment with the Government strategy. The objective of the project supported the PIC’s new 2050
Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent with climate change and disasters being one of the seven thematic


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



               areas. The strategy emphasizes the importance of investments in innovative research to address climate
               and disaster risks and regional cooperation to build community capacity and resilience. However, the
               strategy does not mention strengthening early warning as a key objective. Also, the objective supported the
               2017-2030 Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific (FRDP) and two of its three goals; goal 1
               “strengthened integrated adaptation and risk reduction to enhance resilience to climate change and
               disasters” and goal 3 “strengthened disaster preparedness, response and recovery”. In addition, the FRDP
               identified strengthening the capacity of hydro-meteorological and seismological services and providing data
               and infrastructure to support early warnings and risk information as critical. Furthermore, the objective of
               the project was in line with SPC’s Strategic Plan 2022-2031 and its key focus area 1 “resilience and climate
               action”.

               Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank
               Regional Partnership Framework (FY17-2021). Objective 3.1, “Strengthen resilience to natural disasters
               and climate change,” under focus area 3, “protecting incomes and livelihoods,” recognized that climate
               change and rising natural disasters represent a serious threat to PICs and an existential threat to all
               nations. The project was built on the World Bank’s extensive experience in supporting PICs with DRM and
               climate change adaptation since the late 1990s.

               The objective addressed a critical development problem and was pitched at an appropriate level given the
               country's capacity. However, one aspect of the PDO was “financial protection”, which the project activities
               did not focus on.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen early warning of participating countries.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that inputs/activities such as providing technical
                             assistance to strengthen impact forecasting and preparedness would result in several outputs. These outputs
                             were to include impact forecasting models/maps in place, trainings in disaster preparedness and response
                             provided, models incorporated into national Multi-Hazard Early Warning System (MHEWS), and a knowledge
                             platform. These outputs were to result in the outcome of strengthened early warning systems in participating
                             countries.

                             The theory of change was sound and logical.



                                                                                                                            Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



Outputs

      Staff trained in DRM-related areas by the project in Samoa (42), Tonga (45), Vanuatu (30) and RMI
         (20), of which 85% reported having applied learned skills to their job, according to SPC end-of-project
         survey. The target of 80 percent of multi-hazard early warning systems' professional staff being
         trained and/or retained was achieved.
        The target of 70 percent of users of the multi-national spatial risk data and information system being
         satisfied, was not measured.
        The target of 70 percent of risk exposure data for PREP countries being updated was not measured.
        The target of 50 percent of assets in at least two targeted urban areas with risk information available
         to inform resilient planning was not measured.
        The target of 50 community-based disaster risk management/climate resilience projects being
         developed by the project in targeted areas was not measured.
        The target of 60 percent of beneficiaries in communities being aware of project information and project
         support investments was not measured.

Outcomes:

      The target of 80 percent of the population at risk in Samoa and 70 percent of the population at risk in
       Tonga being covered by hazard forecast and warning messages was dropped at restructuring. Annex
       7 in the ICR states that the coverage is estimated at 70% of the population at risk of Tongatapu and
       ‘Eua, the islands where PREP-SPC assistance focused on.
      137,704 people benefitted from the project, achieving the original target of 135,000 people. The
       indicator included a baseline of 62,000 project beneficiaries (2015). The PAD defined beneficiaries as
       the population in Samoa and Tonga who were able to receive timely and actionable hazard forecasts
       and warning messages, understand the meaning and know what actions to take. However, it is not
       clear how the project measured that people know what actions to take; receiving timely and actionable
       hazard forecasts and warning messages does not mean that beneficiaries understand the meaning
       and know how to take appropriate action.

Only one of the outputs and only one out of two outcome indicators were retained at project closing. Overall,
the objective is rated as Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen early warning of participating countries.

Revised Rationale




                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



The objective and the theory of change remained the same but several indicators were revised and the
targets were reduced and units of measurement were changed (e.g. from percentage to numbers) during the
February 2021 restructuring.

Outputs:

     The number of staff working in the disaster management area and applying learned skills on the job
      increased from 40 staff in 2015 to 116 staff in 2023, exceeding the revised target of 70 staff.
     16 users (staff from the National Disaster Management Offices in Tonga and Samoa that were trained
      in the usage) were satisfied with the early warning system, achieving the revised target of 15 staff.
     The hazard model for forecasting of impacts of extreme weather events was operationalized,
      achieving the target of the model being operationalized. As a result of the impact forecasting
      models and training delivered and incorporated into national MHEWS, the following outcomes were
      achieved:
           o Targeting, accuracy, and response to early warnings, as demonstrated by the high wave event
              in Samoa in August 2023, improved.
           o Capacity to forecast damage of costs, issue seasonal forecasts, and to generate maps for
              forecasted impacts was built.

The ICR reported on the following additional outputs that were not included in the Results Framework
and hence did not have a target:

     Seismic monitoring capacity in Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu as well as on the regional level was
      strengthened through: i) updating the countries’ seismic monitoring computers and software, and
      ORSNET’s server and webpage; ii) providing five mobile seismic stations housed at SPC, as
      temporary replacements for countries’ damaged stations during repairs; iii) training 41 staff from
      participating PICs; and iv) developing a strategic plan for ORSNET.
     48 middle-management staff from Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu completed the region’s first accredited
      Certificate IV in DRM Team Leadership course which was designed and delivered by the project. Two
      modules focused on disaster preparedness and three models covered disaster response. About 67
      percent of participants, who were interviewed at project completion that they were highly satisfied, and
      100 percent found it applicable to their daily work.
     In Samoa a System Integrator was procured.

Outcomes:

     137,704 people benefitted from the project, achieving the original target of 135,000 people. The PAD
      defined beneficiaries as the population in Samoa and Tonga who received timely and actionable
      hazard forecasts and warning messages, were able to understand the meaning and to know what
      actions to take. The indicator included a baseline of 62,000 project beneficiaries (2015). The PAD
      defined beneficiaries as the population in Samoa and Tonga who were able to receive timely and
      actionable hazard forecasts and warning messages, understand the meaning and know what actions
      to take. However, it is not clear how the project measured that people know what actions to take;
      receiving timely and actionable hazard forecasts and warning messages does not mean that
      beneficiaries understand the meaning and know how to take appropriate action.
     Due to the seismic monitoring activities the project supported, PICs are able to share a regional
      platform for automatic early detection of geohazards in up to 30 seismic stations and issue more

                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



       accurate warnings within five minutes or less on an occurrence (before this project PICs needed at
       least 15 to 20 minutes). Also, as a result of the project, Vanuatu experienced a 572 percent increase
       in Quick Epicenter Determination events between June and September 2023 compared to the “without
       project” scenario. Also, the Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazards Department reported better
       monitoring and volcanic warnings as a result of the project.

The project delivered well on several outputs and achieved the targets for doing so. However, it was not clear
how some of the simple numerical targets meant relative to the total for example, the target of 15 users (staff
from the National Disaster Management Offices in Tonga and Samoa that were trained in the usage) satisfied
with the early warning system. It also achieved the outcome level targets though it was not clear how the
project measured that people know what actions to take. The rating is Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen resilient investments of participating countries.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that inputs/activities such as developing a regional
platform to support risk reduction and resilient investment planning were to result in several outputs. These
outputs were to include multi-hazard risk planning and decision support/tools in place, decision support
systems for resilient planning investment in place at the national level, and an established platform for
knowledge sharing. These outputs were to result in the outcome of resilient investments of participating
countries being strengthened.

The theory of change was sound and logical.

Outputs:

      The target of 50 community-based disaster risk management/climate change resilience projects being
       developed by the project in targeted areas was dropped at restructuring. Table 7.3 notes that 22
       larger-than-community resilient projects were identified in the islands of Tanna and Malekula
       (Vanuatu).
      100 percent of public assets had risk information available to inform resilient planning in targeted
       areas, achieving the target of 100 percent.
      The target of 70 percent of risk exposure data for PREP being updated was not measured.
      The target of 60 percent of beneficiaries being aware of project information and project support
       investments was not measured.

Outcomes:



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



The project’s Results Framework did not include any outcome level indicator to measure the achievement of
this objective. Also, no other evidence on the outcome level was provided. However, the project was able
deliver some outputs. Overall, the achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen resilient investments of participating countries.

Revised Rationale
The objective and the theory of change remained the same but several indicators were revised and the
targets were reduced and units of measurement were changed (e.g. from percentage to numbers) during the
February 2021 restructuring.

Outputs:

      A post-disaster needs assessment was undertaken and strengthened, achieving the target of
       undertaking and strengthening a post-disaster needs assessment. This indicator was added
       during the 2021 restructuring.
      Multi-hazard risk information systems were strengthened and were in use in Vanuatu and Tonga,
       achieving the target of multi-hazard risk information systems being strengthened and
       used. This indicator was added during the 2021 restructuring.
      A high-resolution Digital Elevation Model was developed and operationalized in target areas,
       achieving the original target of developing and operationalizing such model. This indicator was
       added during the 2021 restructuring.

Outputs that were not included in the Results Framework:

      According to the World Bank team (September 30, 2024) the project also produced Risk Assessments
       and Resilient Investment Plans for the Tanna and Malekula Islands in Vanuatu, and Concept Town
       Plans for future expansion of their two capitals (Lenakel and Lakotoro). Risk assessments were
       carried out for all key public assets, and 22 priority resilient investments (larger than at the community
       level) were identified.
      The project trained 196 national staff from Samoa, Tonga, RMO and Vanuatu to carry out PDNAs.

Outcomes:

The project’s Results Framework did not include any outcome level indicator to measure the achievement of
this objective. Also, no other evidence on the outcome level was provided. Therefore, it is not clear if the
objective of strengthening resilient investments of participating countries was achieved.




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



                            Overall, the project delivered several outputs that have the potential to contribute to strengthening resilient
                            investments. However, it is not clear how some of the outputs such as a PDNA contributed to the PDO
                            outcomes during the project duration. Given the lack of evidence on the outcome level as well as the limited
                            number of output indicators that measured the achievement of outputs, the achievement of this objective is
                            rated as weak Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            To strengthen financial protection of participating countries.

                            Rationale
                            No activities were undertaken under this objective. Therefore, this objective is rated Negligible. This sub-
                            objective was dropped in the restructuring.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To strengthen financial protection of participating countries. - Dropped

                            Revised Rationale
                            This objective was dropped at the restructuring and is therefore not applicable.



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Original project: Achievement of two original objectives was Modest and one Negligible. Overall, it is rated
                            as Modest pre-restructuring.




                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                Primary Reason
         Modest                                                 Insufficient evidence
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Revised project: Achievement of the first objective was Substantial with shortcomings and achievement of
         the second objective was weak Modest. Overall Efficacy is rated Modest.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                     Primary Reason
         Modest                                                 Insufficient evidence


5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD (p. 16) conducted an Economic analysis for the entire PREP program. Benefits were defined as the
quantifiable benefits from component 1 (investments in early warning and preparedness) and component 2 (risk
reduction and resilient investment planning and preparation). Applying a discount rate of 10 percent, an
Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was calculated at 19 percent, a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$21.1
million and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.6, indicating that the program was a worthwhile investment.

At completion, an Economic analysis (applying a discount rate of 10 percent) was conducted on the
strengthening of early warning in Samoa and Tonga. The costs included the actual costs of IBF, seismic
monitoring and PSU support, and all costs of early warning investments in the two countries with
annual operating and maintenance costs estimated at 10 percent. The analysis calculated an EIRR of 14.9
percent, an NPV of US$5.5 million and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.6. While the analysis indicated that the
investments into early warning in these two countries were a worthwhile investment, the results were not
comparable to the analysis conducted at appraisal.

According to the ICR (para. 53) the project experienced several cost over-runs. For example, the impact
forecasting cost was 32 percent higher than originally planned and the LiDAR contract resulted in a 29 percent
cost overrun. The preparedness training and the Pacific Resilience Nexus were cost-effective, however, only
costing 81 percent and 89 percent of the appraisal estimate.

Operational efficiency:

The project’s closing date was extended by 35 months to accommodate procurement-related implementation
delays, including the re-bidding of LiDAR activities, adjustments to contract scope, and delays related to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Project management costs were US$2.37 million, 26 percent of the total project cost,
exceeding the appraisal estimate by 61 percent. World Bank supervision costs were also high at US$1 million
(10.5 percent of project cost).


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



Given the operational inefficiencies, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                Original Project                             Revised project
Relevance                       Substantial
Objective 1                     Modest                                       Substantial
Objective 2                     Modest                                       Modest
Objective 3                     Negligible                                   N/A
Efficacy                        Modest                                       Modest
Efficiency                      Modest
Outcome rating                  Moderately Unsatisfactory                    Moderately Unsatisfactory
Numeric value of outcome rating 3                                            3
Disbursement (US$m)             3.51                                         5.96
Share of disbursement           37%                                          63%
Weighted value of the outcome
                                1.11                                         1.89
rating
                                1.11 + 1.89 = 3
Total weights
                                Moderately Unsatisfactory
Overall outcome rating          Moderately Unsatisfactory



Original project: Relevance of the objective was Substantial, Efficacy and Efficiency were Modest, resulting in
an outcome rating of Unsatisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



Revised project: Relevance of the objective was Substantial, Efficacy and Efficiency were Modest, resulting in
an outcome rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Given the weighted value of the original and revised project, the overall outcome rating is Moderately
Unsatisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government’s commitment risk: According to the World Bank team (August 29, 2024) the risk of
decreasing government commitment is currently low due to political stability. For example, SPC’s Disaster
and Community Resilience Programme is the largest of SPC’s Geoscience, Energy and Maritime Division.
The organization continues to support the respective countries through ongoing programs and technical
support. These programs (amongst others) include: Building Safety and Resilience in the Pacific (BSRP) II
and Pacific Island Emergency Management Alliance (PIEMA).

In Samoa, the government is planning to operationalize and pilot Impact based focusing warning system
(IBFWS) in 2025, building on from the works done under the SPC -PREP1 Project. In Tonga, the
government continues to undertake policy reforms to strengthen their resilience framework, including the
approval and implementation of the National Disaster Risk Management Policy and the Multi-hazard Early
Warning System Policy. In Vanuatu, the government is prioritization the development of provincial towns to
facilitate resilience and economic growth and decentralize services to the subnational level.

Technical capacity risk: The project experienced a high staff turnover during project implementation which
is likely to continue. Capacity built in entities may not remain or may need to be refreshed. Therefore, it will
be critical to continue training staff in DRM. Also, according to the ICR (para. 90), while LiDAR data in Tonga
and Vanuatu are expected to be used for resilient investment planning, national capacity constraints persist.
According to the ICR (para. 44) counterparts from Vanuatu stated that they needed further specialized
assistance to be able to use LiDAR data. The ICR (para. 91), stated that at the time of project closing, SPC
was working with the University of the South Pacific and other different donors to deliver another cohort
and was cooperating with regional partners and national training institutions to provide individual modules at
the national level. However, it is not certain this will materialize.

Financial risk: According to the World Bank team (August 29, 2024) financing remains a challenge for some
countries. However, some countries have taken initiatives to continue building on the results achieved
through ongoing and pipeline programs (e.g. Samoa, Vanuatu).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the PAD (para. 39) the project took lessons learned from other World Bank projects from
  within and outside of the region into account when appraising this program. These lessons included the
  following: i) the importance of consolidating and strengthening existing implementation and institutional
  agencies for the participating Phase I countries, while being mindful not to over-burden existing
  resources; ii) the importance of defining clear roles and responsibilities between various stakeholders
  involved at the regional and national level; and iii) awareness that regional programs can be more
  complex and difficult to prepare and implement, therefore, a simple project design, clear focus on
  investments, and the inclusion of TA activities closely linked to investments would be essential.

  However, the project’s design ended up being overly complex and part 2 of the project (risk reduction and
  resilient investments) was overly broad and vague. According to the ICR (para. 63) support for the
  community-based activities changed substantially from appraisal to negotiations and was reduced from
  developing separate plans, tools, capacity for community resilience in key sectors to supporting
  integrated community plans.

  According to the PAD (para. 55) the World Bank team identified several risks including the following: i)
  the technically and operationally complexity of the project; ii) weak implementation capacity; and iii) weak
  fiduciary capacity. The World Bank team tried to mitigate these risks by providing technical assistance,
  providing training, and including SPCs in the project to provide real time support to countries. However,
  not all mitigation measures were sufficient, and the project experienced several procurement related
  implementation delays. Also, the World Bank team did not identify the risk of difficulties in hiring technical
  experts for hydrometeorology modelling, risk analysis, and DRM, resulting in implementation challenges.

  Furthermore, the Results Framework had several significant shortcomings such as the PDO formulation
  encompassing an objective that was not part of the project, an inadequate PDO indicator and lack of
  PDO indicator to measure the second aspect of the PDO - resilient investments (see section 9a for more
  details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 86) the World Bank team conducted supervision support missions on a bi-
 annual basis (17 supervision missions in total) with Task Team Leaders (TTLs) and fiduciary staff being
 based in the region which allowed for frequent face-to-face meetings. However, the project experienced a
 high turnover of staff (four TTLs and three co-TTLs), resulting in limited supervision during the initial years
 of implementation until the first project restructuring in 2019.

 The ICR (para 86) stated that the project ratings were candid, aide memoires were concise with clearly
 agreed action plans that were monitored, and procurement reviews (conducted on an annual or bi-annual
 basis) identified bottlenecks and provided solutions.



                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



 The World Bank team restructured the project three times to address implementation challenges and revise
 the Results Framework. However, the shortcomings of the Results Framework were never addressed
 appropriately and no PDO indicator was added to measure the achievement of the second aspect of the
 PDO (resilient investments). Furthermore, the inadequate PDO indicator to measure the achievement of
 the first aspect of the objective was never revised either.

 According to the ICR (para. 87) the World Bank team provided support during critical times. For example,
 in 2021 the World Bank team assisted the project team to scrutinize the cost of the proposed LiDAR
 extension to Efate Island resulting in an estimated saving of US$355,000.

 Overall, supervision was weak until the first project restructuring in 2019 and picked up afterwards and the
 World Bank team provided critical support to address implementation challenges. However, the World
 Bank team never sufficiently addressed the significant shortcomings in the Results Framework. Quality of
 Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s Results Framework had several shortcomings. First, the PDO included “financial protection”,
 even though the project did not include any activities/inputs in this area. Therefore, when the project was
 restructured in 2021, the PDO was revised accordingly. And second, the Results Framework did not
 include any PDO indicators to measure the achievement of the expected outcomes. Instead, it only
 included one PDO indicator (the number of direct project beneficiaries) which was inappropriate to measure
 the project outcome. The PAD defined the “beneficiaries” as the “population in Samoa and Tonga who
 were able to receive timely and actionable hazard forecast and warning messages, understand the
 meaning and know what actions to take”. However, this definition was overly complex and consisted of
 different aspects that were challenging to measure. Instead, the Results Framework could have included a
 PDO indicator that measured the time decreased between the occurrence of geohazards detection and
 warnings issued.

 Furthermore, the Results Framework did not include a PDO level indicator to measure the second aspect
 of the PDO, to “strengthen resilient investments”.

 The intermediate outcome indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable, achievable and time-bound.
 However, two of the initial intermediate outcome indicators required beneficiary surveys in Tonga and
 Samoa, for which SPC did not have the appropriate capacity, resulting in the need to replace these two
 indicators.



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



 According to the PAD (para. 49) the implementing agencies in each country and the PIFS at the regional
 level were responsible for the overall monitoring and evaluation of progress towards the PDO.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s Results Framework was restructured three times to modify the PDO and intermediate
  outcome indicators. However, shortcomings persisted throughout implementation. Three of the
  intermediate outcome indicators were overly simplified and targets were defined as “yes/no” with
  baselines and targets not sufficiently defined. For example, intermediate outcome indicator 3 (“multi-
  hazard risk information systems strengthened and in use”) tried to measure two different aspects and did
  not provide a definition for “strengthened” or for “in use”. Also, intermediate outcome indicator 1 (“number
  of personnel working in the disaster management area applying learned skills on the job”) was meant to
  measure the number of personnel trained but did not provide a total number of personnel trained.
  Furthermore, intermediate outcome indicator 2 (“satisfaction of users with the early warning system”) had
  a target of 16 users without stating the proportion of these users out of the total number of users.

  According to the ICR (para. 74) the project’s M&E activities were limited during the initial years of project
  implementation until 2020-21 when an M&E consultant was hired. From 2020 onwards, project reports
  were of good quality with consistent M&E reporting, and were submitted on a bi-annual basis.
  Furthermore, at project completion, the PREP-SOC project commissioned a final evaluation to survey 67
  trainees and project stakeholders as well as to collect impact stories. The ICR (para 74) stated that M&E
  functions were likely to be sustained after project closure since an M&E officer continues to be employed
  by SPC within its Disaster Risk and Community Program.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 75) M&E data were used to inform decision making. For example between
  mid-2018 and mid-2020, when the project’s performance rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory, M&E
  data were used to make several changes including prioritizing regional activities while continuing PSU
  procurement support and focusing on high quality, value-added outputs while dropping activities covered
  by other funding.

  Overall, the quality of M&E is rated as Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment). The project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) for the PREP program. Also, the Financing Agreement included covenants that ensured that all

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



  terms of reference for any technical assistance or studies conducted under the project complied with the
  World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies and requirements and that these policies would
  be considered when drafting any regulations, guidelines, or corporate procedures.

  The project’s safeguard compliance was Satisfactory throughout project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 79) the project delivered bi-annual Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and annual
  audits which were of adequate quality and mostly submitted on time except for the 2016-2019 period when
  delays occurred. Also, all audits were unqualified and the ex-post reviews found that the project’s financial
  management procedures, internal controls and recording of assets, revenues, and expenses as well as
  maintenance of a contract and fixed asset register were adequate. Furthermore, budgets and annual work
  plans were generally prepared in a timely manner.

  In 2016 and 2017 the SPC submitted audits which covered the activities of the entire organization (as
  stated as an option in the PAD annex 8, para. 37). However, the World Bank team found that the
  2017 audit did not meet the World Bank standards and the SPC had to conduct an audit specifically for the
  project which resulted in a three-month delay.

  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para. 80) the project encountered several procurement related implementation
  delays resulting in low disbursement. Between mid-2017 and the end of 2020, the project’s procurement
  performance was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory as a result of inefficient and weak work planning,
  complex SPC corporate procedures, and insufficient technical capacity. These challenges were only
  resolved in mid-2019 when a new project manager was hired and SPC and the World Bank agreed that
  contracts could go directly from the project manager to the director general of SPC for signing. In addition,
  a short-term procurement specialist was hired at the end of 2019 as well as a long-term procurement
  specialist at the beginning of 2020. These measures resulted in an improvement of the project’s
  procurement performance as demonstrated through the increase in procurement from eight percent of
  the total estimated value in 2019 to 81 percent by 2020 with 37 contracts being signed. The ICR stated that
  while procurement post-reviews found incomplete document records in the Systematic Tracking of
  Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), there were no indications of fraud, corruption, or any other governance
  issues.

  The project complied with all legal covenants and at project closure, the procurement rating was
  Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)


                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Relevance of objective was
                                                                                 Substantial, and Efficacy was
                               Moderately            Moderately                  Modest due to lack of evidence
Outcome
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory              at outcome level, and Efficiency
                                                                                 was Modest due to operational
                                                                                 inefficiencies.
                                                                                 Significant shortcomings in
                                                                                 Quality at Entry due to weak
                                                                                 Results Framework and complex
                               Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                 project design, and these
                               Satisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 shortcomings were not
                                                                                 sufficiently addressed during
                                                                                 restructurings.
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The project included several useful lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      If it is not ensured that a project, which is part of an SOP or a multiphase program
       approach, has its own PDO and Results Framework with PDO indicators reflecting the
       project’s scope and outcomes, it may jeopardize the ability to measure the project’s
       achievement. This project adopted the broader PREP PDO, and the original PDO included
       an outcome (financial protection) that the project did not support. Also, the Results
       Framework did not include a PDO indicator to measure the second aspect of the PDO
       (resilient investments).
      Allowing resilience projects some flexibility in terms of design and implementation
       can ensure their relevance. This project’s original design was overly fragmented across too
       many activities, increasing the risk of project activities overlapping with other donor-funded
       projects. However, the flexibility of the World Bank and SPC during implementation allowed
       for an early restructuring to relocate funds to new opportunities such as LiDAR and
       ORNSET.
      Providing DRM trainings in an environment with high staff turnover requires a careful
       consideration in terms of delivery mode. This project was aware of the high staff turnover

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PACIFIC RESILIENCE PROGRAM - SPC (P147839)



         and as a result provided online training to a large number of staff and costly face-to-face
         trainings to selected number of staff.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. It was also internally
consistent and sufficiently candid about persistent issues during project implementation, such as a weak
Results Framework. The ICR provided useful lessons that can be applied to future World Bank engagement in
this area. However, the ICR would have benefitted from providing more data and a better narrative to
demonstrate the achievement of the objectives rather than just the achievement of the indicators. Overall, the
ICR’s quality was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 19
