     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024186

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P132833                                     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                   Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57880                                   30-Jun-2026                                          68,140,139.71

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 09-May-2016                                 30-Sep-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           125,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             70,011,521.74                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         68,140,885.18                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Elisabeth Goller            Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement was “to strengthen
   the Road Development Authority’s (RDA) capacity for asset management and improve the road service
   delivery on the Selected Corridor”, with selected corridor referring to the road section from Ja-Ela to Chilaw on
   National Highway A003. The revised PDO, introduced with a restructuring in 2019, was “to strengthen the
   capacity of the Road Development Authority for asset management and to improve access and asset
   management framework for provincial roads”.


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



   In this validation, the original PDO is parsed as follows:

   (i) to strengthen the RDA's capacity for asset management, and

   (ii) to improve the road service delivery on the Selected Corridor.

   In 2019, objective 2 was cancelled and replaced by the revised objectives 2 and 3. Consequently, the revised
   PDO is parsed as follows:

   (i) to strengthen the capacity of the RDA for asset management,

   (ii) to improve access [through] provincial roads, and

   (iii) to improve the management framework of provincial roads.

   To enhance clarity, this validation splits the revised part of the PDO into two, whereas the approach used in
   the ICR considers it as one objective.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  12-Aug-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had two components, under which the activities presented below were expected to be financed
   (PAD, page 9).

   Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Asset Management (cost at
   appraisal US$22.9 million; cost at the 2019 restructuring US$16 million; cost at the 2020
   restructuring US$9 million; cost at the May 2023 restructuring US$7 million; actual cost: US$6.4
   million) to (i) operationalize the road management system, including data collection and
   system customization and maintenance; (ii) establish/upgrade an asset management unit; (iii) develop a
   road sector strategy and policy; (iv) assess the staffing, skills, and institutional capacity-building needs to
   institutionalize asset management practices; (v) strengthen the capacity to implement design, build,
   maintain, operate, and transfer (DBMOT) contracts; (vi) monitor and evaluate the pilot DBMOT contract; (vii)
   do preparatory work for a possible scale up of DBMOT contracts; (viii) carry out studies and surveys
   necessary to implement the project; and (ix) support to the road development authority (RDA) to become a
   more efficient and service-oriented organization.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  The 2019 restructuring cancelled the activities related to the DBMOT contracts and added a new activity to
  develop standards and specifications to promote road safety. The 2020 restructuring retained the activities
  (i) to (iii) above and changed the activity to develop standards and specifications to promote road safety to
  develop a road safety strategy and action plan.

  Component 2: Piloting the Implementation of Road Asset Management Principles (cost at appraisal
  US$102.1 million; cost at the 2019 restructuring US$0 million; actual cost: US$0 million) to finance a
  DBMOT contract for the about 58 km Ja-Ela to Chilaw section of the A003 corridor. Through the 2019
  restructuring, this activity was cancelled.

  Revised component 2: Provincial Roads Improvements, introduced with the 2019 restructuring (cost
  at 2019 restructuring: US$109 million; cost at the 2020 restructuring, US$81 million; cost at the May
  2023 restructuring US$63 million; actual cost: US$61.74 million) to finance (i) the rehabilitation of 633
  km of provincial roads; (ii) capacity building of the local construction industry through various training
  programs; and (iii) developing a road map for natural resource availability, efficiency, and value engineering
  applications. The 2020 and March and May 2023 restructuring reduced the km to be rehabilitated to 423
  and 392 and cancelled the respective funds. The March 2023 restructuring cancelled the activity to develop
  a road map for natural resource availability, efficiency, and value engineering applications.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual total project cost was US$68.14 million, which is 55 percent of the original cost
  estimate of US$125 million and 97 percent of the latest revised cost estimate of US$70 million (ICR, annex
  3).

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA credit.

  Recipient Contribution. The project did not envisage a recipient contribution. Nevertheless, the project
  experienced delays because the recipient allocated inadequate annual budget amounts due to fiscal
  constraints (ICR, para 63).

  Dates and Project Restructuring. The project was approved on May 9, 2016, became effective on
  December 8, 2017, and was expected to close on June 30, 2026. With the 2019 restructuring, the closing
  date was anticipated to March 31, 2023 to align it with the duration of the new project activities. The closing
  date was extended in March 2023 by six months, to September 30, 2023 to complete the remaining
  activities mainly delayed by COVID and the economic crisis. This date corresponds to the actual closing
  date.

  Overall, the project was restructured five times. In September 2017, the reference to DBMOT in the
  financing agreement was change to design, build, and maintain (DBM) because operation and transfer of
  transport assets was considered not in line with Sri Lankan legislation and adjust the indicator targets,
  disbursement estimates, and the duration of the DBM contract to account for the delays in the signing of the
  financing agreement. The August 2019 restructuring revised the PDO and the PDO and intermediate results
  indicators, changed the project components, activities, and costs as mentioned in 2.d above, advanced the
  credit closing date, changed the implementation arrangements and other adjustment to align the project to
  the revised objectives and scope. The June 2020 restructuring cancelled US$35 million to be allocated to
  the COVID response and reduced the project scope and intermediate results indicator targets accordingly.

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



   The March 2023 restructuring extended the closing date, adjusted the scope of the rehabilitation works and
   dropped and reduced intermediate results indicator. The May 2023 restructuring cancelled US$20 million of
   uncommitted funds.

   Split Rating. This validation applies a double split rating because (i) the 2019 restructuring revised the
   PDO, the indicators, and targets, and changed the project scope, and (ii) the 2020 restructuring revised
   indicator targets and substantially narrowed the project scope. The March 2023 restructuring deleted all
   activities and the single output indicator related to the revised objective 3 (the project had no outcome
   indicator to measure the achievement of this objective). However, the project carried out a few other
   activities (not envisaged in the project documents and not measured), which plausibly contributed to the
   revised objective 3. Although IEG considered a third split rating because of the March 2023 restructuring,
   we did not carry it out because it would not have impacted the rating of the revised objective 3 nor the
   project under a third revision. The split rating will therefore consider end achievements against (i) the
   original objectives, indicators, and targets, (i) the 2019 revised objectives, indicators, and targets, and (iii)
   the 2020 revised indicators and targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. In 2009, the Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) came out of a 30-year civil
war and focused on reconstruction and growth. At appraisal in 2016, investment in infrastructure was still
a key priority, with the transport sector receiving significant funds. Roads were (and still are) the
predominant mode of transport, carrying 95 percent of passengers and 98 percent of freight. Despite
large investments, at appraisal, at the national level, (i) road maintenance was partially neglected, (ii)
a comprehensive and modern road asset management system was not yet in use, and (iii) insufficient
attention was paid to life cycle considerations in asset management. All this caused the inefficient use of
fiscal resources in the road sector. Therefore, more efficient investments in roads through modern asset
management, including a new contracting modality, were high on the sector agenda. At the time of the
2019 restructuring, the GoSL shifted its priorities to rehabilitating provincial roads. The Bank team
mentioned during the discussions with IEG on August 5, 2025 (all references to discussions between the
Bank team and IEG in this ICRR refer to this date) that the GoSL requested a shift to provincial roads to
serve the rural communities, which make up a large part of the population. The Bank team also informed
IEG that they had agreed to this request because it addressed the country’s development agenda while
delivering urgent improvements to the depreciated provincial road network. Provincial roads had received
less investments and experienced a backlog in road works that jeopardized the access to markets and
services for a significant part of the country's large rural population. The GoSL capacity to efficiently
manage provincial roads was weak.

Alignment with Strategy. At appraisal in 2016, the PDO was fully in line with all three pillar of the Bank’s
FY13-FY16 Sri Lanka Country Partnership Strategy, which consisted of (i) expanding economic
opportunities in lagging regions, (ii) improving the investment climate and competitiveness, and (iii)
improving quality of service and accountability. Under these pillars, the strategy referred to improvements
in national and provincial roads. The pillars of the Bank's FY17-21 Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
were (i) improving macro-fiscal stability and competitiveness, (ii) promoting inclusion and opportunities for
all, and (iii) seizing green growth opportunities, improving environmental management, and enhancing

                                                                                                         Page 4 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



               adaptation and mitigation potential. Although improved road asset management is greatly important to
               the CPF's first pilar because it leads to better fiscal management and access helps with inclusion, the
               PDO's alignment to this CPF is somewhat weaker than to the previous one given the lack of explicit focus
               on climate agenda. The focus of the Bank's FY24-FY27 CPF remains similar to the FY17-21 CPF, with
               the main pillars being (i) economic stabilization and private sector job creation, with an emphasis on fiscal
               sustainability and economic inclusion, and (ii) protected and enhanced human and natural capital,
               including an emphasis on climate resilience.

               Previous Sector Experience. The Bank had several road sector projects in the country, mainly
               to rehabilitate national, provincial, and rural roads and to address climate mitigation. The PAD (para 13)
               described the Road Sector Assistance Project, approved in 2006, as transformational because it
               addressed the country's maintenance backlog. Its objective was to lower transportation costs through
               sustainable delivery of an efficient national road system that would serve the needs of road users and the
               Sri Lankan public at large. The PAD (para 13) also pointed out that the Bank previously helped the RDA
               with several institutional changes and reforms, piloting new road sector initiatives and developing contract
               management capacity.

               Responsiveness to Changing Country Needs. The project adequately responded to a shift in the
               priorities of the GoSL mainly through the 2019 restructuring.

               The original and revised PDOs address key problems in the road sector, which were part
               of key development challenges in Sri Lanka. At appraisal, these PDOs were highly relevant and in
               full alignment with Bank strategy. By project closure, the PDO still remained aligned with Bank strategy,
               but its relevance somewhat decreased in the light of other upcoming development priorities in the
               country. The PDO is more-output than outcome-oriented but appropriately pitched for a country like Sri
               Lanka. Compared to previous Bank activities in the sector, the project's PDO evolved by focusing more
               on the reform and capacity strengthening results in the sector. Therefore, despite a slight decrease in the
               relevance of the PDO in light of other more urgent development challenges in the country by project
               closure, it still aligns with the current CPF and tackles significant development challenges. Therefore, the
               relevance of objectives is rated substantial.
               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the RDA's capacity for asset management.

                             Rationale
                             According to the theory of change (ToC), activities to (i) operationalize the road asset management system;
                             (ii) establish an asset management unit; (iii) develop a road sector strategy and policy; (iv) assess staffing,
                             skills, and institutional capacity-building needs to institutionalize asset management practices; (v)

                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



strengthen the capacity to implement DBMOT contracts; (vi) monitor and evaluate the pilot DBMOT (read
DBM after the 2017 restructuring) contract; (vii) prepare for a possible scale up of DBMOT contracts; and (viii)
support the RDA to become a more efficient and service-oriented organization were expected to have as
outputs (i) improved asset management tools and resources, (ii) capacity, information, and preparatory work
to roll out a new contracting modality, (iii) a new transport strategy and policy, and (iv) studies, services,
or tool to make the RDA more efficient and service-oriented. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to (ii)
enhanced road maintenance and investment decisions, (ii) a roll out of the DBMOT modality, (iii) a clear
direction for the road sector, and (iv) a more efficient and service-oriented RDA, which all indicate
strengthened capacity for road asset management in the RDA. The main assumptions were that (i) the
government would be committed to the capacity strengthening activities, (ii) the DBMOT contract would
work in Sri Lanka, and (iii) strategies and policies would be followed.

The ToC has no logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

Outputs

The following outputs materialized during the life of the project to achieve objective 1 (ICR, paras 19 to
28 and annexes 1 and 7):

      11 modules of the road asset management system were fully activated, work is still ongoing on the
       bridge management system and on three new models, and data collection for most of the modules
       has been completed. With this, the original target of "continuous data collection and upgrading of all
       10 modules" is exceeded. The Bank team explained to IEG that the RDA developed a comprehensive
       asset management system under the previous Bank-supported project. Under this project, the RDA
       activated all modules, completed the system with four new modules and equipment, ensured periodic
       data collection (for risks to future data collection see section 7), and regular use.
      A separate division for asset management was established, headed by a Deputy Director General,
       achieving the original target of "asset management unit coordinating asset management contracts
       and asset management system". The ICR (paras 21 and 22) mentions that in 2024, this division
       absorbed the staff of the previous asset management unit under the planning division and is in charge
       for road planning. The Bank team informed IEG that even if the head of this new division is a
       champion in road asset management, the project played an essential role to raise awareness on the
       importance of asset management and establish this division.
      A road sector policy and strategy were developed, only partially achieving the original target of
       "having the policy and strategy developed and approved". The policy and strategy were still under
       revision at the time of the ICR preparation despite the fact that the draft was submitted to the
       government in 2019 (2019 restructuring paper).

Other outputs not captured through project indicators:

      A standard bidding document for DBM contracts for national roads was developed: The Bank team
       mentioned to IEG that the project hired consultants and held workshops to prepare the DBM bid
       document based on the Bank's outcome and performance-based road contracts (OPRC) model,
       which ADB used for two contracts in Sri Lanka in 2019.
      An asset valuation methodology was piloted: The project supported the RDA to develop and test
       a methodology to systematically collect and value road asset conditions.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




      RDA staff was trained in the asset valuation methodology, Highway Development and
       Management Model (HDM-4) software, road safety, Bank procurement framework, Fédération
       Internationale des Ingénieurs - Conseils (FIDIC) construction conditions, construction claims and
       dispute resolution, and public procurement procedures and practices. The ICR does not specify the
       number of staff trained.
      A diagnostic study on road design and construction practices in Sri Lanka was conducted, focusing on
       existing pavement methods, materials used, pavement and bridge maintenance procedures,
       to identify new cost-effective methods and technologies. This study led to proposals for specification
       updates, design guidelines, and updates of road manuals.

Outcomes

By project completion, 76.24 percent of the new investments in national roads were selected based on the
road asset management system, slightly exceeding the original target of 70 percent. The baseline was 20
percent. In particular, information generated by the division for asset management with the road asset
management system informed the development of National Road Master Plans of 2018-2027 and 2021-2030.
The RDA also used the system in decisions on the maintenance budgets for national roads at the provincial
level.

The project did not contract any DBMOT (read DBM after the 2017 restructuring), not achieving its original
target of "four DBMOT (read DBM after the 2017 restructuring) contracts for national roads being contracted"
because the activities to implement DBM contracts were cancelled in 2019. The ICR (para 26) mentions that
this target was partially achieved because it was meant to be reached through a joint programmatic approach
with ADB (confirmed on page 24 PAD), and ADB completed two contracts using the standard bidding
document prepared under this project. The GoSL has not issued any new contracts since.

The ICR (para 27) mentions that the project helped strengthen the capacity and knowledge of RDA staff was
improved through a series of trainings, which was not captured by an indicator. The Bank team provided a
few examples of capacity enhancements to IEG. For instance, a RDA engineer who got procurement training
through the project was promoted to the agency's procurement specialist. In addition, staff using the road
asset management system provided training to regional offices.

In summary, the project enhanced road maintenance and investment decisions and contributed to ADB
completing two DBM contracts. However, the project did not carry out the comprehensive set of activities to
help roll out the DBM methodology in the RDA. The road sector strategy and policy, prepared under the
project, are also not guiding the sector because they have not yet been approved. Therefore, the RDA's
capacity for asset management is considered as only partially strengthened, and the efficacy of objective 1
under the original indicators and targets is rated modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen the capacity of the RDA for asset management.

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




Revised Rationale
According to the ToC for objective 1 under the revised targets, activities to (i) operationalize the road asset
management system; (ii) establish an asset management unit; (iii) develop a road sector strategy and policy;
(iv) assess staffing, skills, and institutional capacity-building needs to institutionalize asset management
practices; (v) support the RDA to become a more efficient and service-oriented organization, and (vi) develop
standards and specifications to promote road safety (in 2020 changed to develop a road safety strategy and
action plan) were expected to have as outputs (i) improved asset management tools and resources, (ii) a
new transport strategy and policy, (iii) studies, services, or tool to make the RDA more efficient and service-
oriented, and (iv) tools to promote road safety. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to (ii) enhanced road
maintenance and investment decisions, (ii) a clear direction for the road sector, (iii) a more efficient and
service-oriented RDA, and (iv) enhanced road safety capacity, which all indicate strengthened capacity for
road asset management in the RDA. The main assumptions were that (i) the government would be committed
to the capacity strengthening activities and (ii) standards, laws, strategies, and similar instruments and tools
would be approved and used.

The ToC has no logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

Outputs

Under the revised targets, the project exceeded the unchanged original target of "continuous data
collection and upgrading of all 10 modules" and achieved the unchanged original target of "asset
management unit coordinating asset management contracts and asset management system". It only partially
achieved the unchanged original target of "having the policy and strategy developed and approved"
(see outputs listed above for objective 1 under the original targets).

The project developed a road safety action plan under the pilot iRAP surveys, but it did not achieve the
target introduced in 2019 of "developing standards and specifications for road safety". It partially achieved
the largely equivalent target revised in 2020 of "developing a road safety strategy and action plan". The
Bank team informed IEG that this plan is different from a road safety strategy and action plan because it only
covers the road safety features on the about 1,000 km of surveyed roads. The ICR also reports the following
additional road safety outputs, not included in the results framework, hence without targets (ICR, paras 19 to
28 and annexes 1 and 7):

      Three RDA staff were trained and accredited in road safety assessment through the piloting of
       the International Road Assessment Program (iRAP): Three engineers received the iRAP accreditation
       and have since been expanding the iRAP assessments in the RDA.
      Technical designs to correct road safety weaknesses on provincial roads were prepared.

Finally, the ICR reports other outputs not captured through project indicators, listed above for objective 1
under the original targets.

Outcomes

As seen under objective 1 under the original indicators and targets above, the project enhanced RDA's road
maintenance and investment decisions, slightly exceeding the unchanged original target.



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



The ICR (para 27) mentions that the project helped strengthen the capacity and knowledge of RDA staff
through a series of trainings, which was not captured by an indicator. The Bank team provided a few
examples of capacity enhancements to IEG. For instance, RDA staff trained to use the road asset
management system provided training to staff in regional offices. In addition, RDA staff trained in the first
iRAP pilot phase carried out the second phase of the iRAP pilot on 607 km of provincial roads on their own,
indicating that their capacity to carry out road safety assessments had been improved.

The DBMOT indicators was dropped together will all activities related to DBMOT in the 2019 restructuring,
which meant that one of the two expected outcomes under this objective was dropped. The remaining
outcome slightly exceeded its target.

In summary, the project enhanced road maintenance and investment decisions, slightly exceeding the
respective outcome target. It also enhanced the capacity of RDA staff, especially in the area of road safety.
Therefore, even if not all outputs have been achieved as planned, the RDA's capacity for asset management
was strengthened with minor shortcomings, and the efficacy of objective 1 under the revised indicators
and targets is rated substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the road service delivery on the Selected Corridor.

Rationale
According to the ToC of the original objective 2, the activity to rehabilitate about 58 km Ja-Ela to Chilaw
section of the A003 corridor through a DBMOT contract was to have as output a rehabilitated road
with ongoing maintenance. In terms of outcomes, this road section was to have a roughness of 2.5 in terms of
the international Roughness Index and a high level of user satisfaction on the corridor, which would indicate
improved service delivery on the corridor. The main assumptions were that (i) the government would
be committed to rehabilitate this road section under the DBMOT contract and (ii) the rehabilitation would be of
good quality.

The ToC has no logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

Outputs and outcomes

This project activity was not carried out, and the originally expected output of rehabilitating 58 km of road was
not achieved. The following original outcomes were also not achieved:

      2.5 percent reduction in average roughness on the selected corridor(s)
      Increased user satisfaction on the corridor (baseline and target to be established by project start)
      15 percent reduction in the number of accidents on the corridor



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



Hence, the efficacy of the original objective 2 is rated negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve access [through] provincial roads.

Revised Rationale
The original objective 2 was dropped and replaced with this new objective 2, revision 1. According to its ToC,
the activities to rehabilitate provincial roads were expected to have as output rehabilitated provincial roads. In
terms of outcomes, this was to lead to (i) free flow travel and (ii) reduced vehicle operating cost on
these roads, and thereby improved access through provincial roads. The main assumptions were that (i) the
rehabilitation would be of good quality and (ii) the traffic would not increase too quickly to impede free flow
travel.

The ToC has no logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

Outputs

The following outputs materialized during the life of the project to achieve the new objective 2, revision 1
(ICR, paras 30 to 36 and annex 1):

      385 km of roads were rehabilitated, which is significantly short of the revision 1 target of 633 km.
      355 km of roads were covered with new signage and marking to enhance safety, which is
       significantly short of the revision 1 target of 633 km. The completion of significantly less km of
       roads was due to the cancellation of funds. In addition, according to the Bank team (e-mail dated
       October 16, 2024), this was also due to cost increases caused by high inflation and limited availability
       of construction material.

Outcomes

The project helped reduce travel times in the three selected provinces by 14, 13, and 13 percent, exceeding
the revision 1 target of 10 percent. Free flow travel speeds for cars went up from 26 kmph at baseline to 43
kmph, exceeding the revision 1 target of 29 kmph. For buses, they went up from 19 kmph at baseline to
36 kmph, exceeding the revision 1 target of 21 kmph, and for trucks, they went up from 21 kmph at
baseline to 34 kmph, exceeding the revision 1 target of 23 kmph. The Bank team informed IEG that the
free flow travel speed targets were likely too conservative.

The ICR (para 31) claims that the project helped improve the living standards of provincial and rural
communities through better road connectivity but does not provide evidence on improved living standards.

In summary, the project improved access and exceeded the outcome indicator targets. However, access was
improved on significantly less kilometers of provincial roads than planned. The ICR (para 31) also pointed out

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



that although the project improved drainage systems and retention walls to ensure all year access, it could
have benefitted from improving bridges along the rehabilitated roads to ensure seamless connectivity and
focus more on road safety. Therefore, the achievement of this new objective 2, revision1, is rated
modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve access [through] provincial roads.

Revised Rationale
According to the ToC of the new objective 2, revision 2, the activities to rehabilitate provincial roads were
expected to have as output rehabilitated provincial roads. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to (i) free
flow travel and (ii) reduced vehicle operating cost on these roads, and thereby improve access through
provincial roads. The main assumptions were that (i) the rehabilitation would be of good quality and (ii) the
traffic would not increase too quickly to impede free flow travel.

The ToC has no logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

Outputs

The following outputs materialized during the life of the project to achieve the new objective 2, revision 2
(ICR, paras 30 to 36 and annex 1):

      385 km of roads were rehabilitated, almost achieving the revision 2 target of 424 km.
      355 km of roads were covered with new signage and marking to enhance safety, almost achieving
       the revision 2 target of 424 km.

Outcomes

The project improved access with the same minor shortcoming related to bridge improvements and road
safety and exceeded the outcome indicator targets, as shown under new objective 2, revision 1 above.

Therefore, because revision 2 reduced the km target for the roads on which access was to be improved, and
the project almost reached the revised km target, the achievement of this new objective 2, revision 2, is
rated substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Not applicable because this objective 3 was introduced with the 2019 restructuring.

Rationale
Not applicable because this objective 3 was introduced with the 2019 restructuring.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve [the] management framework for provincial roads.

Revised Rationale
This objective 3, revision 1, was introduced with the 2019 restructuring. According to the ToC, derived from
information the 2019 restructuring paper (para 6), activities to (i) build capacity of the local construction
industry through various training programs and (ii) develop a road map for natural resource availability,
efficiency, and value engineering applications were expected to have as outputs (i) a trained local
construction industry and (ii) a road map for natural resource availability, efficiency, and value engineering. In
terms of outcomes, this was to lead to (i) greater capacity of the local construction industry and (ii) guidance
for more efficient resource use and value engineering, thus leading to an improved asset management
framework for provincial roads. The main assumptions were that (i) the training would lead to improved
capacity and (i) the guidance would be used.

The ToC has logical gaps because training does not automatically lead to improved capacity. It is also
unclear to what degree the results are likely attributable to the project activities because it was not defined
what was meant by "improved asset management framework", which also lacked outcome targets to measure
it. For the purpose of this validation, IEG defines "improved asset management framework" as "greater
availability of capacity and tools to carry out asset management".

Outputs

The project did neither develop the road map for optimal use of natural resource availability, efficiency, and
value engineering applications nor carry out the capacity building activities of the local construction industry
(confirmed by the Bank team to IEG). Hence, it did not achieve the revision 1 target of having a "road map
for optimal use of natural resource, including local contractor capacity building".

However, the ICR reports that the project achieved additional outputs that could plausibly have contributed to
"greater availability of capacity and tools to carry out asset management." These outputs were produced with
the help of the project's Center of Excellence and include the following (ICR, paras 32 to 35):

      Design standards and user guides for provincial road works used in project implementation.



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 25
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                                  17 trained provincial road engineers in bridge and highways designs, quality assurance, contract
                                     administration, payments, claims and variation procedures, environmental and social (E&S)
                                     requirements, which according to the Bank team, were expected to train their peers.
                                    Diagnostic study on the existing asset management practices for provincial roads: The Bank team
                                     mentioned to IEG that the Center carried out this study, which highlighted the need for funding and
                                     capacity building for the provincial road agencies, proper road asset management, and road data
                                     collection.
                                    Road asset data collected for a core road network of 200-300 km in each province.
                                    Workshops to introduce road asset management at the provincial level.
                                    Simplified and systematic road selection framework introduced for the project works used during
                                     project implementation: The ICR mentions that road agencies expect to use the framework for their
                                     future road selection decision-making. The Bank team mentioned that provincial road agency staff is
                                     pleased with this took, which enable them to technical defend their priorities.

                            The task team informed IEG that the provincial road authorities had low capacity to design and supervise
                            road works. Therefore, the project set up a Center of Excellence, consisting of five road professionals, to
                            create capacity and support project implementation. This Center produced design standards and user guides,
                            prepared and carried out training for road work planning, design, and supervision, and helped with project
                            implementation, among others. However, the GoSL has not maintained the Center of Excellence beyond
                            project implementation because of fiscal constraints.

                            Outcomes

                            The Bank team informed IEG that the provincial road authorities had low capacity to design and supervise
                            road works. Therefore, the project set up a Center of Excellence, consisting of five road professionals, to
                            create capacity and support project implementation. This Center produced design standards and user guides,
                            prepared and carried out training for road work planning, design, and supervision, and helped with project
                            implementation, among others. However, the GoSL has not formally established the Center of Excellence
                            because of fiscal constraints.

                            In summary, despite the laudable efforts to strengthen the capacity of provincial road agencies during project
                            implementation and possible positive results (not documented), the achievement of objective 3, revision 1,
                            is rated modest. This is because the project (i) did not clarify what improvements in the provincial roads
                            management framework means, (ii) had no outcome indicator to measure the achievement of objective 3,
                            revision 1, (iii) the originally planned road management-related activities mentioned in the 2019 restructuring
                            paper were not carried out, and (iv) the single output indicator was not achieved and dropped shortly before
                            project closure.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 13 of 25
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




         Rationale
         Under the original PDO, indicators, and targets, objective 1 was partially achieved and is rated modest, and
         objective 2 was not achieved and is rated negligible. Overall, the project barely achieved its objectives under
         the original PDO, indicators, and targets, and the overall efficacy is rated negligible.




         Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
         Negligible                                                Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Under revision 1 PDO, indicators, and targets, objective 1 was achieved with minor shortcomings and is rated
         substantial, and objectives 2 and 3 were partially achieved and were rated modest. Overall, the project
         partially achieved its objectives under the revision 1 PDO, indicators, and targets, and the overall efficacy
         is rated modest.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
         Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Under the revision 2 PDO, indicators, and targets, objectives 1 and 2 were achieved with minor shortcomings
         and are rated substantial. Objective 3 was partially achieved and was rated modest. Overall, the project
         achieved its objectives under the revision 2 PDO, indicators, and targets with minor shortcoming, and the
         overall efficacy is rated substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, the GoSL carried out a cost benefit analysis for component 2, which amounted to 82 percent of the
total project cost. The analysis used HDM4 to calculate the economic costs and benefits by comparing ‘without’
and ‘with’ project scenarios. It used a discount rate of 12 percent and a time period of 20 years. The analysis for
the scenario to be implemented showed an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 23.3 percent and net
present values (NPVs) of US$57.7 million. This corresponds to approximately LKR8.4 billion at the January 1,


                                                                                                           Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



2016 exchange rate (Note: the economic analysis in the PAD was carried out in US$ whereas the economic
analyses at restructuring and by project end were done in LKR). The NPV increased by about US$0.01 million
when greenhouse gas emissions were included and also showed a slight increase in the EIRR (exact increase
not specified in the PAD).

At the approval of the 2019 restructuring, the GoSL carried out a new economic analysis for the revised
component 2, using the same methodology as in the original analysis. The revised component 2 amounted to 87
percent of the total project cost. This new analysis resulted in an EIRR of 16.6 percent and a NPV of LKR8.1
billion.

At completion, the GoSL repeated the cost benefit analysis for the revised component 2, the actual cost of
which amounted to 90 percent of the total project cost. This showed an EIRR of 12.2 percent and an NPV of
LKR3 billion. The ICRR (annex 4) attributes the lower ex-post EIRR and NPV compared to the ex-ante
estimates to the country's lower economic growth than anticipated, which negatively affected the traffic volumes
and hence the project benefits. This explanation is plausible.

Implementation and Administrative Efficiency

The GoSL only signed the Financial Agreement 17 months after project approval because of disagreements on
language used in it. Once effective, the project had delays in obtaining approvals to hire staff for the asset
management unit, which delayed the asset management system related activities. Delays also happened in the
implementation of the provincial road rehabilitation due to (i) insufficient staff in the PMU, (ii) lack of staff with
adequate capacity in provincial road agencies, (iii) poor performance of some contractors, (iv) changes in
decision makers at national level, but above all, (v) external factors, such as COVID, the Easter Sunday attacks,
and the economic crisis leading to travel restrictions, fuel shortages, import restrictions, and inadequate budget
allocations because of fiscal constraints.

The project, as revised with the 2019 restructuring, was extended by 6 months to complete the remaining project
activities. Despite the implementation delays and the extension, the activities under the revised project were
implemented in slightly more than four years, which is reasonable for a road rehabilitation project implemented
in 9 provinces. The revised project achieved most of its revised output targets, and the final project cost was 3
percent lower than the cost estimate after the second cancellation of grant proceeds in May 2023.

Because of (i) the significant effectiveness delay, (ii) the low EIRR for a road rehabilitation project, which was
also 27 percent lower than estimated at the moment of the project restructuring, (iii) the lower NPV compared to
the appraisal estimate, and (iv) implementation delays, even if these had small impacts on the overall
implementation period and were largely beyond the project's control, the efficiency of project implementation
is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:


                                                                                                        Page 15 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   82.00
Appraisal                                                16.60
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   87.00
ICR Estimate                                             12.20
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to government priorities and the World Bank strategy at closing is substantial. The
project was implemented in an only partially efficient way because of effectiveness and implementation delays
and the lower EIRR and NVP at closing compared to the appraisal ones. Considering these ratings and
weighting them by the share of disbursements before and after the two main restructurings, the overall outcome
is moderately satisfactory, indicating moderate shortcomings in the project's achievements of its objectives and
its efficiency.

                          Original PDO and     PDO and targets        PDO and targets
                          targets              revision 1             revision 2
Relevance of objective    Substantial          Substantial            Substantial
Efficacy                  Negligible           Modest                 Substantial
Efficiency                Modest               Modest                 Modest
Numeric value of
                          2                    3                      4
outcome rating
Disbursement (US$ Mio)    1.58                 4.85                   61.71
Share of disbursement
                          2.32                 7.12                   90.56
(%)
Weighted value            0.05                 0.21                   3.62
Final overall outcome
                                               MS
rating

0.05 + 0.21 + 3.62 = 3.93, which rounds up to 4 = Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



Government ownership and commitment risk: The most significant and likely risk to project development
outcomes is that the GoSL does not allocate the necessary budget provisions (i) to maintain the provincial
roads rehabilitated under the project and (ii) to rehabilitate the provincial roads, which could not have been
completed under the project because of the cancellation of funds to enable the GoSL to respond to COVID. If
this risk materializes, it would potentially have significant negative impacts on improved access.

Capacity risk: At the national level, the likelihood that the RDA will discontinue to use road asset
management system for investment decision making is small. In addition to having a strong champion in the
head of the road asset management division, the RDA already has a good track record in using the system
for decision making. However, if the use of this system for decision making is discontinued, it would
potentially have significant impacts on asset management strengthening. Periodic road data collection is
done in-house with the RDA's equipment, so it is likely to continue even though the RDA lost experienced
staff because of the recent economic and political crisis in the country. At the provincial level, the risk is high
that the benefits of the exposure to asset management and capacity strengthening achieved during project
implementation will not be sustained mainly because of a lack of funding and government commitment. If this
happens, the impact will be moderate because the achievements have been moderate.

Technical risk: The Bank team mentioned to IEG that the technical risk that the asset management system
becomes outdated is low because it is flexible and based on models that can easily be changed and
adapted. In addition, the RDA has an ongoing contract for the maintenance of the system until 2029. If this
risk materialized, it would have a moderate negative impact because basic investment priorities could still be
obtained with an outdated system.

Exposure to natural disasters: Sri Lanka is highly exposed to natural disasters, such as tsunamis and high
rainfalls. Therefore, there is a significant and moderately likely risk that some of the project roads could be
washed away or destroyed and the benefits of access at least temporarily lost, especially considering the
project's lack of resilience focus.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team supported a project in an area that was a high priority for the country at the time of
  appraisal and important in terms of the country's development challenges. The team built on its previous
  engagement in the country and closely worked together with the ADB to introduce DBMOT contracting.
  The original project design was sound because it included a comprehensive set of activities necessary to
  enhance the success of DBMOT contracting, such as an operational asset management system and the
  unit, staffing and institutional assessments, capacity strengthening, contact piloting, pilot monitoring and
  evaluation, and preparations for broader rollout. By project approval, substantial preparatory work to
  implement the DBMOT contract under the project had taken place, with the conceptual design, the
  environmental and social assessments, and the draft bid document being ready. Although the PAD is
  comprehensive, it provides few details on how the construction industry would have to be prepared for
  the new contracting model, which constitutes a fundamental shift in how road works are implemented.
  Therefore, the Bank team could have included project activities to help the construction industry prepare
  for this shift.


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  The Bank team paid adequate attention to the social, environmental, and fiduciary aspects during
  preparation and helped design a largely adequate results framework. The team considered the overall
  project risk as moderate. Although the team considered the institutional capacity risk for implementation
  as substantial, given the fundamental shift that DBMOT contracting involves, the technical design risk
  could also have been considered to be substantial. The Bank team informed IEG that the 17-month
  effectiveness delay caused by legal restriction to have DBMOT contracts on national roads in the
  country (DBM contracts are fine) was not due to the Bank's lack of due diligence. This is because in
  general financing agreements are reviewed by the Attorney General before appraisal, and the use of
  DBMOT contracts was not raised as a problem at that stage.

  The Bank team supported the preparation and appraisal of the original project with minor
  shortcomings. Therefore, the project's quality at entry is rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project became effective in December 2017 and in May 2018, the GoSL already formally asked the
 Bank to cancel the DBM activities and use the funds for provincial roads improvements. The Bank team
 informed IEG that this happened because the GoSL shifted its priorities to provincial roads..

 With respect to the revised design, the Bank team showed great flexibility and agility in adapting the project
 to the new priorities and circumstances in the country. The team agreed with the GoSL on a framework for
 data-driven road selection for rehabilitation on provincial roads. The team rightly updated the project risk to
 substantial considering the absence of a sector framework at provincial level. However, the team proposed
 only generic and vague mitigation measures, such as hiring consultants. The Bank team carried out the
 necessary due diligence in terms of environmental and social safeguards also for the restructured
 project. The restructuring paper had shortcomings in terms of reporting on the economic analysis.

 Because the revised project intervened at the national level and in 9 provinces, the implementation
 arrangements were complex by nature. In addition, because of the GoSL's desire to directly involve the
 provincial road agencies' own staff to create capacity, these arrangements became even more complex. In
 these circumstances, the Bank team's decision to keep fiduciary responsibility with a central PMU was
 adequate.

 In hindsight, given the limited capacity at provincial level, the planned activities to enhance the provincial
 road management capacity were not the highest priority, and the Bank team could have insisted on
 including in the project more appropriate activities to create capacity and provide support to provincial road
 agencies. Among other, the lack of adequate capacity strengthening activities resulted in weak contract
 management that caused implementation problems and delays. The Bank team did also not adequately
 assist the GoSL to formulate the objective 3 of "improving [the] management framework for provincial
 roads", which lacks clarity, a definition, and outcome indicators. This led to difficulties in assessing the
 project achievements.



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



 The Bank team also missed an opportunity to make sure the technical scope of the rehabilitation works
 was comprehensive, e.g. to include bridges (ICR, para 61).

 The revised project implementation period of less than 4 years for the original 633 km of
 rehabilitation spread over 9 provinces was ambitious. Eventually, the government only rehabilitated slightly
 more than half of these kilometers in an implementation period that was extended by 6 months. However,
 the external factors outlined in section 5 also negatively affected the delay and the reduced outputs.

 Apart from the shortcoming related to project restructuring, the ICR (paras 81 to 85) shows that the Bank
 constantly monitored the project progress and outcomes and provided very strong project implementation
 support, especially after initial problems occurred, such as contract management issues, shortcomings in
 safeguards implementation, and three fatal accidents. The Bank team carried out 10 formal supervision
 missions. The Bank team also carried out many informal meetings with the client, which were possible
 because most of the Bank team was based in the field. The strong Bank team support also continued
 during COVID. Bank team put in place a contract monitoring framework to closely monitor civil works
 progress, discussed contract-by-contract in bi-weekly progress meetings, advised on measures to address
 implementation delays, such as through sub-contracting, refining contract scopes,
 and improving cashflows. The Bank team closely followed up on safeguard-related issues and carried out
 specific missions to monitor safeguards implementation and periodic review meetings to ensure
 implementation and compliance of agreed work zone safety measures. Since the project had shortcomings
 in reporting both in terms of regularity and substance (ICR, para 67), the Bank team played an important
 role in tracking project progress and the achievement of the results.

 IEG's discussions with the Bank team showed how thoroughly the Bank team understood the project
 details and how closely they were engaged in setting up the road asset management division and elevating
 road management to a key function in the RDA. These discussions also revealed the strong efforts of the
 Bank team to ensure that the provincial road contracts could be successfully completed during a period
 when the country faced COVID and a serious political and economic crisis.

 In summary, the Bank team's performance in supporting project restructuring had some shortcomings, but
 the team played a strong and constant role in supported the implementation of this complex project.
 Consequently, the Bank performance in supervision is rated moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


a. M&E Design



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



 According to the PAD (paras 42 and 43), the RDA was to be responsible for project monitoring and
 evaluation (M&E) under the original project. The RDA was to have a project management unit (PMU) and
 the support of a management consultant for the overall monitoring of the DBMOT contracts.

 The project's original PDO was clear, and the project activities were logically linked to the expected
 outputs, outcomes, and impacts. The original PDO indicators were outcome-oriented and adequate to
 measure the achievement of the PDO. The indicator "number of DBMOT contracts for national roads
 contracted" could have been considered as a PDO indicator instead of an intermediate results indicator
 because it measured the success of RDA's efforts in introducing new asset management tools.

 The original targets were realistically set. All indicators had baseline data, except the one for the user
 satisfaction survey, which was to be established by project start. The PAD (annex 1) provided clear
 definitions and guidance on data collection for each indicator.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (paras 65 and 66) points out that the RDA could have benefitted from the development of an
  M&E system as proposed in the original project, which was dropped at the 2019 restructuring. The Bank
  team informed IEG that this system was expected to help monitor in real time the status and progress of
  each project activity.

  After the 2019 restructuring, an additional PMU was created for the project activities at the provincial
  level. This PMU was also responsible for M&E-related activities at the provincial level, with the support of
  individual consultants (2019 restructuring paper, para 10).

  The project's revised PDO was clear, except for the revised objective 3 of "improving the management
  framework for provincial roads," for which a definition was missing. Again, except for the revised objective
  3, the project activities were logically linked to the expected outputs, outcomes, and impacts. Objective 3
  also had no outcome indicators, and the single output indicator was dropped shortly before the project
  restructuring.

  At its revision, the project missed an opportunity to include additional DPO indicators to account for
  its new focus on strengthening the capacity of the RDA and the provincial road authorities and better
  measure improved access in less technical terms. Examples are indicators to measure the use of the
  new road safety specifications and standards, the enhanced local construction industry capacity, and the
  people actually benefiting from improved access.

  The indicator targets of the revised project were realistically set, except for the one on free flow travel
  times, which was too conservative and largely overachieved by project end. All indicators had baseline
  data.

  The project had shortcomings in reporting both in terms of regularity and sophistication (ICR, para 67),
  but the Bank team very closely followed up on the project progress and monitored the achievement of the
  results.

  The project had planned a user survey for the original corridor, but this survey was not conducted
  because the rehabilitation of this corridor was cancelled from the project scope.


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




c. M&E Utilization
  The collected M&E data was used by the Bank Team for project monitoring. This data was also used
  during the mid-term review and for decisions during project restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. This did not change with
   the 2019 restructuring. The project triggered the following safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment
   OP/BP4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Forests OP/BP 4.36, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11,
   and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The GoSL prepared and disclosed the necessary safeguards
   instruments. At the 2019 restructuring, the Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 was no longer triggered
   because of the nature of the work. The GoSL revised and completed the necessary safeguards instruments.
   Any taking of land or reallocation of structures was to be subject to voluntary land donation. Overall, the
   compliance with environmental and social safeguards was moderately satisfactory.

   The project did not cause any significant, irreversible, long-term environmental impacts, but three fatal
   accidents occurred in 2021 at three different project sites. In response, the project strengthened
   the occupational health and safety (OHS) related aspects during civil works implementation, satisfactorily
   implemented the corrective action plan and the recommendations of the safety audit conducted by the
   Bank, strengthened its environmental and social capacity, and carried out compensation payments to the
   families of the victims, among others.

   The project was satisfactory in terms of social compliance. It used voluntary land donation and had
   adequate grievance address mechanisms. The civil works contractors and their employees agreed
   with the codes of conduct on sexual exploitation and abuse and sexual harassment prevention prepared
   under the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement

   As for procurement, the ICR, para 72, points out that the project's procurement performance was
   moderately satisfactory because it faced contract management problems and did not regularly update the
   procurement information in STEP.



                                                                                                  Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



   Financial Management

   The project's financial management performance was satisfactory, with project payments being carried out
   on time, timely quarterly financial reports, and timely unqualified annual financial audits (IRC, para 73).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                   Shortcomings in efficacy and
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   efficiency
                                                                                   Shortcomings in quality of
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                   supervision
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR, with additions by IEG after
discussions with the Bank team:

Sufficient awareness and capacity to manage and oversee safety at work sites can help avoid
or reduce the risk of accidents. The project initially had only one dedicated person responsible for
environmental and social activities in the central PMU because of hiring restrictions. In this period,
three road fatalities occurred. Since then, the GoSL has increased its staff to manage and oversee
safety at work sites and implemented all actions required by the Bank. Among others, this included
to train contractors on OHS and raise awareness on the importance of safety at work sites, adopt
work site safety guidelines, implement internal traffic control plans, and carry out work site safety
audits. This helped avoid further fatalities at work sites. It underscores the importance of diligent
management, vigilant monitoring, and raising awareness of work site safety in infrastructure
projects.

Insufficient attention to capacity strengthening when working at the subnational level
might jeopardize project implementation and put project outcomes at risk. In its design,
the project put little focus on activities to strengthen the capacity of the provincial road agencies to
implement the project and more effectively manage road works in general. The project design, as

                                                                                                       Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



restructured in 2019, only included a couple of studies at the provincial level, not aimed at
strengthening the road agencies capacities, and referred to the hiring of consultants to support
project implementation. As a result, the project had insufficient consultants to support contract
management and ensure compliance with OHS requirements, and serious problems occurred. The
Center of Excellence, not mentioned in the 2019 restructuring paper, was a success, but it may not
be retained due to fiscal constraints. Hence, the project is not likely to sustain the capacity gains in
the provincial road agencies without any donor-financed follow up activity. A carefully designed
capacity strengthening program for subnational road agencies, focusing on key activities, such as
contract management or road work planning, might have help avoiding some of these pitfalls.

Proactively adapting project interventions to address the evolving needs of a country and a
sector can help advance project implementation and sustain outcomes even in a volatile
environment. Flexibility in adjusting the scope of the project to address the changing government
priorities and the crisis response needs and adjusting implementation strategies to overcome the
challenges of the volatile environment helped this project progress in its implementation and
achieve outcomes during a highly turbulent time. This illustrates the importance of (i) adopting an
adaptive and flexible approach in project implementation, (ii) responding proactively and rapidly to
address evolving needs, and (iii) increasing Bank support and strong collaboration between the
Bank and the government during challenging times. The project is an example of the Bank’s ability
to demonstrate the level of flexibility and proactivity necessary to adapt to evolving and urgent
needs.

Although difficult, contract enforcement can help complete civil work contracts in difficult
situations. After COVID, several civil works contractors did not perform as expected in terms of
speed and quality. Cancelling a non-performing road work contract is a difficult decision for a road
agency because contracting the works again can take a year. In this period, the community remains
with uncompleted road works, which can even cause road safety risks. Prices are also likely higher.
In addition, contractors often have access to good legal support and might start and win lengthy
court proceedings. In this project, because of the insistence of the Bank team, the GoSL took strong
actions and cancelled a few the non-preforming contract. This send a signal to contractors, and in
several other cases, the GoSL was able to convince non-performing contractors to subcontract part
of the remaining works and so complete the contracts successfully.

A strong champion and continuous Bank presence and support can help ensure that a road
asset management system is successfully implemented and used. In this project, the head of
the road asset management division was a strong and passionate believer in road asset
management. In addition, the Bank team continuously and strongly insisted on the need for asset
management and supported the RDA continuously during the implementation of the system. The
Bank's perseverance in this area also helped convince the RDA to formalize the road asset
management division, allocate adequate funds, and use the system as their basis for road planning.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)



  Please Explain
  To assess the achievement in terms of asset management, which could provide lessons for other projects.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR follows the guidelines. It is generally well-written, consistent, and concise. The ICR correctly
applies a split rating. It contains a useful graphical presentation of the ToC that clearly reflects the revisions to
the project design.

The efficacy section is largely results oriented. The ICR adequately reports on the achievement of the targets. It
cites significant additional information on project outputs and, in some cases, outcomes. However, this
additional information was sometimes presented with too much detail and was unclear about the project's
contribution. The additional information sometimes also lacks evidence to support the claimed results. For
instance, the ICR (para 31) claims that the project improved the living standard of provincial and rural
communities but provides no evidence (this statement is also not directly linked to the objective of improving
access [through] provincial roads). The ICR does not always clearly distinguish between the attribution of
capacity strengthening results to project activities and project implementation in general.

The assessments in the ICR of the project's monitoring and evaluation, provincial road agency capacity
strengthening design, and climate consideration are critical and transparent.

The ICR's risk analysis is succinct. The lessons were well identified and based on evidence.

The ICR contains minor factual errors. For instance, the information in table 4 (ICR, para 28) indicates that 15
modules of RAMS are operationalized and in use, whereas annexes 1 and 7 specify that 11 modules are fully
activated and the remaining four are still under development. The intermediate results indicator of number of
DBMOT contracts for national roads contracted was deleted with the 2019 restructuring but is still included in
annex 1. The ICR could have benefited in terms of clarity from a table to show all changes to the indicators and
targets over time.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)




                                                                                             Page 25 of 25
