     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024087

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P167368                                   Emergency Income Support and Training

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 St Maarten                                Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A8265                                  30-Jun-2020                                          21,914,674.35

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Aug-2018                               31-Aug-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           22,500,000.00                                    22,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            21,914,674.35                                    21,914,674.35

 Actual                                        21,914,674.35                                    21,914,674.35




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Livia Maria Angelica       Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement and in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD), was "to provide temporary income support, improve the employability of affected
   beneficiaries in targeted sectors, and strengthen the social protection system’s capacity for shock-response
   and protection of the poor."




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



   This Review concurs with the assessment in the ICR (p. 11) that the PDO included three objectives: (i)
   provide temporary income support, (ii) improve the employability of affected beneficiaries in targeted sectors,
   and (iii) strengthen the social protection system’s capacity for shock-response and protection of the poor.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1. Supporting the implementation of the Emergency Income Support and Training
   Program (appraisal: US$20.56 million; restructuring: US$18.39 million; actual: US$18.39 million). This
   component aimed to provide temporary income support to under-employed and unemployed persons in
   exchange for their participation in short-term skills training in selected occupational areas. Training was to
   include both theoretical and practical areas focused on the hospitality and construction industries, as well
   as training on socio-emotional skills. This component was to use a results-based approach in which
   disbursements were made against the achievement of disbursement-linked indicators (DLI) and
   disbursement-linked-results (DLRs, which were to be monitored on an annual basis). The Ministry of Public
   Health, Social Development, and Labor (VSA, for its name in Dutch) was to be responsible for the oversight
   of this component. Training was to be executed by the Sint Maarten Training Foundation (SMTF), which
   signed a subsidiary agreement for implementation of the program.

   Component 2. Strengthening institutional capacity to enhance the social protection system
   (appraisal: US$1.12million; restructuring: US$3.18 million; actual: US$2.58 million). This component was to
   develop the Social Registry (SR) and the government’s capacity to manage it. The SR would support the
   identification and registration of individuals and households together with their socio-economic needs,
   allowing for a more efficient social protection system. The SR was under the responsibility of the VSA.

   Component 3. Project management (appraisal: US$0.82 million; restructuring: US$0.92 million; actual:
   US$0.94 million). This component was to finance a project coordinator and technical specialists for the first
   two components, as well as equipment, audits, and other expenditures required for project management. In
   addition, a communications strategy was to be financed to raise the population’s awareness of the socio-
   economic assessment to be performed under the SR and of the key services to be provided by the project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was fully financed through the Single Donor Trust Fund “Sint Maarten: Hurricane Irma
   Reconstruction, Recovery and Resilience,” financed by Government of the Netherlands and managed by
   the World Bank.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



   The project was approved on August 2, 2018, and became effective on August 9, 2018. The mid-term
   review was carried out on June 4, 2021. The project closed on August 31, 2023, over three years later than
   its original closing date of June 30, 2020.

   The project had three Level 2 restructurings. The first restructuring, on November 27, 2019, extended the
   project by 23 months, from June 30, 2020, to May 31, 2022, because of implementation delays.

   The second restructuring, on December 19, 2021, addressed the fact that retroactive financing of US$3.2
   million had not been used, and that closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic had affected the
   implementation pace of the project. Project funds were reallocated to Component 2 to enable adequate
   financing of activities linked to the SR. Also, a labor market analysis was added to strengthen the delivery of
   employment services by the National Employment Service Centre within VSA. This analysis was to provide
   information on current and future employment trends, employer demand, and skills gaps. Funds were also
   reallocated to Component 3 to ensure that project management was sufficiently funded. The project was
   extended by nine months, until 28 February 2023, and the DLI and DLRs were adjusted to fit the new
   schedule.

   The third restructuring (February 27, 2023) extended the closing date by another six months, to August 31,
   2023, and revised and aligned disbursement estimates to the new timeline of the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Sint Maarten, part of the Leeward Islands in the Caribbean, had been historically vulnerable to natural
disasters due to its location within the hurricane belt. On September 6, 2017, the country was hit by
Category 5 Hurricane Irma. Damages were estimated at US$1.38 billion and losses at US$1.35 billion, that
is, a total of about 129 percent of gross domestic product. Ninety percent of infrastructure as well as a large
share of the natural environment were affected. Although there was no poverty line for Sint Maarten, it was
estimated to be about 27 percent. Female-headed households, which made up 39 percent of all
households, were considered particularly vulnerable. The tourism sector, the largest sector employing the
local population, sustained major damage. Unemployment rates were 42 percent for men and 58 percent
for women. Youth unemployment was 38 percent for men and 62 percent for women.

To assist in the recovery, the Government of the Netherlands established a EUR 470 million Single Donor
Trust Fund (SDTF) to be managed by the World Bank. This donor fund intended to support the country’s
recovery effort in removal of debris, reconstruction, resumption of government and business services, and
assistance to the affected population. Even though Sint Maarten, a constituent country of the Kingdom of
the Netherlands, had not been previously a client, the World Bank was awarded the management of the
SDTF given its expertise in disaster risk management and response.

The project intended to address the needs for immediate recovery and reconstruction by providing support
to cope with income losses due to unemployment or underemployment, training beneficiaries to improve
their skills, and strengthening institutional capacity to monitor social programs. The project was aligned with
the Strategic Framework (SF) for the period of 2019 to 2025, which functioned in lieu of a Country
Partnership Framework. The SF was limited to the activities to be supported by the SDTF and was aligned

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



               with the Sint Maarten National Recovery and Resilience Plan’s focus areas. The SF aimed to (i) promote
               sustainable economic recovery, (ii) support citizens and resilient communities, and (iii) build the foundations
               to improve long term resilience and good governance. The project was aligned with the second focus area
               of the SF, specifically with Objective 5, "Increase access to quality health, education and sports services,"
               and Objective 6, "Strengthen social safety nets and promote employment, particularly for vulnerable youth
               and households headed by women." In addition, the project supported Objective 8, "Strengthen fiscal
               resilience and modernize the public sector," through the strengthening of the information system to better
               identify the most vulnerable and affected population to help the government effectively allocate resources to
               this population group.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Provide temporary income support

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that monthly transfers to households and provision of health
                             insurance, conditioned to beneficiaries’ participation in skills training with a minimum attendance rate of 70
                             percent, would constitute effective provision of temporary income support.

                             Outcomes

                             This objective had one outcome indicator, which was also the DLI. There were no outputs under this
                             objective.

                             The number of beneficiaries who received monthly income support, had health insurance coverage in
                             exchange for their participation in skills training, and achieved the minimum attendance rate of 70 percent
                             increased form a baseline of 727 to 1,960 in June 2021, exceeding the target of 1,155 beneficiaries. The total
                             number of female beneficiaries increased from a baseline of 420 to 1,350, exceeding the target of 1,080
                             beneficiaries.

                             With significantly more than the targeted number of beneficiaries receiving support under the conditions
                             established by the project, achievement of this objective is rated High.



                             Rating


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the employability of affected beneficiaries in targeted sectors

Rationale
The employability of affected beneficiaries was expected to improve through the attainment of new or
strengthened skills resulting from the provision of training and certification in the two priority sectors, tourism
and construction.

Outputs

All outputs were measured in June 2021, at the end of the project-supported training program.

The number of beneficiaries participating in labor market programs increased from a baseline of 727 to 1,977,
exceeding the target of 1,800 beneficiaries. Of these, the number of women increased from 420 to 1,364
beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 1,080 female beneficiaries. Trainings were delivered on hospitality,
construction, culture, English, and adult literacy. International certifications were awarded in food handling
(496), tourism (942), front office work (119), and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (242).

76 percent of the beneficiaries of the labor market program were unemployed, exceeding the target of 20
percent. 27 percent of the beneficiaries of the labor market program were unemployed youth, exceeding the
target of 20 percent.

71 percent of beneficiaries who completed training in an occupational area were unemployed, exceeding the
target of 50 percent.

Outcomes

By June 2021, 94 percent of beneficiaries had completed training in an occupational area, exceeding the
target of 50 percent. An online survey of former trainees, two and a half years after completion, showed that
52 percent of those who responded were employed, of which 13 percent were under employed (ICR p. 12).
The economic analysis at project closing showed that there was an estimated increase in the employability of
beneficiaries of 8.3 percent (ICR p. 14). Although the outcome did not fully measure the achievement of the
objective, the additional information provided in the ICR gave indications that employability of affected
beneficiaries had improved.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)




                            Objective
                            Strengthen the social protection system’s capacity for shock-response and protection of the poor

                            Rationale
                            The theory of change for this objective held that stronger institutional capacity to administer social protection
                            for shock response and protection of the poor would be achieved through the development and
                            implementation of a Social Registry (SR). The SR would be based on data gathered through a socioeconomic
                            needs assessment (SENA), which would include a survey and a targeting instrument.

                            Outputs

                            By August 2023, the SR was designed, developed, and made operational. This included the development of
                            the SR operations manual, and the development and implementation of the SENA.

                            Outcome

                            By August 2023 (project closing date), 225 records had been registered in the SR, not reaching the target of
                            1,000 records. However, the ICR reported that by the end of December 2023, 840 records had been
                            registered in the SR, and that the VSA had committed to continue increasing the number of households in the
                            registry, projecting to reach the target of 1,000 records during 2024.

                            Given this progress toward achievement of the outcome target, achievement of this objective is rated
                            Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Temporary income support was provided, under conditions established by the project, for significantly more
                            than the planned number of beneficiaries. Achievement of the first objective is therefore rated High. The
                            targeted number of beneficiaries who were provided with labor market programs and skills training was
                            exceeded, and the ICR provided evidence that these interventions contributed to the increase
                            in employability. Achievement of the second objective is therefore rated Substantial. The social protection
                            system's capacity for shock response and protection of the poor was increased through creation of the social
                            registry, with increasing numbers of records being added to the registry. Achievement of the third objective is
                            therefore rated Substantial. The aggregation of achievements is indicative of a Substantial rating for overall
                            efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The cost benefit analysis at the time of appraisal focused on the potential increase in expected earnings
resulting from the skills acquired through participation in the training programs. Benefits were estimated as the
difference between expected salaries for those beneficiaries participating in the program as compared to those
who did not participate. The costs were US$18.38 million, directly attributable to Component 1 of the project. A
four percent increase in employability was estimated, and an eight percent social discount rate was assumed.
The resulting internal rate of return (IRR) was 8.1 percent for beneficiaries exiting the program at age 35, and
the net present value (NPV) was estimated at US$135.3 thousand. The PAD acknowledged that there was great
uncertainty with respect to the recovery of the tourism sector, such that the IRR and NPV could be much lower.

Further to the above, the PAD indicated that it was difficult to estimate benefits coming from the stipend (which
would help beneficiaries avoid negative coping mechanisms such as reducing expenditures on food) and
strengthening of the social protection system. Still, the SR was expected to contribute to the development of
reliable information for social assistance programs, reducing leakages, double dipping, and fraud. In addition,
the SR would allow for consolidation and harmonization across social assistance programs in Sint Maarten,
reducing administration costs.

The ICR estimated an IRR of 9.7 percent. The estimate considered the actual costs under Component 1,
US$18.39 million, and the increase observed (through the SENA Survey 2022) of 8.3 percent in the number of
project beneficiaries, while there was no significant increase in income. The ICR also argued that the use of the
SR would yield positive results in the long run. Evidence from other countries had demonstrated that
such systems increased administrative efficiency, reduced fraud, and improved crisis response capabilities (as
shown during the COVID-19 pandemic in Sint Maarten as well as elsewhere).

Although implementation of the training programs was adequate, implementation efficiency faced some
shortcomings. Given the emergency character of the project, effectiveness was declared only one week after
approval, allowing for a prompt start to implementation. The training programs, built on an existing program,
quickly expanded to offer courses such as construction, culture, English, and adult literacy, in coordination with
other agencies. The delegation of implementation to the SMTF of Component 1 activities allowed the
government to focus its efforts on the response to the shock. However, there were delays in implementing
Component 2 activities linked to the SR. Hiring qualified project management staff took longer than planned,
leading to delays in preparing the Project Operations Manual, financial procedures manual, and grievance
redress mechanism. The Project Coordinator was not hired until nine months after the project became effective.
VSA technical capacity was stretched very thin, resulting in slow turnaround times with SR design and
development, especially in the early stages. Long approval processes for securing feedback from various VSA
and other departments on the survey and registration instruments also led to delays. A high-level steering
committee that was tasked with providing guidance on SR issues met infrequently. Lack of knowledge about
World Bank procurement and financial management procedures also resulted in lengthy procurement
processes, including negotiation, signing of contracts, and receipt of performance guarantees (see Section 10b).
The need for Dutch language proficiency resulted in a shortage of qualified individuals and firms to participate in
procurement processes, particularly affecting Component 2. The project had to be extended, through three
restructuring processes, by 38 months, mainly compensating for the overly optimistic original implementation
period of 22 months. The eventual overall implementation period was five years.


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



Given the shortcomings in implementation, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      91.00
 Appraisal                                                  8.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      89.00
 ICR Estimate                                               9.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High, as they were fully consistent with the Framework Strategy and the
National Recovery and Resilience Plan, both of which were developed to respond to the emergency caused by
Hurricane Irma. Efficacy is rated as Substantial, as the aggregated objectives were almost fully achieved.
Efficiency is rated Substantial. Even though there were positive expected returns, there were shortcomings in
implementation efficiency that led to the need to extend the project by a significant amount of time. These
ratings are consistent with an outcome rating of Satisfactory, reflecting some shortcomings in the
project's achievements.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

While the support and training program was designed in response to the emergency caused by Hurricane
Irma, it also proved useful to the government during the COVID-19 pandemic, at which time the government
contributed US$4.4 million of its own resources, confirming its commitment to the program. With respect to
the SR, the ICR (p. 24) enumerated several points in support of the long term sustainability of the registry: (i)
the VSA plans to complete the roll-out of the registration process, using its own resources to hire the
necessary personnel, (ii) the SR has been integrated within VSA units, and the Council of Ministers has
approved the required SR positions and budget for the next three years, and (iii) arrangements have been
made for information technology maintenance and integration of the SR into the interoperability regulatory



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



framework through the ongoing Digital Government Transformation Project (P172611), also financed under
the SDTF.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was prepared subject to the provisions under paragraph 12 of the World Bank’s Operational
  Policy on Investment Project Financing, “Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity
  Constraints." As such, the project was prepared without a Project Concept Note or a Quality
  Enhancement Review. The Decision Meeting was carried out jointly with two other projects under the
  Trust Fund.

  The project had a straightforward design. The larger share of the project (91 percent) built on the existing
  structure of the SMTF, thus streamlining design and, later, implementation. The SMTF had already an
  employer-led training program that had proven to be technically strong. The results-based character of
  this part of the project, where disbursement was tied to a DLI and DLRs, ensured that a strong monitoring
  system was in place. The development of the SR added an important institutional strengthening
  component to ensure transparency and sustainability. However, the proposed timeline of 22 months for
  its implementation was too optimistic. Particularly in an emergency context, attention to the emergency
  response was prioritized over the development and production of the SR. In addition, project design did
  not take into account specific activities that were necessary for the implementation of the SR, such as the
  need for a household survey. As a result, the cost for the implementation of the SR was twice the initial
  estimates. Also, the legal context for institutionalization of the SR had not been assessed.

  The overall project risk assessment correctly rated overall risk as substantial. Specific risks were rated as
  substantial for technical design, and high for institutional capacity and fiduciary. While these ratings were
  appropriate, considering the emergency context, the risk assessment did not recognize the complexity
  around the development of the SR.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team carried out annual in-person implementation support missions and complementary
 virtual missions and meetings. During the COVID-19 pandemic travel restrictions, missions and meetings
 were virtual. Missions included both technical and fiduciary support. According to the ICR (p. 22), the Bank
 team worked proactively to address operational problems, particularly with the design and implementation
 of the SR. Towards the end of the project, the World Bank team focused on the transition arrangements for
 the SR by ensuring that adequate staff and budget resources were allocated such that the VSA could
 directly manage the system. Given the lack of prior experience in the country, the VSA could have
 benefited with knowledge of other SRs in the region, which the Bank team could have facilitated. Further

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



 support could have also been provided on financial management and required documentation pertaining to
 the compliance of the DLI. Finally, data should have been collected on employability to allow assessment
 of achievement of the second objective.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was well integrated with each of the objectives’ theories of change. Indicators for
 objectives 1 and 2 were under the responsibility of the SMTF. The outcome indicator for Objective 1 was
 also a DLI and was to be monitored on a quarterly basis and subject to external verification. DLRs were
 defined with a yearly monitoring schedule and were set to be scalable above a minimum of beneficiaries
 per DLR (PAD, Annex 4, p. 53). Indicators for objective 3 were under the responsibility of VSA. As noted in
 the ICR (p. 20), the intermediate indicator for this objective was an on/off indicator, so that progress could
 not be measured over time. No formal evaluations were included in the design, given the emergency
 character of the project. Because no outcome indicators (on employability) were included in the results
 framework for the second objective, it was not possible to assess completely the achievement of that
 objective.



b. M&E Implementation
  Overall, monitoring implementation was carried out as designed. The indicators for the training program
  were a DLI and DLRs and subject to independent verification, ensuring that results were robust. The PAD
  indicated that exit interviews were to collect data on post-training results, but these were not carried
  out. An online survey was done two and a half years after the completion of the program, but it faced
  significant challenges in locating former participants. The World Bank carried out a targeting assessment
  of existing social programs and services in mid-2021 to assess performance. The project submitted
  regular progress reports, including updated data on monitoring indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  The continuous monitoring of the project allowed for a positive feedback loop with respect to the types of
  training courses offered and the need for additional classes. For example, new topics were
  added (construction, culture, English as a second language, and adult literacy). The targeting study
  carried out by the World Bank helped inform the design and use of the proxy means test.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   No safeguards were triggered for this project, and the category for Environmental Assessment was C.
   Given the nature of the project, no adverse environmental impacts were expected. Environmental and
   Social risk ratings throughout the project were Low.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary and institutional capacity risks were initially rated high, since the project was implemented by the
   Interim Recovery Committee, pending the creation of the National Recovery Program Bureau (NRPB).
   Ratings for financial management (FM) were moderately satisfactory with one moderately unsatisfactory
   ISR rating somewhere in the middle due to delays in hiring FM staff, the lack of an approved FM manual,
   issues with tracking of the SMTF beneficiaries, an overdue audit report, and less than US$3,000 in
   ineligible expenditures. By December 2020, ratings were satisfactory, as the NRPB had a fully functioning
   FM department and had finalized the FM manual, and the SMTF had improved its internal controls and
   refunded to the World Bank the ineligible expenditures under Component 1.

   Procurement activities, which were limited to Component 2, faced continuous challenges until a few
   months before project closing. Procurement processes were very lengthy, and there were difficulties in
   managing contracts for the SR information system. The government noted in a communication to the Bank
   on 9/23/24 that procurement requests (i.e. Technical specifications for goods) came in late and/or
   incomplete causing the procurement team not to be able to start procurement process and documents had
   to be sent back to the Project Coordinator and VSA for further input. By March 2023, management of
   procurement activities improved. Procurement was rated satisfactory or moderately satisfactory in ISRs.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  The design did not take into
                                                                                  account the complexity and time
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory    required to develop a Social
                                                                                  Registry, and employability
                                                                                  outcomes were not measured.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 24-26) provided important lessons, a selection of which are summarized below.

Building training activities on the model of existing programs can be effective in the context
of an emergency response. In this case, project design took into account existing evidence that
employer-led models under public-private sector partnerships were effective. Further to this, the
training program was already under implementation, albeit at a smaller scale, prior to the launching
of the project. The SMTF was a foundation created by local employers that had the added value of a
relationship with international certification agencies. To ensure the availability of qualified trainers,
participating employers designated employees as trainers, in addition to the recruitment of trainers
from abroad. The SMTF also worked with the National Employment Service Center for the referral of
unemployed individuals.

There are trade-offs between providing rapid response to a natural disaster and contributing
to the building of institutional capacity. This project included the development and
implementation of a SR with the purpose of creating a system that could support the implementation
of targeted social programs in the long term and ensure readiness for potential future natural
disasters. However, the project faced constraints, particularly because of the limited availability of
data and institutional capacity. These constraints led to significant delays, as a household survey
had to be carried out, and major process reengineering and reorganization of key tasks had to be
executed within the VSA. Ultimately, the SR was developed and proved useful during the COVID-19
pandemic.

In a context where a large percentage of households are headed by women, not only income
support but tailored training programs are essential. In this case, the training program had a
high proportion of female beneficiaries (69 percent). This was attributed to the training focusing on
sectors that traditionally employ women (for example, culinary arts and hospitality) and flexible
scheduling that considered women’s childcare responsibilities.

Continuity in Bank staff allows for open and sustained dialogue with the client
government. Iin this case, this was particularly important in the context of a new client that needed




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Emergency Income Support and Training (P167368)



to learn about World Bank processes. This dynamic was recognized by the client in its project
closing report.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was very well written and concise, providing objective and in-depth analysis of project implementation
and lessons learned. The ICR assessed the data well, pointing to successes and shortcomings in detail,
particularly in the exceptional context in which this project was designed and implemented (a small island state
that was not a prior World Bank client, in the context of a devastating natural disaster). In addition, the ICR
brought in additional data beyond the project's results framework to support its assessment of efficacy. The
lessons learned were detailed and insightful, significantly contributing to the debate on social protection
programs in the context of emergencies due to natural disasters. It was a shortcoming that no data were
provided on employability outcomes.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 13
