     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024195

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P176353                                    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Uzbekistan                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-93210,IDA-70140                       30-Jun-2023                                        400,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Dec-2021                                30-Jun-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            400,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        400,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Judyth L. Twigg              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (PD) (pg. 1), the program development objective (PDO) of the
Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition Development Policy Operation (DPO) was "to support a faster and more
equitable economic transition through (i) stronger market institutions and better management of state-owned



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



enterprises; (ii) improved fiscal transparency and accountability; and (iii) increased economic and social
inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities."

This ICR Review evaluates this program with the following objectives:

      PDO1: To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market
       institutions and better management of state-owned enterprises.
      PDO2: To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal
       transparency and accountability.
      PDO3: To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and
       social inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three pillars.

Stronger Market Institutions and Better Management of State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs) supported
reforms to: (a) liberalize wheat markets; and (b) strengthen the corporate governance of SOEs.

Improved Fiscal Transparency and Accountability supported reforms to: (a) fully consolidate all
public sector spending in the state budget; and (b) establish new public debt legislation that would allow for
more systematic and transparent management of public debt.

Increased Economic and Social Inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities, supported
reforms to: (a) overhaul and modernize labor market regulations; (b) align social assistance spending with
improved poverty measures; and (c) improve opportunities and protections for persons with disabilities.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The program cost was estimated at US$400 million at appraisal and was
financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan of US$150 million and an
International Development Association (IDA) credit of US$250 million. Both the IBRD loan and the IDA credit
were fully disbursed.

Dates. The program was approved on December 16, 2021, became effective on December 17, 2021, and closed
as scheduled on June 30, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Aiming to reduce poverty by half by 2026 and achieve upper-middle-income status by 2030, Uzbekistan
 needed to shift from its old growth model—from a state-driven development strategy focused on direct
 government intervention in the economy and state support to favored sectors, industries, and enterprises to


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



one of a market economy. While the economy had grown by an average of 5.0 percent annually (3.3 percent
in per capita terms) from 1993 (after emerging as an independent state at the end of Soviet rule in 1991) to
2016, Uzbekistan needed to accelerate its transition to a market economy.

Binding Constraints to Development. Following three successive DPOs over 2018-2020 that supported the
structural transformation program, this operation would address binding constraints to development and
advance the transition effort in six key areas, as articulated in the Systematic Country Diagnostic for
Uzbekistan (World Bank [WB], 2016): (a) in agriculture—while horticultural production had outpaced traditional
crop production, agricultural land remained concentrated on cotton and wheat production; (b) meanwhile,
cotton and wheat, the mainstays of the agricultural economy, remained tightly regulated, subject to production
quotas and set prices for inputs and outputs; (c) on SOEs—the large share of SOEs in the economy
created institutional obstacles to competition in the marketplace, fragmented business regulation, and
limited the development of a business environment conducive to private-sector growth and development; (d)
on the budget—the allocation of scarce resources was suboptimal; (e) on labor—the labor market was weak,
weighed down by low participation rates (especially among women and young men), a high level of
informal employment, poor internal labor mobility, and mandated workforce deployments to preferred
industries, and (f) on social assistance—schemes that directly or indirectly support the poor were modest and
had declined over time.

Country Development Priorities. The program objectives were consistent with, and supported the
implementation of, the Development Strategy for New Uzbekistan 2022-2026 (DS), organized around
seven priority areas and 100 goals. The program objective to support a faster and more equitable economic
transition through stronger market institutions and better management of SOEs was aligned with the third DS
priority area, specifically with "Goal 30 - Multiply the income of farmers by at least 2 times ... increasing the
annual growth of agriculture to at least 5 percent." The program objective to support a faster and more
equitable economic transition through increased economic and social inclusion, especially of women and
persons with disabilities, was aligned with the fourth DS priority area, specifically with "Goal 53 - Ensure
mandatory social guarantees for the population, strengthening the social protection of the needy," "Goal 69 -
 Support women and ensure their active participation in society," and "Goal 66 - Form an effective system of
support for people with disabilities to improve their quality and standard of living."

World Bank Group (WBG) Country Strategy. The program objectives were aligned with the WBG country
strategy for Uzbekistan at appraisal and at closing.

      The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) for the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
       Uzbekistan for the period FY16-FY20, prepared in 2018, modified the original CPF and supported the
       country's development priorities organized around three focus areas: sustainable transformation
       towards a market economy; reform of select state institutions and citizen engagement; and investing in
       people. The program objective to support a faster and more equitable economic transition through
       stronger market institutions and better management of SOEs was aligned with the first PLR focus area,
       specifically with the objective to "enhance economic growth and transition towards a market economy,"
       and the second PLR focus area, specifically with the objective to "strengthen the financial sustainability
       of SOEs." The program objective to support a faster and more equitable economic transition through
       improved fiscal transparency and accountability was aligned with the second PLR focus area,
       specifically with the objective to "improve public finance management." The program objective to
       support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and social
       inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities, was aligned with the third PLR focus area,
       specifically with the objective to "build effective social safety nets."

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



       The CPF for the Republic of Uzbekistan for the period FY2022-FY2026 supports the country's
        development priorities organized around three high-level outcomes: increase inclusive private sector
        employment; improve human capital; and improve livelihoods and resilience through greener growth.
        The program objective to support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger
        market institutions and better management of SOEs was aligned with the first CPF high-level outcome,
        specifically with "Objective 1.3 - Increase the returns from agriculture and agri-business development"
        and "Objective 1.1 - Expand competitive access to the market." The program objective to support a
        faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and social inclusion,
        especially of women and persons with disabilities, was aligned with the third CPF high level outcome,
        specifically with "Objective 2.3 - Expand the coverage of social protection and inclusive labor market
        policies."


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

This operation supported seven prior actions (PAs) directed at three objectives.

Table 1: Objectives and PAs of the Accelerating Uzbekistan’s Transition DPO

 PDO1 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market
 institutions and better management of state-owned enterprises
 PA1 - In accordance with the Borrower’s agricultural modernization strategy to increase climate resilience
 and eliminate state-controlled agricultural production, the Borrower has abrogated restrictions requiring
 wheat farmers to sell a fixed quota of production to the state at a price regulated by the state to allow
 farmers to determine their buyers and to set farmgate prices based on market conditions, as evidenced
 by Presidential Resolution No. PP-10, dated November 15, 2021.
 PA2 - To improve the management of state-owned enterprises, the Borrower has submitted a new state
 asset management law for parliamentary approval that establishes corporate governance and financial
 transparency requirements for all state enterprises and legislates principles for reducing the number of
 state owned enterprises, as evidenced by Cabinet of Ministers Letter 02/49365/1- 2357, dated November
 12, 2021.
 PDO2 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal
 transparency and accountability
 PA3 - To increase the transparency of public spending and parliamentary oversight of the budget, and to
 improve the alignment of spending to government priorities, the Borrower’s has enacted amendments to
 Articles 45 and 46 of the Budget Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan to expand the composition of the
 Consolidated Budget of the Republic of Uzbekistan to include off-budget funds of all budgetary
 organizations and extra-budgetary funds of budgetary organizations, as evidenced by Law of the
 Republic of Uzbekistan No. ZRU660, dated December 30, 2020.
 PA4 - To strengthen the management of public debt and increase debt transparency, the Borrower has
 submitted a new State Debt Law for parliamentary approval that: (i) establishes objectives for debt
 management, and assigns specific purposes, roles, and responsibilities for debt management; and (ii)
 establishes legally binding requirements for debt reporting, as evidenced by Cabinet of Ministers Letter
 No. 02/25858/1-609, dated November 12, 2021.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



PDO3 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic
and social inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities
PA5 - To modernize labor relations and reduce gender and other discrimination in the labor market, the
Borrower has submitted to Parliament for approval a new labor code that: (i) introduces equal pay for
men and women for equal work; (ii) prohibits discrimination in hiring and labor contract termination; and
(iii) establishes and regulates the concept of ‘minimum wage’, as evidenced by Letter of the Ministry of
Employment and Labor Relations No. 01/00-02/13- 12578, dated November 15, 2021.
PA6 - To better link the social safety net system with the needs of the poor, the Borrower has (i) adopted
a new poverty line methodology consistent with international good practice, and (ii) required the new
poverty line to be used in the determination of need and the level of social benefit payments made to
individuals, as evidenced by Cabinet of Ministers’ Decision No. 544, dated August 27, 2021.
PA7 - To increase the economic inclusion of persons with disabilities, and better align Uzbekistan’s legal
regime for disability rights with international good practice, the Borrower has enacted a law ratifying
Uzbekistan’s accession to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, as evidenced by
Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan No. ZRU-695, dated June 7, 2021.

PDO1: To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market institutions
and better management of state-owned enterprises.

Agriculture. Accounting for 25 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) and of employment, agriculture had
historically operated under a centrally planned state production system that: administratively allocated land (up
to 70 percent of arable land before 2017) for cotton and wheat production; subjected farmers to production
targets; required farmers to surrender a fixed quota to state procurement at set prices; and dictated technology
and seed use in fields. Since 2017, a structural reform program has helped liberalize agriculture: (a) cotton and
wheat growing areas were progressively reduced; (b) almost all areas assigned to cotton were transferred to
private textile firms to facilitate cotton production through contract farming and the processing of cotton into yarn
and textiles; (c) almost all restrictions on horticultural exports were scrapped in 2018; (d) cotton and wheat
farmgate prices nearly converged with market prices by 2019; and (e) the state cotton order system, which
required all cotton to be sold to the state, was scrapped in 2020. The PA supported by this operation would
replicate the reform in cotton in wheat.

PA1 required the government to end the state wheat order system in which farmers followed government
production targets and surrendered up to half their output to the state at prices set by the state mandatory
procurement system. Additionally, the PA required the government to procure wheat for the strategic food
security reserve (used to dampen volatility) at market prices. The reform measures would reduce wheat market
distortions and continue to liberalize agriculture. A market system would: (a) grant farmers freedom to
determine their output and sales; previously, farmers who did not follow state mandates were levied stiff
penalties, including the loss of land ownership; (b) improve farmer incomes; (c) increase investments
that raise agricultural productivity; state controls had dampened private investment; (d) encourage land
improvements; (e) motivate farmers to adopt water-savings technologies, in response to water supply
vulnerabilities; deteriorating water availability could reduce crop yields by 20-50 percent through 2050; and (f)
help spur the use of more resilient crop varieties in response to elevated climate change risks. Relevance of
PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

SOEs. The public sector dominated the economy and produced half of GDP, with some 3,000 tier-one SOEs
accounting for 20 percent of exports and 18 percent of employment. The performance of SOEs, however, was
mixed. Profits of 1.5 percent of GDP of profitable SOEs were offset by losses of 1.0 percent of GDP at loss-
making SOEs in 2020. Although on-budget subsidies were listed at 1.0 percent of GDP, quasi-fiscal

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



support topped 6.0 percent of GDP due to poor cost recovery, price controls, inefficient fee collections, and
technical losses (WB, 2019, Uzbekistan Public Expenditure Review). Near-monopoly power over large swaths
of the economy thwarted private sector entry and activity in many industries. Since 2017, structural reforms
have sought to improve corporate governance and financial accountability, as the government started to:
(a) impose basic corporate governance standards -- modern accounting methods, comprehensive asset
inventories; (b) require the two largest SOEs to adopt the International Financing Reporting Standards (IFRS)
issued by the IFRS Foundation and the International Accounting Standards Board; (c) require 32 large SOEs to
appoint independent board directors and obtain international credit ratings; and (d) unbundle
policymaking, regulation, and operations at vertically integrated SOEs in the air transport and energy sectors.
The PA supported by this operation would consolidate these gains.

PA2 required the government to submit for Parliamentary approval a new state asset management law that
would create a unified legal framework for the management of state enterprises and state property. Enacted in
March 2023, albeit after some delay (the passage of the law was not required by PA2), the Law “On State
Property Management” (LRU No. 321): (a) establishes good-practice corporate governance requirements,
based largely on the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Principles of Corporate
Governance, that would apply to all SOEs; (b) requires SOEs to adopt IFRS and develop and implement
business transformation plans, (c) enhances the independence of supervisory boards, and (d) separates state
ownership from regulatory responsibilities. Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal
transparency and accountability.

State Budget. More than half of total public spending in 2018 lay outside the formal budget process (WB, 2019,
Public Expenditure Review), undermining resource allocation and raising fiscal risks. Since 2018, several
reforms were initiated to improve fiscal accountability and transparency: (a) the government required the
publication and disclosure of the annual budget in 2018, reversing past practice; (b) Parliament was vested with
the responsibility for reviewing and approving the budget law beginning in 2019; (c) any supplementary
spending exceeding three percent of the original ceiling set by Parliament required approval by Parliament; (d)
additionally, the government had to submit quarterly budget execution reports to Parliament and answer
questions posed by the Parliament's Budget Committee; (e) spending by the Uzbekistan Fund for
Reconstruction and Development, the largest source of off-budget activity, was integrated into the state budget
in 2020; and (f) local budget approval was devolved to local deliberative bodies (created separately as part of
political reform).

PA3 required Uzbekistan to enact amendments to Articles 45 and 46 of the Budget Code to expand the
composition of the consolidated budget to include all off-budget funds and extra-budgetary funds. The
PA would: (a) complete the sequence of reforms started in 2018, addressing the remaining off-budget
operations estimated at 1.5 percent of GDP in 2021; (b) reduce fiscal risks; and (c) improve fiscal
transparency. Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Public Debt. The legal framework for public debt management, including the Law on External Borrowing of
1996, was outdated in many aspects. Definitions and reporting coverage of public debt fell short of international
standards; debt management policies focused on annual requirements and exigencies rather than on a
medium-term strategy; and institutional roles were fragmented among agencies, as were the governing
laws and administrative orders. Since 2018, some reforms have been advanced: (a) five major regulations on
public debt management were issued beginning in 2018; and (b) the new regulations helped facilitate the



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



issuance of the country's Eurobond in 2019; but (c) still, the regulations and orders needed to be consolidated
into a coherent law.

PA4: A new State Debt Law, to be submitted to Parliament, would expand the definition of public debt following
international standards, set a new ceiling on public debt (60 percent of GDP), establish the objectives and the
framework for debt management, clarify the responsibilities of various institutions (among them, Parliament, the
Debt Management Office at the Ministry of Finance, and the Chamber of Accounts) in the debt management
process, and codify the measures to strengthen transparency, reporting, and public disclosure. The
accountability provisions of the new law would improve debt management overall and prepare the groundwork
for fiscal risk assessment. Moreover, more comprehensive debt reporting, and information dissemination would
invite innovative market financing, including Sustainable Development Goal bonds and climate bonds. Although
not required by PA4, the Law “On the Public Debt” was enacted by Parliament and signed by the President as
LRU No. 836 in April 2023. Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO3 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and
social inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities.

Labor Market Regulations. Labor market outcomes were moderate in Uzbekistan. The unemployment rate was
9 percent of the active labor force in 2019 and 10.5 percent in 2020, with another 34 percent of the working-age
population staying inactive, according to the State Statistics Committee. Labor force participation by women
was 28 percentage points lower than by men, marked by highly prevalent gender discrimination in hiring. About
59 percent of total employment was informal in 2019, with only 35 percent of the employed holding a "labor
book" (a record of years of work and pension rights). Labor's share of the national income was 41 percent in
2017, compared to the average in the Europe and Central Asia region of 55 percent (International Labor
Organization [ILO], 2020, Towards Full and Productive Employment in Uzbekistan). Economic conditions aside,
labor laws were highly restrictive, with the 1995 Labor Code retaining most of the provisions of the Soviet-era
labor law (Murayev, 2010, Evolution of Employment Protection Legislation in the USSR, CIS, and Baltic States).
Since 2017, some reforms have been introduced: (a) the propiska registration regime, which meted criminal
and administrative penalties on employers and employees for job applications made outside of one's
administrative region, was scrapped in 2019; (b) a new draft Labor Code was submitted to Parliament for a first
reading in 2019; and (c) the WB and the ILO have provided technical assistance to the government to align the
draft law with ILO conventions.

PA5 called for the submission by the government for approval by Parliament of a new Labor Code that
introduced equal pay for men and women for equal work, prohibited discrimination in hiring and labor contract
termination, and established and regulated the concept of "minimum wage." The new law was expected to yield
substantial improvements in labor market regulations: (a) the labor market would benefit from clear rules
governing full-time and temporary employment contracts, with the unification of fragmented regulations; (b) the
minimum wage review process would be regularized; minimum wages were previously revised ad-hoc, being
set as a unit of account for public sector service costs; (c) regular and parental leave provisions would be
expanded; (d) a stringent framework for inspections would improve enforcement standards and motivate
compliance; and (e) women and the disabled would be better protected from discrimination. Although not
required by the PA, the New Edition of the Labor Code of the Republic of Uzbekistan was signed by the
President as ZRU No. 798 in October 2022 and went into force in in April 2023. Relevance of PA5:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Social Assistance. Uzbekistan's constitutionally mandated social transfer program—"Pensions, allowances, and
other kinds of welfare may not be lower than the officially fixed minimum subsistence wage"—was incoherent in


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



 many respects. Benefits accrued regardless of distance from a threshold; the threshold was also the minimum;
 and it was impossible to implement (the benefits were estimated to equal per capita GDP). Meanwhile, the
 government lacked a formal measure of poverty; instead, the government defined a "low income" beneficiary
 population based on the costs of a minimum calorie intake of 2,100 calories. Consequently, social assistance
 became a discretionary ad-hoc program, with the deprivation criteria reduced to "individuals in need of financial
 support." Since 2019, reforms have attempted to rationalize social assistance: (a) the government and the WB
 piloted a Household Budget Survey employing a list-based measure of recorded consumption and expenditure
 in 2019; (b) the government rolled out the new Household Budget Survey nationwide in 2020; and (c) since
 then, the government has been developing a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy, including more
 responsive social transfer policies.

 PA6 consisted of two steps to better align social assistance with improved poverty measurement: the
 government would adopt a new poverty line measurement method consistent with international best practice,
 and then use the new poverty line to determine the need for, and the level of, social benefit payments to
 individuals. With the calculation of a new poverty line in 2021 (USZ44,000, based on the cost of basic needs,
 the most common approach globally), the social safety net system would improve, according to the ICR: (a) the
 number of people categorized as poor would increase substantially; (b) social safety benefit levels would be set
 differently and more responsive to actual needs; and (c) over time, the changes would lead to a more
 accessible and effective social safety net system. Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory (S).

 Social Inclusion. Estimates of the number of persons with disabilities ranged from 2.1 percent of the population
 (government figures) to 13.5 percent of the population aged three and over, with 3.5 percent having severe
 forms of disability (WB, 2018, Listening to the Citizens of Uzbekistan Survey). Persons with disabilities had poor
 access to health care (25 percent did not receive adequate health care services) and to education (children with
 disabilities had 20 percent less access to pre-school), faced inordinate physical obstacles (85 percent of
 buildings in Tashkent were not adapted to persons with disabilities), and suffered from unemployment (only 7.1
 percent of persons with disabilities were employed in 2019). Since 2017, some reforms have started to address
 the problem: (a) a Presidential Decree in 2017 proposed to provide persons with disabilities with medical and
 social assistance; and (b) a disability rights law, the Law “On the Social Protection of Persons with Disabilities in
 the Republic of Uzbekistan,” went into effect in 2019, upholding the principle of non-discrimination; but (c) still,
 "disability" remained narrowly defined in law, and the courts remained inaccessible to disability discrimination
 cases. The PA supported by this operation would solidify the country's commitment to extending equal
 opportunities to persons with disabilities.

 PA7 called for the ratification by Parliament of the United Nations (UN) Convention on the Rights of
 Persons with Disabilities (CRPD), to which Uzbekistan acceded in 2009 but which it had not since ratified (one
 of ten countries that failed to follow through). Uzbekistan treated its obligations under the CRPD as legal and
 financial risks and never ratified the convention. The ratification would: (a) improve the policy framework
 governing programs for the economic and social inclusion of persons with disabilities; (b) serve as a
 commitment mechanism to ensure the alignment of national legal regime with international best practices; and
 (c) invite enhanced UN and international monitoring of the country's compliance record. However, while an
 important first step, the PA does not move far enough along the results chain for increased economic and social
 inclusion of persons with disabilities. Relevance of PA7: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

                                                                                                       Page 8 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)




4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The program defined nine results indicators (RI) to capture the impact of the seven PAs and to measure
progress toward the three program objectives. The ICR suggested alternatives to three of the RIs, one of
which could not be applied for lack of data.

Table 2: RIs by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and achievement

                                                                                   Actual
                                                                                   Change
                                                                                   in
                                                                                   Results
                Associated                                                         Indicator
 Results                   Relevance                                                         Achievement
                Prior                   Baseline    Target          Actual Value Relative
 Indicator                 Rating                                                            Rating
                Action                                                             to
                                                                                   Targeted
                                                                                   Change,
                                                                                   in
                                                                                   Percent
 PDO1 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market
 institutions and better management of state-owned enterprises.
                                                    Price paid per
                                                    ton of wheat by
                                                    the             The
                                                    government for government
                                                    public grain    procured
 RI1 -
                                        Price set   reserves is     wheat for
 Convergence
                                        annually by within 5        public grain
 of prices paid
                           Highly       regulatory  percent range reserves
 by government PA1                                                                 100       High
                           Satisfactory decree      of the market corresponding
 for wheat with
                                        (January    price           to the average
 domestic
                                        2021)       determined in price at the
 market prices
                                                    the Uzbek       Uzbek
                                                    Commodity       Commodity
                                                    Exchange        Exchange
                                                    (December
                                                    2023)
 RI2 - Improved
 supervisory
                                        0           At least 20     16
 oversight of              Highly
                PA2                     (January    (December       (February      80        Substantial
 SOEs, as                  Satisfactory
                                        2021)       2023)           2024)
 measured by
 the number of


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



top 30 state-
owned
enterprises,
classified by
size of balance
sheet assets,
for which the
State Asset
Management
Agency has
selected and
appointed
independent
supervisory
board
members, in
line with OECD
corporate
governance
principles
RI3 -           PA2        Moderately     No specific   Approved        Approved                [High]
Improvement in             Unsatisfactory legal         implementation roadmap in
the climate                               requirements roadmap in       place in the
change and                                for SOE       place for       industrial
environmental                             corporate     transition of   sector, where
governance of                             governance to SOE             most SOE
state-owned                               account for   operations to operate: (i)
enterprises                               environmental more            Presidential
                                          and climate sustainable       Decree (PP-
                                          change risks and climate      436) "On the
                                          (January      friendly        transition to a
                                          2021)         business        green
                                                        practices       economy and
                                                        consistent with ensuring
                                                        the             green growth",
                                                        requirements issued on
                                                        under the new December 2,
                                                        Asset           2022, with
                                                        Management focus on
                                                        Law             "transition to
                                                        (December       green
                                                        2023)           economy and
                                                                        ensuring
                                                                        energy saving
                                                                        in industries"
                                                                        (Decree
                                                                        Appendix No.
                                                                        2); (ii)

                                                                                               Page 10 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



                                                                      Decision of
                                                                      the Cabinet of
                                                                      Ministers No.
                                                                      474, issued
                                                                      on August 25,
                                                                      2022, "On
                                                                      measures to
                                                                      determine
                                                                      environmental
                                                                      requirements
                                                                      and standards
                                                                      of
                                                                      environmental
                                                                      protection in
                                                                      the field of
                                                                      mining and
                                                                      metallurgy
                                                                      industry
                                                                      based on
                                                                      international
                                                                      standards."
                                                                      (2023)
PDO2 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal
transparency and accountability.
                                                       Approved
                                        No             methodology in
                                        methodology place and
                                                                      A
RI4 - Improved                          exists for the being piloted
                                                                      Methodology
alignment of                            classification for the
                                                                      and Roadmap
consolidated                            and scoring of classification
                                                                      for Green
government                              public         and scoring of
                                                                      Budget
spending to                             expenditures public
                                                                      Tagging was
government       PA3     Unsatisfactory against        expenditures                    [High]
                                                                      published and
priorities                              government against
                                                                      applied to
relating to                             environmental government
                                                                      state budget
climate change                          and climate environmental
                                                                      expenditures
and                                     change         and climate
                                                                      for 2022
environment                             priorities     change
                                                                      (2023)
                                        (January       priorities
                                        2021)          (December
                                                       2023)
RI5 - Increased PA4      Satisfactory No Medium- A Medium-            A Medium-        High
parliamentary                           Term Debt      Term Debt      Term Debt
oversight of the                        Strategy in    Strategy has Strategy for
government's                            place          been approved 2023-25 was
Medium Term                             (January       for the        approved in
Debt Strategy                           2021)          government     June 2022
                                                       and at least   and an annual

                                                                                         Page 11 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



                                                       one annual      debt report
                                                       debt report has was submitted
                                                       been submitted to the
                                                       to Parliament Parliament. A
                                                       (January 2023) Medium-Term
                                                                       Debt Strategy
                                                                       for 2025-27 is
                                                                       in process of
                                                                       Cabinet
                                                                       approval
                                                                       (2023)
                                                                       Secondary
                                                                       regulations
                                                       Secondary       were
                                                       regulations     approved and
                                         No regulatory have been       an allocation
                                         requirements approved to      and impact
RI6 -                                    exist for the require the     report for
Improvement in                           government to government to Uzbekistan's
climate and                              report on     produce         first SDG
                PA4       Satisfactory                                                  High
environmental                            purpose-      allocation      Bond (issued
related debt                             specific      impact reports in June 2021
reporting                                impact bonds for purpose-     and linked to
                                         (January      specific impact the climate
                                         2021)         bonds           objectives)
                                                       (December       was published
                                                       2023)           on November
                                                                       15, 2022
                                                                       (2023)
PDO3 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and
social inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities.
                                                       At least 60
                                                       percent of all
                                                                       All labor code
                                                       labor code
                                                                       compliance
                                                       compliance
                                                                       audits
                                                       audits
                                                                       conducted at
RI7 - Increased                                        conducted by
                                                                       the discretion
enterprise                               Regulations the Ministry of
                                                                       of the Ministry
compliance                Moderately     did not exist Labor and
                PA5                                                    of Labor and 167 [High]
with new                  Unsatisfactory (January      Employment
                                                                       Employment
enterprise                               2021)         Relations
                                                                       Relations
regulations                                            include checks
                                                                       includes
                                                       of new labor
                                                                       checks of new
                                                       code
                                                                       labor code
                                                       regulations
                                                                       regulations
                                                       (December
                                                       2023)


                                                                                        Page 12 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



RI8 - Increased
usage of the
new poverty
line in social
assistance
programs, as
measured by
the share of
total
expenditure on
regular (non-
emergency)
social
assistance                                0
                                                         At least 80    95.3
programs that PA6          Satisfactory   (January                                         119   High
                                                         (January 2023) (2023)
are based on                              2021)
program
criteria
determined by
the new
poverty line
(eligibility
thresholds
and/or the
setting and
indexation of
benefit
amounts), in
percent
RI9 -             PA7      Moderately     Uzbekistan's A national        On December             [Substantial]
Strengthened               Unsatisfactory accession to implementation 19, 2022, the
institutional                             the UN CRPD plan, which        Legislative
frameworks                                not ratified includes          Chamber
that supported                            (January     strategies to     approved the
greater                                   2021)        reduce the        2023-25
inclusions of                                          impact of         National
persons with                                           climate change Action Plan on
disabilities, and                                      risks on          the
their protection                                       persons with Realization of
from future                                            disabilities, has the
vulnerabilities,                                       been approved Convention on
as measured                                            and is under the Rights of
by the                                                 implementation Persons with
presence of a                                          (December         Disabilities in
national                                               2023)             the Republic
implementation                                                           of Uzbekistan
plan to                                                                  (2023)
progressively

                                                                                                 Page 13 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



realize
Uzbekistan's
obligations
under the UN
Convention on
the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities

Note: Achievement ratings in [brackets] reflect ratings achievement that may be adjusted, based on
relevance of the RIs, in the Efficacy section (Section 5).

PDO1 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market
institutions and better management of state-owned enterprises.

RI1: The variance of the purchase price for wheat paid by the government (for the strategic grain reserve)
from the market price posted in the Uzbek Commodity Exchange was an adequate measure of the impact
of abrogating the government wheat order system and adopting market prices (PA1). With prices at the
commodity exchange determined competitively and reflective of prices in Kazakhstan (Uzbekistan
produces 6 million tons annually and imports 3 million tons from Kazakhstan), the pivot from regulated to
market prices represents a movement from a planned to a market economy. Relevance of RI1:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2: The number of the top 30 SOEs for which the State Asset Management Agency had selected and
appointed independent Board members, following OECD corporate governance principles, was adequate
to measure the impact of the submission to Parliament of the new State Asset Management Law, which
established corporate governance and financial transparency requirements for all SOEs. The appointment
of independent Board directors would be a vital first step toward improving the management of SOEs.
Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI3: The approval of an implementation plan for SOEs to transition to more sustainable and climate-
friendly business practices was intended to be a second measure of the impact of the submission to
Parliament of the new State Asset Management Law. While the emphasis on sustainable business
practices is not incorrect, considering the government's goals for a "sustainable and resilient future" (WB
2022, Uzbekistan Second Systematic Country Diagnostic - Toward a Prosperous and Sustainable
Future), a more central focus on broader corporate governance and financial transparency priorities would
have been warranted because the associated prior action pertained to the passage of the Law on State
Property Management which required the adoption by SOEs of OECD corporate governance standards,
IFRS accounting norms, SOE board independence, and the separation of government responsibilities for
state ownership from state regulation of SOEs. Relevance of RI3: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

PDO2 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal
transparency and accountability.

RI4: While the publication of the methodology and roadmap for green budget tagging and its application to
the 2022 State Budget is a worthy innovation, the relevance of this RI to the PA is questionable. The RI,
which aims to measure the alignment of spending to government priorities on climate change and the
environment, would be relevant if the PA focused on green budgeting. However, PA3 involved the

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



consolidation of off-budget funds and extra-budget funds into the state budget in response to the problem
that more than half of total public spending still lay outside the formal budget process in 2018 (see Section
3.B). Relevance of RI4: Unsatisfactory (U).

RI5: A government-approved Medium Term Debt Management Strategy (MTDS) and a completed Annual
Debt Report submitted to Parliament were adequate to measure the impact of the submission to
Parliament of a new State Debt Law that established the objectives and framework for debt management
and that imposed requirements for debt reporting (PA4). The approval of a MTDS and the preparation of
Annual Debt Reports would signify improvements to fiscal accountability and transparency, including
oversight by Parliament of debt management and debt reporting. Relevance of RI5: Satisfactory (S).

RI6: Approved regulations requiring the government to produce allocation impact and impact reports for
purpose-specific impact bonds was intended to be a second measure of the impact of the submission to
Parliament of a new State Debt Law. The new law required improved and comprehensive debt reporting,
and allocation and impact reporting—for impact bonds—would be a relevant application. Impact bonds
are performance-based contracts between an investor, an outcome funder, and a service provider that
tackle a social or environmental challenge and reward the investor if the provider meets agreed-upon
outcomes (the investor loses the investment if the provider underachieves or fails). According to the WB,
a key promoter of these financial products, "a critical component of market standards related to this type
of financing instrument is post-issuance reporting on how bond proceeds have been used and the
expected environmental and social impact of projects supported" (WB, 2024, Trends in Allocation and
Impact Reporting: Ensuring Transparency in Emerging Market Sovereign Green, Social, and
Sustainability Bonds). Relevance of RI6: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3 - To support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic
and social inclusion, especially of women and persons with disabilities.

RI7: The percentage of labor code compliance audits that include checks on new labor code regulations is
a weak RI to measure the impact of the submission to Parliament of the new Labor Code (PA5). Rather
than simply considering the coverage of the audits by the Ministry of Employment, the indicator could
have focused, more importantly, on the results of the audits themselves, relative to the salient mandates
of the new Labor Code: the extent of compliance with the non-discrimination clause, conformity with equal
pay regulations, and observance of the minimum wage guidelines. Relevance of RI7: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI8: The share of total public expenditures for regular social assistance programs that are based on
criteria determined by the new poverty line was adequate as the RI to measure the impact of Cabinet of
Ministers' Decision No. 544 of August 2021 (PA6). The PA required the adoption of a new poverty line
methodology, consistent with international practice, and the use of the new poverty line to determine
eligibility for, and the amount of, social benefit payments to individuals. A higher proportion of social
assistance spending based on the new criteria would indicate that the government has made progress
with targeting and prioritization. Overall, focusing on poorer households would yield greater progress
with reducing poverty and inequality. Relevance of RI8: Satisfactory (S).

RI9: The approval of an implementation plan to reduce climate change risks on persons with disabilities is
a weak choice for a RI to measure the impact of ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (PA7) for two reasons: (a) it does not focus on the core obstacles to economic
and social inclusion faced by persons with disabilities; and (b) it is unlikely that the government


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 27
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



               would have started to execute the action plan long before closing; therefore, results could not be
               measured and reported by 2023. Relevance of RI9: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Support a faster and more equitable economic transition through stronger market institutions and better
                management of state-owned enterprises

                Rationale
                RI1: The price paid by the government for wheat for the public grain reserve was equal to the average in the
                Uzbek Commodity Exchange in 2022 and 2023, meeting the target that the price paid be within 5 percent of
                the market price determined in the Uzbek Commodity Exchange. In 2022, the price paid to farmers for wheat
                procured for the public grain reserve was equal the average price recorded at the Uzbek Commodity
                Exchange in June-August 2022. (farmers received the basis price of UZS 3,000,000 per ton in June 2022 and
                then received a price top-up of UZS 439,000 per ton to adjust to the actual average price at the Uzbek
                Commodity Exchange in October 2022). In 2023, the government simplified the pricing method and procured
                wheat for the public grain reserve at UZS 2,933,000 per ton, equal to the average price at the Uzbek
                Commodity Exchange in March-May 2023, the months with typically the highest wheat prices during the
                marketing year. Achievement rating: High.

                RI2: Independent board directors were appointed by the State Asset Management Agency for 16 of the 30
                largest SOEs by 2023, partially meeting the target that independent board directors be appointed for at least
                20 of the 30 largest SOEs. The late enactment of the Law ZRU-821, "On State Property Management," in
                March 2023 and delays with the selection of the international consultants explain the partial achievement. A
                total 25 independent board directors were appointed during the process (representing 11 percent of
                220 board directors at the 30 largest SOEs); the selection considered core business competencies, as well
                competencies related to environmental, social, and corporate governance. The ICR added that the
                appointment process is ongoing, with the State Asset Management Agency slated to fill up the remaining 57
                independent Board director positions in the near term. Achievement rating: Substantial.

                RI3: A road map for the transition of operations of SOEs to more sustainable and climate-friendly business
                practices was set, consistent with the new Law "On State Property Management," achieving the
                target. Presidential Decree PP-436, issued in December 2022, “On the Transition to a Green Economy and
                Ensuring Green Growth,” identified measures to improve energy efficiency at large energy-
                intensive enterprises and utilities: adoption of an accounting system of energy resources; introduction of
                energy audits; and improvements to the quality of, and the tariff policy governing, heat supply. The decision of
                the Cabinet of Ministers No. 474, issued in August 2022, “On Measures to Determine Environmental
                Requirements and Standards of Environmental Protection in the Field of Mining and Metallurgy Industry
                Based on International Standards,” listed 32 actions focused on heavily polluting SOEs in mining and

                                                                                                                    Page 16 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



metallurgy. Uzbekneftegaz JSC, the state-owned holding company of Uzbekistan's oil and gas industry,
published its first annual Sustainability Report in 2020, Striving for Progress, detailing the integration of the
UN Sustainable Development Goals into its operations. These achievements notwithstanding, since it is
questionable that environmental sustainability would have been the priority for SOE corporate governance
reform and SOE financial transparency reform. The moderately unsatisfactory relevance rating of RI3 results
in a downgrade to the achievement rating to modest. Achievement rating: Modest. The ICR had
suggested an alternative RI to measure the impact of PA2, the number of SOEs adopting the International
Financial Reporting Standards of the IFRS Foundation and the International Accounting Standards
Board; however, this alternative indicator could not be used due to lack of data.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support a faster and more equitable economic transition through improved fiscal transparency and
accountability

Rationale
RI4: The government, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the Agence Française de
Développement (AFD) published the Climate Budget Tagging in Uzbekistan: Methodology and
Implementation Roadmap in May 2022, meeting the target that there be a system for classifying and scoring
public expenditures against government environmental and climate change priorities. The methodology is
used to assess expenditures across various sectors (agriculture, forestry, energy and fuel,
waste management, water waste management, pollution abatement) to determine whether they would have
implications for environmental (green) goals and outcomes. An initial assessment was conducted and applied
to the total state budget in 2022, after which the government published the Climate Public Expenditure and
Institutional Review: Uzbekistan in August 2023. The review, which covered 976 separate expenditure lines
(using the lowest level of granularity available), found that: (a) 11 percent of expenditure lines had positive
environmental impacts; (b) 2 percent had a combination of positive and negative impacts; (c) one percent had
negative impacts; and (d) 82 percent had neutral impacts. While these achievements are notable and would
have been relevant to measure progress with green budgeting, they do not reflect the primary impact of
integrating off-budget and extra-budget spending into the consolidated state budget. Because the relevance
of this original RI is rated unsatisfactory (see Section 4), the achievement of RI4 should be downgraded from
high to negligible. However, the ICR also proposes an alternative indicator to better measure the impact of
integrating off-budget and extra-budget spending into the consolidated state budget: the amount of spending
that still lay outside the formal budget process. According to the ICR, off-budget spending was reduced from
1.5 percent of GDP in 2021 to 0.9 percent of GDP in 2023. While lacking an explicit target, the achievement is
significant. Using this alternative RI, the achievement is rated substantial. Achievement rating: Substantial.

RI5: The Cabinet of Ministers approved the MTDS 2023-2025, part of the Medium-Term Fiscal Strategy for
2023-2025, in June 2022. Following that, the annual report, The State Debt of the Republic of Uzbekistan for
2022, was submitted by the Ministry of Economy and Finance to Parliament and published. Thereafter, the
updated MTDS 2025-2027 was prepared in November 2023, with technical assistance from the WB and the


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



International Monetary Fund (IMF). The three actions meet the target that a MTDS be approved by the
government and at least one annual debt reported be submitted to Parliament. Achievement rating: High.

RI6: The Ministry of Economy and Finance developed secondary regulations for the regular publication of
allocation impact reports for purpose-specific impact bonds, meeting the target. Following the regulations, the
government and UNDP published the Uzbekistan July 2021 SDG Bond Allocation and Impact Report in
November 2022 pertaining to Uzbekistan's sovereign Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) Bond, worth
US$635 million (first tranche) issued in July 2021 with a coupon of 3.9 percent and a maturity of 10.25 years,
and UZS 2.5 trillion (US$235 million equivalent) (second tranche) with a coupon of 14 percent and a maturity
of three years. The associated allocation and impact report disclosed how the bond proceeds would be used
to achieve the government’s priorities pertaining to the UN Sustainable Development Goals; the bond
would fund public SDG-oriented projects (projects that directly or indirectly supported climate risk adaptation
or mitigation) in seven areas (SDG 4 - Education, SDG 6 - Water Management, SDG 3 - Health, SDG 11 -
Green Transportation, SDG 11 - Pollution Control, SDG 15 - Management of Natural Resources, and SDG 7 -
Green Energy). In October 2023, Uzbekistan issued a green sovereign Eurobond in the London
Stock Exchange worth UZS 4.25 trillion (US$350 million equivalent) in parallel with two tranches of
Eurobonds worth US$660 million. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will publish the associated allocation
and impact report for this issue by the end of 2024. Achievement rating: High.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Support a faster and more equitable economic transition through increased economic and social inclusion,
especially of women and persons with disabilities

Rationale
RI7: A hundred percent of Labor Code compliance audits conducted by the Ministry of Labor and
Employment Relations included checks of new Labor Code regulations (the new Labor Code approved by
Parliament in October 2022 and entered into force in April 2023), meeting the target that at least 60 percent of
such compliance audits include checks of new Labor Code regulations. The Ministry of Labor and
Employment Relations conducted 16,038 inspections in 2023, covering a wide range of regulations (e.g.,
work safety, salary levels, timely payment of salaries, and gender and other discrimination) and found 41,260
violations (including 7,256 pertaining to employment conditions and payments to women workers) for which
warnings were issued, or fines imposed, or lawsuits filed. The ICR added that further reforms are necessary
to strengthen the compliance audits and to correct for legal and institutional gaps: (a) audits at the discretion
of the Ministry of Labor and Employment Relations apply only to public enterprises; (b) audits of private
enterprises can only be triggered by complaints and require approvals by the Business Ombudsman (only 34
were conducted in 2023, which found 375 violations); (c) hence, amendments to the Law on the Ombudsman
would be necessary. Relatedly, ILO and the International Finance Corporation were assisting the government
to implement international labor standards and norms in the country. However, because the RI is rated
moderately unsatisfactory (see Section 4), the achievement of RI7 is downgraded from high to modest.
Alternatively, the ICR suggested that the gender wage gap, defined as the difference between the median
earnings of men and women relative to the median earnings of men, might be a better measure of the impact

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 27
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



                      of the new law, as a narrower gap would reflect greater economic inclusion for women workers. The ICR
                      reported that the gender wage gap declined from 37.5 percent in 2020 to 34 percent in 2022. While lacking an
                      explicit target, the achievement is significant. Based on this alternative indicator, the achievement is rated
                      substantial. Achievement rating: Substantial.

                      RI8: Following the adoption of the new poverty line as the eligibility criterion for social assistance programs,
                      total spending on social assistance programs based on the new poverty line amounted to UZS 17.561 trillion
                      in 2023, corresponding to 90.5 percent of total social assistance spending, meeting the target that the
                      percentage be at least 80 percent. The number of families receiving social support based on the new poverty
                      line increased from 2.1 million in end-2022 to 2.2 million in end-2023 (about 9 million individuals). In total, an
                      estimated 22.6 percent of all families receive some type of social support, including from regular social
                      assistance programs administered by the National Agency of Social Protection and managed through the
                      Single Social Registry (introduced in 2020). Meanwhile, non-emergency social assistance programs also use
                      the new poverty line (among other criteria), except for three targeted programs created after the COVID-19
                      pandemic (the Women’s, Youth, and “Iron” registries) and two targeted regional assistance programs (in the
                      Karakalpak Republic and the Khorezm region). According to the ICR, efforts are underway to integrate the
                      three special registries into the Single Social Registry. Achievement rating: High.

                      RI9: The Legislative Chamber approved the 2023-25 National Action Plan for the Realization of the
                      Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in the Republic of Uzbekistan in December 2022,
                      partially meeting the target that there be a national implementation plan to reduce the impact of climate
                      change risks on persons with disabilities. The National Action Plan supports four pillars: (a) improved
                      legislation to protect the rights of persons with disabilities; (b) infrastructure and services to enable persons
                      with disabilities to participate in all aspects of public life; (c) public information about the rights of persons with
                      disabilities to create a favorable environment for social inclusion; and (d) an improved system for social
                      rehabilitation and habilitation. However, while the National Action Plan focuses on removing key obstacles to
                      the participation of persons with disabilities in social and economic life, it lacks explicit reference to any
                      strategy or plan to address the impact of climate change on persons with disabilities. For this reason, the
                      target is only partially achieved. Moreover, the RI focuses exclusively on reducing climate changes risks on
                      persons with disabilities. Because the RI is rated moderately unsatisfactory (see Section 4), the achievement
                      of RI9 is downgraded from substantial to modest. Achievement rating: Modest. The Disability Indicators for
                      the SDGs (UN Secretariat for the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, 2015) has a long list
                      of indicators to monitor, review, and assess progress with disability-related SDG targets from which the
                      program could have drawn relevant measures. The ICR cited two, focused on core obstacles and
                      applicable to the Uzbekistan program: wage subsidies for the employment of persons with disabilities,
                      and dedicated quotas for university for persons with disabilities. Neither of the two proposed alternative RIs,
                      however, can be used because of a lack of data.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale
                                                                                                                              Page 19 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)




Achievement of all three objectives is rated satisfactory. Overall efficacy is rated satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of prior actions is rated highly satisfactory. Efficacy is rated satisfactory. Outcome is rated
satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key development outcomes face sustainability risks.

Progress with SOE reforms and privatization will confront substantial hurdles. The reform program
remains unfinished, as many SOEs continue to enjoy undue privileges including tax holidays,
preferential access to energy supplies, and subsidized finance. Corporate restructuring at SOEs, however,
will inflict social costs, including those arising from any wholesale staff retrenchment, as some 3,000 SOEs
account for 18 percent of all employment (see Section 3.B).

The government's fiscal consolidation program, which aims to reduce the overall fiscal deficit to 3 percent of
GDP in the medium term (IMF, 2024, Republic of Uzbekistan - Staff Report for the 2024 Article IV
Consultation), will exert pressure on public spending. While revenue measures—broadening the tax
base, eliminating exemptions, and improving compliance—will help, it is likely that expenditure cuts will also
be necessary, considering that public sector wages, energy subsidies, capital investment, and policy lending
have expanded recently. If budgetary cuts will be broad-based, social spending might be affected as well.

Two DPOs, approved in 2022 and 2023, support new reform measures that will help mitigate sustainability
risks to the development outcomes achieved by this operation.

       The Advancing Uzbekistan's Economic and Social Transformation Development Policy Operation
        (2022-2024) aims to support Uzbekistan's transition to an inclusive and private sector-led market
        economy by strengthening market institutions and the environment for private sector growth,
        improving SOE management, and increasing social inclusion and resilience. Related reforms include:
        (a) on SOEs -- the submission to Parliament of a Law on Privatization; (b) the privatization of the SOE
        Universal Mobile Systems; (c) restrictions on SOEs from engaging in new commercial activities

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



       inconsistent with their core businesses; (d) ceilings on the issuance by SOEs of non-guaranteed debt;
       (e) on labor markets -- the payment of maternity benefits from public funds; and (f) on social
       assistance -- the adoption of a National Social Protection Strategy, including the introduction of a
       results-oriented budget linked to social protection goals.
      The Uzbekistan First Inclusive and Resilient Market Economy DPO Program (2023-2025) aims to
       support Uzbekistan’s transition to an inclusive and resilient market economy by creating markets;
       improving fiscal risk management and public procurement; and supporting social inclusion and green
       resilience. Related reforms include: (a) on agriculture -- the abolition of the crop placement system for
       all crops; (b) on SOEs -- the separation of energy network operation and commercial functions at the
       SOE JSC National Electric Grid of Uzbekistan; (c) the unbundling of regulatory and shareholding
       functions at the SOE Uzkimyosanoat; and (d) on social assistance -- the creation of a National
       Agency for Social Protection.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Stand-Alone Operation. Like three preceding DPOs approved by the WB for Uzbekistan in 2018, 2019,
and 2020, this reform program was structured as a stand-alone operation to implement the country's
medium-term development strategy in its drive toward a market economy. While the PD did not explain the
choice of a stand-alone operation, discussions in the document offer an insight on the preference for a
stand-alone operation over a programmatic series: (a) with structural and policy reforms becoming more
complex over time, institutional constraints in Uzbekistan had become more binding; (b) the high level of
centralization in the government imposed significant pressures on administrative capacity; and (c) while
social discontent over reforms remained low, political economy risks were ever present, especially
in reforms that involved adjustments to prices and that posed risks to employment.

Analytical Underpinning. The PAs were informed by analytical work produced by the WB and other
development partners, including those delivered as part of technical assistance activities.

      PA1 - Central Asia's Horticulture Sector (WB, 2020), Uzbekistan Second Agricultural Public
         Expenditure Review (W, 2021), and Assessing Uzbekistan's Transition (WB, 2021).
        PA2 - Assessing Uzbekistan's Transition (WB, 2021).
        PA3 - Uzbekistan Public Expenditure Review (WB, 2019), Republic of Uzbekistan Fiscal
         Transparency Evaluation (IMF, 2019), Uzbekistan 2018 Public Expenditure and Financial
         Accountability Performance Assessment Report (PEFA Secretariat, 2019), and Assessing
         Uzbekistan's Transition (WB, 2021).
        PA4 - Technical Assistance on Fiscal Rules (IMF, 2021) and Technical Assistance on Debt (IMF,
         2019).
        PA5 - Technical Assistance on the Development of the Labor Code (WB and U.K. Effective
         Governance for Economic Development Program, 2021), Gender Discrimination in Hiring: Evidence



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



       from an Audit Experiment in Uzbekistan (WB Policy Research Working Paper 9874, 2021),
       and Assessing Uzbekistan's Transition (WB, 2021).
      PA6 - Setting a National Poverty Line in Uzbekistan (WB, 2021).
      PA7 - Listening to the Citizens of Uzbekistan Survey (WB, 2018), UN Common Country Analysis:
       Uzbekistan (UN, 2020), and Uzbekistan Disability Inclusion (WB, 2021).

Links to Related WB Operations. This operation succeeded three DPOs, which initiated reforms in the
same areas covered by this operation: agriculture liberalization, SOE reform and privatization, fiscal
transparency, labor markets, social protection, and social inclusion.

      The Uzbekistan Reforms for Transition DPO (2018-2019) aimed to strengthen the foundations for
       sustainable economic growth and a resilient macro-financial framework, support market formation
       for private sector development, and enable job creation and manage social risks. The related
       reforms included: (a) on agriculture -- the listing of products to be transacted through the
       commodity exchanges; (b) the alignment of the regulated purchase price for cotton toward the
       international market price; (c) the reduction in the land area mandated for cotton and grain
       production; (d) on SOEs -- fuel and electricity tariff adjustments at the state joint stock companies
       Uzbekenergo and Uzbekneftegaz; (e) on labor -- the submission to Parliament of amendments to
       the Labor Code to extend formal contracts to part-time and temporary workers; and (f) on social
       assistance -- an increase in social safety net financial support to vulnerable groups.
      The Sustaining Market Reforms in Uzbekistan DPO (2019-2020) aimed to increase the role of
       markets and the private sector in the economy and enhance social inclusion. Related reforms
       included: (a) on agriculture -- the removal of mandatory pre-payment and minimum export price
       requirements for horticultural exports; (b) on SOEs -- the creation of a new Agency for the
       Management of State Assets; (c) on the budget -- the publication of citizens budget and budget
       execution reports; (d) on labor -- removing restrictions limiting employers from hiring workers
       without propiska (a local residence permit); (e) on social assistance -- the creation of a Unified
       Social Registry of Social Protection.
      The Uzbekistan - Supporting a Transparent and Inclusive Market Transition DPO (2020-2022)
       aimed to improve the efficiency, sustainability, and transparency of resource allocation in the
       economy, and enhance economic inclusion and social resilience. Related reforms included: (a) on
       agriculture -- the abrogation of the state order system for cotton; (b) on SOEs -- prohibition of on-
       lending by state commercial banks to SOEs using subsidized funds from the Uzbekistan Fund for
       Reconstruction and Development; (c) requirement for the 32 largest SOEs to adopt the
       International Financial Reporting Standards, prepare financial recovery strategies, and obtain
       international credit ratings beginning in 2021; (d) approval of a list of SOEs to be divested of
       government ownership through a competitive process; (e) on the budget -- amendment to the
       Budget code to allow the Parliament and the regional councils to approve their budgets; (f)
       incorporation of the Uzbekistan Fund for Reconstruction and development income and expenses in
       the draft State Budget Law; (g) on labor -- simplification and digitalization of the state residency
       registration procedures to expand labor mobility; (h) new regulations to reduce gender barriers
       to employment; and (i) on social assistance -- raising the number low-income family allowance
       beneficiaries by 10 percent.

Collaboration with Development Partners. The WB collaborated closely with other development
partners in the design and implementation of this reform program which involved a broad range of sectors,
especially those sectors where the other development partner had significant experience. In this operation,
the reform measures benefitted from technical expertise, advisory services, and related

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



resources contributed by the UNDP and AFD on green budget tagging, the IMF on the MTDS, and the
UNDP on climate and environmental debt reporting. The UNDP and the AFD implemented the joint
initiative “Strengthening the National Capacities Towards Introduction of SDG and Green Budget Tagging
Methodologies and Practices in Uzbekistan” in 2022-23, helping the Ministry of Economy and Finance
design and develop methodologies, conduct research, and strengthen institutional and individual capacities
in SDG and green budgeting. The IMF provided technical assistance, jointly with the WB, for the
preparation of the MTDS for 2025-27, following the passage of the Law on State Debt in 2023. The IMF
also completed the Republic of Uzbekistan Debt Sustainability Analysis jointly with the WB in 2021 and
2022, which informed the preparation of the debt management strategy. The UNDP and the government
jointly published the Uzbekistan July 2021 SDG Bond Allocation and Impact Report in November 2022 to
explain how the proceeds of the bond by Uzbekistan—the first country in the region and the second in the
world to issue a Sovereign SDG Bond—will help achieve the country's Sustainable Development Goals.

Implementation Risks and Mitigation Measures. The WB assessed the overall risk of the operation to
be moderate, considering that the government had implemented substantive reforms in the same areas
addressed by this operation and supported by the three DPOs preceding this program. According to the
PAD: (a) the overall reform program continued to enjoy strong political and public support; (b) the
government had established a track record of ameliorating the negative social impacts of past reform
measures; and (c) the crisis triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic a created sense of urgency, especially
for the reforms to improve the social safety net system. The WB recommended that the government
maintain a stable macroeconomic framework to support the reform program, emphasize the accountability
of government actions, and strengthen transparency and citizen engagement.

While the WB considered the overall risk to be moderate, it judged the institutional risk to be substantial
because the institutional frameworks that had been created were still relatively new (e.g., from the
unbundling of vertically integrated SOEs), administrative capacity at the sector level remained under-
developed owing to the high level of centralization in government operations, and the scope of reforms was
expanding and the pace was accelerating with this operation. The risk mitigation measures included: (a) an
accelerated implementation of the public sector administration reform program approved in 2021 to
strengthen public sector performance; (b) strong partnerships with development partners, focused on
technical assistance for institutional capacity building; (c) a concerted effort to attract talent, including from
the diaspora, for public sector jobs; and (d) even greater transparency to ensure government
accountability.

Shortcomings at Design. The results framework had shortcomings. At least one RI was unrelated to the
PA and rated unsatisfactory in its original form. Moreover, three RIs were weaker than
available alternatives and were rated moderately unsatisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale


                                                                                                        Page 23 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



Monitoring. Overall, the WB monitored the implementation of the reform program closely.

Technical Assistance. The WB continued to extend technical assistance to the government, either through
analytical work or as part of preparation activities for follow-on operations, in several reform areas supported by
this operation. Among these were technical assistance for: the review of the Strategy for Agricultural
Development; capacity building for the management, oversight, and privatization of SOEs; the update of the
MTDS; the revision of the formula for means-tested programs of social assistance; and the implementation of
the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

Coordination with Development Partners. The WB also closely collaborated and cooperated with other
development partners during program implementation: with the UNDP and the AFD on green budget tagging;
the IMF for the update of the MTDS; and with the UNDP for the elaboration of climate and environmental debt
reporting.

Follow-On Operations. There were no reform reversals at or since closing. Rather, the WB and the
government signed financing agreements in 2022 and 2023 for two new DPOs that advance the structural and
policy reform program begun in 2018 in support of the transition toward a market economy (see Section 7).




Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The WB performance at design is rated satisfactory, and at implementation, highly satisfactory. The overall
WB performance is rated satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The ICR offered the following analysis of the ex-post poverty impacts of the reform scrapping the state wheat
order system and aligning state purchase prices (for the strategic grain reserve) with market prices (PA1).




                                                                                                     Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



      On one hand, the resort to market prices raised the incomes of 40,000 farmers and 150,000 agricultural
       workers. The poverty rate fell from 17.3 percent in 2022 to 13.4 percent in 2023, although to effect of
       higher farm incomes on poverty reduction is not easily quantified.
      On the other hand, the cessation of subsidized wheat sales to state flour mills, coupled with the
       destabilization of world grain markets following the onset of the war in Ukraine in February 2022, helped
       drive wheat flour prices higher by 32 percent in 2022 and 19 percent in 2023, and bread prices, by 36
       percent in 2022 and 35 percent in 2023. The impact of the reform measure on prices is difficult to
       disentangle from those of the war and other factors.
      To mitigate the impact of the large short-term price hikes during the period, the government drew on the
       sales of strategic wheat reserves (around 2.5 million tons over 2022-24) to provide one-off social
       transfers to the poorest households.

The ICR did not present a similar ex-post discussion of the other reform measures but only reiterated the ex-
ante analysis cited in the PD.

      The new Labor Code (PA5) will improve labor relations and foster the inclusiveness of employment, with
       net poverty reduction impacts and progressive distributional effects. Specifically, the new law will
       improve incentives for employment, end gender wage discrimination, and contribute to higher incomes
       for female workers.
      The use of the new poverty line for social assistance targeting (PA6) will make government social
       programs more responsive to the needs of the poor.
      The implementation of the CRPD (PA7) will improve employment opportunities for persons with
       disabilities and strengthen their access to essential health care and other public services.



b. Environmental

The ICR did not quantify the environmental effects of the reforms ex-post but reiterated the ex-ante assessment,
which concluded that the environmental impacts would be mostly positive or, at least, neutral.

      The continued liberalization of agricultural markets, including the abolition of the wheat quotas and state-
       controlled prices (PA1), will help address climate vulnerabilities in farming by encouraging crop
       diversification, strengthening incentives for climate-adapted land systems, and curbing soil and water
       pollution. At the same time, reforms could lead to more intensive cultivation of orchards and vineyards, the
       development of new greenhouses, and the construction of new agricultural processing facilities, with
       possible negative environmental impacts.
      By upholding environmental stewardship principles in the SOE sector, the new State Asset Management
       Law (PA2) will have positive environmental impacts on the economy in the long run.
      The classification and scoring of public expenditures against environmental and climate change priorities
       (PA3) will help public spending generate positive environmental effects.



c. Gender



                                                                                                    Page 25 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)



The ICR credits the approval of the new Labor Code—which, among others, enhanced gender equality in pay
(PA5)—with the improvement in Uzbekistan's score on the WB's Women, Business, and the Law 1.0 Index. Based
on eight indicators that represent different stages of a woman's life and career, including mobility, workplace, pay,
marriage, parenthood, entrepreneurship, assets, and pension, the index is a measure of progress toward gender
equality. Uzbekistan's score improved from 67.5 (out of 100) in 2020 to 82.5 in 2023 (WB, Women, Business, and
the Law 2024).



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for development financing operations and includes
sections on the relevance of PAs and the relevance of results indicators. For RIs that it deemed were weak
measures of the impact of the PAs, the ICR proposed well-considered alternatives with data where available.
The account of the program's performance was well informed, and the efficacy assessment was outcome-
oriented. The ICR presented ample evidence to support its assessment of the WB’s performance at design and
during implementation. The record of the analytic underpinnings of the operation, the link with other WB
operations in Uzbekistan, and the implementation risks that were identified at appraisal were detailed. The link
with related operations was significant, as this operation (while not part of a programmatic series) succeeds
three, and precedes two, DPOs that advance Uzbekistan's decades-long transition from a planned economy to
a market economy. The ICR drew lessons that would be valuable to DPOs focused on similar transition
programs.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

 Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 26 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerating Uzbekistan's Transition DPO (P176353)




12. Lessons

A lesson is drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

While a programmatic series is superior when the government has a strongly articulated multi-year
reform agenda, a standalone operation can meet far-reaching medium and long-term goals by
being anchored on a consistent program of sequenced reforms, hence attaining a quasi-programmatic
character. This standalone operation succeeded three and preceded two DPOs that made strides advancing
increasingly difficult reforms in agriculture liberalization, SOE reform and privatization, fiscal transparency, labor
markets, social protection, and social inclusion. The latest operation in this sequence was finally designed as a
formal programmatic series when it was determined that the government had the political willingness and the
institutional capacity to pre-commit to an increasingly complex program of structural reforms.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                       Page 27 of 27
