     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024215

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P163157                                   Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Niger                                     Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3350                                 30-Jun-2023                                          26,449,768.44

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2018                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        26,449,768.44                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal      Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5), the objective of the project was to expand income-generating
   activities for youth in selected poor areas. Project objectives were not revised during
   implementation; however, some key associated outcome targets were upwardly revised. Because the
   ambition of the targets increased, no split rating will be done, and assessment will be on the basis of the
   revised higher targets.



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Apr-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Youth productive inclusion in rural areas (US$14.5 million at approval; US$16.1 million after
   restructuring; US$15.7 million actual at closing). This component aimed to promote youth empowerment
   and help youth engage in more productive and sustainable self-employment, thereby enabling them to
   diversify economic activities. Financing was to support provision of an integrated package of cross-cutting
   support services aimed at addressing key barriers to more productive youth employment in rural areas,
   especially among young women. The component targeted youth Village Savings and Loans Associations
   (VSLAs) with 15 to 30 members, with the aim of providing the following services: (i) sensitization workshops
   on individual aspirations and social norms focused on psychosocial constraints to choices, particularly for
   young women; (ii) life skills and micro-entrepreneurship training, including information on local economic
   and employment opportunities, and (iii) capital support, consisting of a grant in two tranches to enable
   investments in new income-generating activities or productivity increases in existing activities. VSLA
   members were to be accompanied throughout the program for a total of nine months. During the start-up of
   their business activities, participants were to be supported to access markets and link with employment and
   municipality services. Throughout the process, VSLA members had access to coaching and follow-up
   support, as well as sports and cultural activities, to strengthen both their life skills and group cohesion.

   Youth insertion in selected activities in semi-urban areas (US$8 million at approval; US$5.5 million
   after restructuring; US$5.2 million actual at closing). Component 2 was intended to create jobs and
   improve beneficiaries' eligibility in peri-urban areas. The component was to finance insertion of youth in
   economic activities that (a) were potentially income-generating; (b) had social value, positive impact, or
   spillover effect in the local economy; (c) were applicable in other regions; and (d) were accessible to young
   people after short-term technical training, with reasonable start-up capital. The aim was to foster the
   development of off-farm micro-enterprises by youths, but also to unlock the potential for more efficient
   markets and better employment around the selected areas. In contrast to Component 1, which took a
   group-based and cross-cutting approach at the village level, this component focused on individual
   beneficiaries and large enough localities to leverage links to trade and value chains.

   Institutional support and project management (US$7.5 million at approval; US$8.3 after
   restructuring; US$7.4 million actual at closing) was subdivided into three sub-components: (i) support
   for decentralized services aimed at promoting employment and micro-entrepreneurship, including
   information, awareness-raising, and guidance to youths who were self-employed or employed in small
   businesses in rural areas. This was to be achieved through extending services provided by the National
   Agency for Employment to the municipalities covered by Component 1, with the creation of municipal
   employment offices and the recruitment of both male and female municipal employment agents; (ii) support

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



   for coordination in the employment sector, including the implementation of the national employment policy
   by the government, the creation of an inter-ministerial committee to work as an intersectoral discussion
   platform on employment policies, and integration between social protection and employment systems,
   starting from the Unified Social Registry; and (iii) project management, including systems development and
   financing of fiduciary matters, communication, planning, data collection, monitoring, and evaluation. The
   component also was to support the establishment and maintenance of a steering committee responsible for
   overseeing project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was approved on June 14, 2018, became effective on October 30, 2018, and closed on June
   30, 2023, with no extensions. It was financed by a US$30 million International Development
   Association credit, of which $28.3 million was disbursed. There were no other sources of financing.

   The project was restructured once, on April 25, 2022, pursuant to recommendations of the mid-term
   review. As part of the restructuring, 3,600 beneficiaries from year 2021 and 2022 cohorts of Component 2
   were transferred to Component 1, in order to address COVID-19-related delays to Component 2 trainings
   and to enable the project to achieve its goals. The number of Component 1 beneficiaries was also
   increased by a further 1,000 beneficiaries due to lower-than-expected training costs per beneficiary
   (benefiting from exchange rate gains). These increases were then reflected by raising relevant target values
   in the results framework. In addition, target communities were somewhat revised due to conflict-related
   internal displacements and insecurity.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDO was relevant for the country context. Niger has high population growth rates coupled with
low employment levels. With annual population growth of four percent and a fertility rate of 7.6 children
per woman, Niger has one of the most rapidly growing populations in the world. The country population is
expected to reach 54 million people in 2050. This fast demographic growth has resulted in a large
number of youths entering the working-age population every year. However, underemployment and
unemployment remain high, despite increasing off-farm economic opportunities. With wage jobs scarce,
most of the working population is self-employed in agriculture and off-farm activities. According to the
ICR (p. 6), a combination of farm and off-farm activities was associated with 20 percent higher income
levels, on average. Off-farm diversification was also a potential risk management and climate change
adaptation strategy. Providing cash earnings throughout the year, off-farm activities represented a
welcome complement to the highly seasonal subsistence agriculture. Yet off-farm productivity was
constrained by lack of access to capital and skills. Moreover, two thirds of households had to abandon
secondary off-farm occupations when demand for farm labor increased, keeping investments and
productivity low. A 2016 national study (Étude Nationale d’Évaluation d’Indicateurs Socio-Économiques
et Démographiques, Gouvernement du Niger 2022) found that the constraints identified to greater
employment levels included lack of access to capital, weak skills, limited aspirations, and poor
information on employment opportunities, restrictive social norms, and lack of access to markets and


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



               inputs. Constraints related to aspirations and social norms were particularly strong for women. According
               to the ICR, however, while different government programs supported urban youth employment, core
               constraints preventing youth, particularly rural youth, from engaging in productive employment were
               overlooked, and off-farm self-employment and micro-enterprises were less considered prior to design of
               this project.

               The PDO was relevant to the latest World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2018-22,
               extended to FY23) and addressed the key Fragile, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) risks identified in
               the framework. The project was aligned with Focus Area 2, Improved Human Capital and Social
               Protection, and in particular with Objective 4: Increased access to quality education and training services,
               particularly for women, as well as Objective 5: Improved social protection system and ability to manage
               forced displacement. In addition, the PDO was highly relevant to the CPF's FCV risk mitigation strategic
               priority of strengthening economic opportunities for youth and women, including in conflict-
               affected regions. The PDO contributed to the aim of breaking the poverty cycle and building resilience, as
               it specifically targeted impoverished youths residing in the poorest and most insecure areas. The PDO
               was aligned with the priority of modernizing Niger’s rural economy, by supporting income-earning
               activities for youth and ensuring that they would have access to training opportunities (ICR, p. 11).

               The PDO was aligned with the government’s Social and Economic Development Plan (PDES 2022-
               26), particularly Axis 1 on social inclusion, and with the National Solidarity Program. One of the
               key PDES objectives is to create jobs in the productive sectors, increasing the number of youths trained
               in entrepreneurship and integrated in productive sectors. One of its targets is to integrate 500,000 youth
               in the economic circuit between 2022 and 2026. The PDO was also aligned with the third axis of the
               PDES, which is focused on the structural transformation of the economy, with a program aimed at
               developing the private sector and providing active support to youth entrepreneurship.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Expand income-generating activities for youth in selected poor areas

                             Rationale
                             The project aimed to support youth employment in poor areas, through strategies that differentiated
                             between rural and semi-urban areas. The project's theory of change divided youth into two groups, those
                             in rural areas and those in semi-urban areas, based on the presumption that the different contexts
                             necessitated different approaches to employment creation. In both rural and semi-urban areas, youth

                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



beneficiaries received a combination of vocational training and an "integrated package" of other support,
including skills development, enhanced risk-coping mechanisms through savings facilitation, capital support,
linkages to markets, coaching, and startup capital. In rural areas, this was done through VSLAs, and in semi-
urban areas it was done directly through training providers targeting individual beneficiaries in large enough
localities "to leverage links to trade and value chains." The presumption was that it would be possible in semi-
urban areas to identify a few income-generating activities and trades with potential to be economically viable,
and to generate positive spillover effects on the local economy, thereby unlocking the potential for more
efficient markets and better employment. In rural areas, support was provided through VSLAs that were either
pre-existing or were developed as part of the project, and training focused on micro-entrepreneurship skills
rather than vocational training, which was less relevant in the absence of local links to trade and value
chains. In addition, support was provided in order to help expand government employment services at the
community and municipal level (PAD, p. 16; ICR, p. 7). Through these different mechanisms in different poor
areas, youth were to be provided with expanded income-generating activities, achieving the objective. This
theory of change remained even after project restructuring, although funds and target numbers of
beneficiaries were shifted from Component 2 to Component 1 due to (largely procurement-
related) implementation delays in Component 2 (ICR, p. 16).

The project served 40 communes, selected according to a well-articulated set of criteria delineated in
the PAD. Communes were selected based on poverty and insecurity. Commune-level poverty estimates
were produced by the National Statistical Institute and the World Bank. Security risk was measured by the
United Nations Department of Safety and Security. Three-fourths of total beneficiaries (30,000) were selected
in poor communes and one-fourth (10,000) in highly insecure communes. Over the course of the project, 10
of the 40 originally selected communes were replaced with others due to sharp rises in instability, making it
impossible to safely continue the project.



Outputs

Targets for all but one output were surpassed. These included:

      1,626 youth groups were formed, against an upwardly revised target of 1,000 groups.
      48,013 beneficiaries completed life-skills training and micro-entrepreneurship, surpassing the
         upwardly revised target of 39,000 beneficiaries.
        46,716 beneficiaries received start-up capital support against an upwardly revised target of 39,000
         beneficiaries.
        550 village coaches were selected and trained, surpassing the target of 400 coaches.
        4,681 beneficiaries completed technical training (Component 2), surpassing the downwardly revised
         target of 4.400 beneficiaries. (Original target of 7,200 was reduced due to shift of funds from
         Component 2 to Component 1).
        6,626 youths (beneficiaries of Components 1 and 2) used community employment services (supported
         by Component 3), surpassing the target of 4,000 youths.
        No communal employment agents were financed by the National Agency for Promotion of
         Employment (ANPE), as originally envisaged. (The target was 10). This was due to the fact that the
         recruitment process was put on hold during the coup. According to the ICR, this process has now
         been resumed.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)




      An impact evaluation was conducted as planned, with results and recommendations validated.



Outcomes

The project effectively achieved its development objectives, surpassing all of its PDO-level
indicators and generating evidence demonstrating that income-generating activities for youth were
expanded in targeted areas. Specifically, 48,115 youth benefited from labor market programs financed by
the project, including over 28,000 women. 99.91 percent of Component 1 beneficiaries (and 95.47 percent of
female beneficiaries) were able to diversify their economic activities after receiving the integrated support
package. At project closure, 84 percent of Component 2 beneficiaries (and 96 percent of female beneficiaries)
were engaged in an income-generating activity for which they received support, against a baseline of only 4.3
percent of participants (2.79 percent among young women) engaged in income-generating activity. 96
percent of beneficiaries surveyed towards the end of the project reported that they were satisfied with the
project.

Preliminary findings of a randomized controlled trial conducted on the last cohort (2022-2023) of rural
beneficiaries showed that beneficiary households were more likely to be engaged in off-farm income-
generating activities than the control group (ICR, p.1 3). The average number of off-farm income-
generating activities per household was 50 percent higher among beneficiaries than in the control group.
One-third of beneficiary households were engaged in at least one off-farm income-generating activity, which
represented around 40 percent more than the control group. The study also found that beneficiary
households were engaged in more diversified activities, and their monthly income gains from these activities
were twice those of non-beneficiary households. Income-generating activities produced a 20 percent increase
in household ownership of small livestock, with a particular impact on the diversity of animals.

Findings of the impact evaluation in rural areas found a significant increase in beneficiaries’ monetary
contributions to savings groups (ICR, p. 14). At the end of the project, the average contribution by
beneficiaries was nearly double the level of contributions by the control group. Beneficiaries were also able
save nearly three times more than the control group. Eventually, beneficiaries showed less need to borrow,
with average borrowing amounts 50 percent lower than the control group. The government’s final evaluation
found that individual contributions among surveyed VSLAs in Maradi region ranged between 100-200
FCFA per week, with highs of up to 400-500 FCFA per week.

The impact evaluation also found a threefold increase in savings among beneficiaries compared to
the control group (ICR, p. 15). In the five-month period after the formation of the savings groups, individuals
were able to save US$15, averaging US$3 per month. This amount is US$12 more than the control group
over five months, or US$2.40 more per month. With savings tripled, beneficiaries enjoyed greater financial
security and enhanced their investment capacity, fostering economic growth and self-sufficiency. Improved
access to credit and the empowerment resulting from increased savings could further support entrepreneurial
activities and proactive financial management. Additionally, pooled resources from savings groups were
sometimes used to fund groups and community initiatives, bolstering community economic development.

Young women engaged in more off-farm income generating activities than men, but activities
performed by young men were more profitable. An initial assessment done at the start of the project found
that eight activities were considered suitable to women, including food processing, sales, and technological
occupations such as mobile phone repairing and charging. At the end of the project, almost all women

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



                            beneficiaries (99 percent) were actively engaged in income-generating activities in rural areas. Findings of the
                            impact evaluation show that young women were engaged in a higher number of off-farm income generating
                            activities compared to young men, but earned less from them, suggesting that men tend to engage in more
                            profitable activities. In peri-urban areas (Component 2), the rate of beneficiaries leading new income-
                            generating activities was higher among young women (96 percent) than among young men (68 percent) (ICR,
                            p.18). In response to an IEG question about this discrepancy, the project team explained that “the number of
                            activities that the initial assessment considered suitable for women was different and fewer compared to
                            those for young men…the choice of activities was made after community sensitization on social norms,
                            bottlenecks, and women's aspirations, while also respecting the will of young women to engage in activities
                            they deemed more appropriate.”

                            The project strengthened the capacity of ANPE to expand employment services at the municipality
                            level. Municipal employment agents provided information, awareness-raising, guidance, and other services to
                            youths who were self-employed or employed in small businesses in rural areas. These services were
                            accessed by 6,626 youths who were not beneficiaries of Components 1 or 2. ANPE took part in setting up
                            municipal employment offices and training agents, and it committed to the long-term management of ten out
                            of 40 municipal employment agents hired for the project. According to the ICR, the successful establishment
                            of employment services at the municipality level paved the way for stronger engagement with local actors. In
                            the medium term, this could translate into an opportunity to integrate employment-related aspects into
                            municipal development plans (ICR, p. 18).



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy was high, with all outcome targets surpassed and robust evidence presented in the ICR of the project’s
                            outcomes on diversification of income-generating activities and program satisfaction. Findings from the impact
                            evaluation show highly positive impact on the number and diversity of off-farm income-generating activities, as
                            well as on the profit from these activities and on small livestock investments. The project significantly increased
                            beneficiaries’ savings capacity, reduced their need for borrowing, and contributed to expansion of employment
                            services at the municipal level.




                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
Operational efficiency was low at first but improved considerably over time. The preparatory phase was
slow due to the unexpected replacement of the Technical Implementation Unit coordinator, so that the recruitment
of the project's technical team was finalized almost two years after project effectiveness; institutional disputes with
regard to fiduciary responsibilities that required World Bank arbitration; and significant delays in procurement,
which necessitated, in the case of Component 2, project restructuring with a shift of funds from Component 2 to 1
(ICR, pp. 20, 26). However, project staff were proactive and creative in overcoming these initial difficulties. For
example, to address procurement delays, the project introduced effective measures to reduce the number and
frequency of procurement processes, which allowed for timely service delivery. Intervention areas were grouped
into three zones based on their proximity, with one single non-governmental organization (NGO) covering an entire
zone, and a clause was inserted in contracts with service providers making it possible to automatically extend
contracts based on satisfactory performance in the previous cycle. Having similar activities under different
components delivered by the same NGO in each zone also minimized costs related to procurement, training, and
transport. Activities such as community sensitization, targeting, registration, and group establishment were
common to the two project components and implemented by the same NGO in each zone. Similarly, the decision
to shift funds from the weaker-performing Component 2 to Component 1 programs made it possible fully achieve
project goals despite Component 2 challenges. The reallocation of part of the funds from Component 2 to
Component 1 ensured the timely execution of the project and improved efficiency, as the unit cost of setting up
income-generating activities was lower in rural areas due to a highly efficient implementation model. This
reallocation resulted in a lower number of peri-urban beneficiaries targeted compared to original plans but
increased the total number of beneficiaries (ICR, p. 16). Preliminary results of the impact evaluation indicated that
Component 1 interventions were equally as effective as Component 2 interventions.

The project team adapted implementation measures to maintain efficiency against a backdrop of
increasing security risks. Security measures included recruiting trainers locally, hiring vehicles and drivers from
the area, restricting duration of field activities to daylight hours, and using telephones rather than face-to-face
meetings when needed to communicate remotely with communities. Trainings engaged smaller groups to avoid
the risks of crowded gatherings. In Diffa, NGOs had to carry out some activities in camps for internally displaced
people, where youths from the original beneficiary communities had been displaced. All these adaptations required
more days in the field, necessitating the employment of more personnel and increasing travel costs. According to
the ICR (p. 17), thanks to efficient coordination with the implementing partners, these increased costs could be
absorbed within the project budget.

Project costs were in line with to similar programs in the Sahel. The average cost of delivery for Component 1
was US$385 per beneficiary, including project administration costs. Per capita cost in four other similar programs
in Sahelian countries ranged between US$251 and US$573. According to the ICR (p. 15), the project obtained
efficiency gains by basing its design and implementation on learning from successful programs and adapting
existing tools to the needs of its target groups. The project also achieved significant productive outcomes with
lower capital support compared to other productive inclusion programs focused on labor and jobs. A cross-country
review of lump sum grants for productive investments found different average values depending on the type of
program: US$222 in social safety net programs and US$416 in labor and jobs programs. This project's capital


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



support was set at FCFA 100,000 (US$188) but reached significant outcomes in terms of diversification of income
activities and investments in productive assets.

The project administrative cost ratio decreased over time and was maintained within international
standards (10 percent). The project administrative cost ratio started at 49.2 percent due to large physical
investments needed to kick off activities in 2018, and it remained high during 2019 because of implementation
delays, particularly related to Component 2. After 2021, with full rollout of activities, administrative costs
decreased, settling at nine and ten percent in 2022 and 2023, respectively (ICR, p. 17).




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was highly relevant to country needs, surpassed all its PDO targets, and presented convincing
evidence of longer-term outcomes of the project. Despite delays in implementation and procurement challenges
in the initial years, the project was able to accomplish its goals with satisfactory implementation and cost
efficiency, showing marked improvement in efficiency during the course of implementation. These ratings
indicate that there were essentially no shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and results,
leading to an Outcome rating of Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



Institutional investments that were made during the project have thus far proved to be resilient, but
maintenance of development outcomes is primarily dependent on political stability levels and their
effects on the country’s economic growth. As part of Component 3, the government took part in setting
up municipal employment offices and training agents and committed to the long-term management of ten out
of 40 municipal employment agents hired for the project. According to the ICR (p. 13), the successful
establishment of employment services at the municipality level paved the way for a stronger engagement
with local actors, which, in the medium term, could translate into an opportunity to integrate employment-
related aspects in municipal development plans. Moreover, the project team, in response to an IEG question
on the current situation, reported that in recent dialogue with the World Bank team, the new government
showed strong interest in continued engagement on youth employment activities. However, the political and
security situation remains unstable and could affect longer-term development outcomes. The April 2024 WB
economic outlook notes that “the political crisis, followed by sanctions and a severe reduction in financing,
together with weak agricultural production, is estimated to have lowered GDP growth in 2023 to 1.2 percent
(2.5 percent per capita) and increased the extreme poverty rate to 52 percent. Nevertheless, with sanctions
lifted, growth could rebound to 6.9 percent, boosted by large-scale oil exports.” With regard to the benefits
accrued by project beneficiaries from Components 1 and 2, a follow-up survey would be necessary to
determine the extent to which short-term gains in income-generating activities, household savings, food
security, and livestock accumulation are maintained in the long term.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was based on prior research that identified key constraints to employment. The
  PAD cited the 2017 Niger Jobs Assessment and a 2018 qualitative assessment of constraints to
  productive employment as key project design resources defining both opportunities and constraints.
  These core constraints included access to capital, skills, information on employment opportunities, and
  limited aspirations (particularly for women). The project endeavored to address these constraints through
  its various activities. In addition, component design was informed by lessons from five Sahel countries
  implementing productive accompanying measures as part of the Sahel Adaptive Social Protection
  Program (PAD, p. 26).

  Project design included a thoughtful and well-elaborated targeting strategy. The strategy aimed to
  ensure that the project benefited poor and vulnerable youths, as well as youths in at-risk areas, thus
  contributing to tackling drivers of fragility (PAD, p. 13). Similarly, the project defined strategies for
  engaging female beneficiaries through sensitization campaigns that sought to ease constraints to
  participation for women and ensure inclusiveness, as well as through an integrated support package with
  specific gender-sensitive elements (PAD, p. 15). Outreach activities were planned to motivate young
  women to enroll in the project, including gender-sensitive approaches and engagement with community
  leaders, families, and influential male relatives when appropriate. The project plan also included life skills
  training and dedicated mentoring for female participants to address pervasive social barriers and boost
  self-confidence. To ensure a safe and comfortable environment, the project planned separate training for
  women and men and noted the possible need to have different age cohorts among women to facilitate
  discussions among peers (PAD, p. 17).



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



  Project design targeted in part conflict areas and gave full consideration to the associated
  risks. To mitigate these risks, the project planned to use third parties, including NGOs, to help monitor
  and provide effective implementation in insecure areas, and acknowledged the need for flexible
  programming in insecure areas (PAD, p.30).

  The project’s institutional framework took advantage of the experience of technical ministries and
  institutions working with youth employment in the country. The project was anchored to technical
  agencies, rather than to the Prime Minister’s Office or the Ministry of Planning, to leverage their overall
  experience with employment issues and with other Bank-funded projects, as well as their regional
  presence across the country. This choice proved valuable during project implementation (ICR, p. 27).

  Initial procurement challenges were not sufficiently anticipated and mitigated during the planning
  phases of the project. For example, the number of procurement processes planned under Component 1
  represented a significant challenge. The broad geographical coverage of the project and the many
  services and training to be contracted with local and specialized agencies would have required 56
  recruitments per cycle. Similarly, under Component 2, procurement difficulties delayed vocational training
  activities. According to the ICR, challenges included: (a) lack of knowledge of service providers’ capacity
  and availability to carry out different thematic trainings; (b) poor capacity of vocational training centers; (c)
  lack of clarity on the type of service providers to be contracted; and iv) lack of flexibility to adapt
  communication channels when advertising calls for expressions of interest (ICR, p. 26).

  The results framework was mostly rigorous, based on a robust theory of change. In addition, an
  impact evaluation was conceived with an experimental design, including random selection of a group of
  beneficiaries and a control group. However, as noted in Section 9a, at least one outcome indicator in the
  results framework could have been disaggregated to provide a more nuanced understanding of results.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision by the World Bank was adequate. According to the ICR (p. 21), missions were organized
 regularly, initially twice a year, becoming more frequent towards the end of the project. This allowed for
 systematic support to the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and effective supervision of project
 implementation. Aide-memoires were thorough and of good quality. Reports discussed achievements and
 issues in the different components and technical areas. They also included relevant recommendations and
 action points, which were followed up.

 The project team reacted in a timely and effective manner to numerous substantial challenges that
 arose. COVID-19 restrictions slowed down some key activities in early 2020, but these were restored
 quickly thanks to quick adoption of COVID-19 protection measures. Increased insecurity during the project
 period was also addressed in a timely and effective manner with the adoption of a range of security
 measures and safe community and staff engagement, as well as the use of local third-party implementers.
 Community employment agents used locally hired cars and drivers and were equipped with mobile phones
 to facilitate remote communication with communities. Activities were shortened, enabling participants to
 return home earlier. Trainers were locally recruited and returned to the main town daily. Village groups and

                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



 sensitization meetings were organized in smaller sizes and increased frequency. Public communications
 and messages were channeled through local radio rather than in person. Extensive monitoring and
 communication with communities were primarily conducted by phone. Where these measures were
 insufficient to adequately mitigate security risks, ten of the originally targeted communes were replaced
 with communes with lower security risks (ICR, p. 22).

 Recommendations from a mid-term process evaluation and mid-term review led to project
 restructuring, which allowed for the timely completion of project activities and exceeding
 of outcome targets despite significant challenges. The mid-term review provided recommendations
 regarding resource reallocation towards more efficient components. This was followed by a process
 evaluation to identify bottlenecks and potential improvements in coordination, procurement, and service
 delivery. Recommendations were taken on board through a project restructuring that put activities on track
 and created the conditions for increasing some indicator targets when the favorable exchange rate created
 the opportunity (ICR, p. 28). As detailed in section 10b, financial management and procurement processes
 were closely monitored, and improvements were introduced where necessary.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear and realistic, and PDO indicators were relevant and measurable.
 For the most part, the framework provided a rigorous and accurate picture of project contributions toward
 achievement of the objective. In one case, however, as noted in the ICR (p. 22), the PDO indicator of
 “share of rural beneficiaries in Component 1 who start, grow, or diversify their economic activity after
 receiving the integrated support package” could have been disaggregated to facilitate monitoring and
 provide more nuanced information on the outcome.

 M&E design included regular supervision and process monitoring, a mid-term review, satisfaction
 surveys, and an impact evaluation. The M&E manual developed in 2020 included an M&E plan and
 templates to be used by implementing actors as well as a dashboard to monitor the results framework. The
 mid-term review aimed to inform potential project adjustments. Satisfaction surveys were planned for six
 months after the reception of the full integrated support package by beneficiaries and aimed to capture
 their feedback on project implementation and inform delivery improvements over time. The impact
 evaluation was built on experimental (randomized controlled trial) design and aimed to measure the
 productive package impact on beneficiaries (ICR, p. 22).




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E plan was consistently implemented, with strong engagement and coordination between
  the central M&E unit, implementing partners, and decentralized agents. According to the ICR (p.
  23), the M&E unit and implementing partners carried out regular supervision missions and ensured data
  quality control. Monitoring reports were regularly produced, consolidating information on the progress of
  results framework indicators. NGOs produced three types of reports: one on the initial training of trainers;
  one at the end of each training; and a final report. NGOs responsible for VSLA trainings produced
  monthly reports on the funds mobilized by VSLAs, including information on deposits, credit, cash
  balance, and interest.

  Appropriate adjustments were made to the M&E plan, as needed, in the course of the project. For
  example, in 2022, the project developed online forms that were filled out on tablets and uploaded to the
  Kobo Toolbox platform, thereby reducing the risk of human errors and improving the time and security of
  data processing and transmission. Similarly, in response to issues identified in the mid-term review, a
  process evaluation was commissioned by the World Bank to identify bottlenecks and potential
  improvements in coordination, procurement, and service delivery.



c. M&E Utilization
  The MTR and subsequent process evaluation identified bottlenecks and proposed measures to
  overcome implementation delays, which led to successful restructuring of the
  project. Recommendations from the mid-term review and process evaluation tackled initial
  implementation challenges, promoting more efficient allocation of resources between components, and
  allowing for a substantial increase in the initial PDO targets (ICR, p. 23).

  The ICR was informed by data from the impact evaluation, particularly with respect to
  demonstrating the project’s effectiveness and outcomes. The evaluation provided valuable
  information on the positive impact of rural productive inclusion on the profit and diversification of
  economic activities, savings and credit behaviors, household consumption asset ownership, and youth
  migration.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C and did not trigger safeguard policies. Continuous
   monitoring by local agents and NGOs ensured that income-generating activities undertaken by beneficiaries
   had no adverse social or environmental impact. Training modules included preventive environmental
   guidelines and capacity building of beneficiaries on risk identification and management by type of activity.
   VLSA training included specific sessions on activity planning and integrating risk management principles
   and approaches (ICR, p. 25).


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Fiduciary risk was rated substantial at project launch but upgraded to moderate during
  implementation. Of the two implementing agencies, one was assessed at project launch to be of high risk
  and the other moderate. The PAD assessed that improvements were needed for the system to be
  adequate to provide accurate and timely information on the status of the project. The PAD consequently
  delineated measures to build the implementing agencies’ capacity for adequate financial
  management. Thanks to these measures, the financial management system in place was rated as
  satisfactory by the World Bank’s supervision missions and by the external financial audit.

  During program implementation, procurement challenges were met with creative solutions. For
  example, the number of procurement processes planned under Component 1 represented a significant
  challenge. The broad geographical coverage of the project and the many services and training to be
  contracted with local and specialized agencies would have required 56 recruitments per cycle. This
  number was significantly reduced with measures that included grouping intervention areas and
  automatically extending NGO contracts to more cycles based on their satisfactory performance. Under
  Component 2, procurement difficulties delayed vocational training activities by two years but were
  eventually overcome. Challenges included: (a) lack of knowledge of service providers’ capacity and
  availability to carry out different thematic trainings; (b) poor capacity of vocational training centers; (c) lack
  of clarity on the type of service providers to be contracted; and iv) lack of flexibility to adapt communication
  channels when advertising calls for expressions of interest. These challenges were overcome with
  changes in the procurement process that shifted towards non-governmental service providers (ICR, p. 26).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Positive spillover effects were observed within beneficiary communities, where non-beneficiaries
  created spontaneous groups replicating the VLSA model. An ANPE sensitization mission found that
  200 non-beneficiaries had started spontaneous VLSAs in the region of Maradi. VSLA groups were also
  formed in Zinder and Tillabery. A total of 89 percent of beneficiaries interviewed in the government’s final
  evaluation stated that new groups had been created, mirroring VSLAs supported by the project. The
  trickle-down effect on communities resulted in many young people motivated and keen to participate in
  similar initiatives (ICR, p. 19).

  Giving an economic opportunity to youths living in risk areas reduced migration and the risk of
  involvement with army groups. The project’s focus on reaching poor and vulnerable youths in risk areas
  allowed for tackling drivers of fragility, including the risk of migration and engagement in armed groups due
  to economic marginalization. Findings of the impact evaluation indicated that fostering youth engagement
  in economic activities increased and diversified their productive activities, made them more remunerative,
  and reduced the likelihood of migration, which is often associated with involvement in armed groups.
  Migration rates in the year prior to the impact evaluation decreased by three percent among beneficiaries
  compared to the control group, with a 25 percent reduction in the number of migrants. Migration rates
  decreased particularly among young men, with a 6.67 percent reduction compared to the control group.
  Reasons to migrate were predominantly economic, with lack of work opportunities at village level and


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



   search of better income mentioned by nearly 90 percent of the migrants. The project reduced both the
   number of youths migrating in search of work and the length of time spent away (ICR, p. 19).

   Beneficiaries experienced better consumption and food security than the control group. Using the
   Food Insecurity Experience Scale, the impact evaluation found that households participating in project
   activities were less food insecure than the control group. The positive impact on food security was the
   same independent of the delivery modality, i.e. lump sum or monthly transfers (ICR, p. 18).



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                  Procurement challenges were
                                                                                  not sufficiently anticipated and
                                                                                  planned for in project design,
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                  leading to lengthy
                                                                                  implementation delays in the first
                                                                                  years of the project.
Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR:

Youth productive inclusion programs can be viable and highly effective in FCV contexts. The
project generated evidence that productive inclusion in near-conflict areas significantly impacts
youth’s access to productive activities, their consumption and well-being, and their migration rates.

Anchoring safety nets and economic inclusion initiatives under the relevant technical
Ministry rather than the Prime Minister's Office and strengthening that Ministry’s
decentralized services can create conditions for sustainability at the local level. There is often
a trade-off in the design of safety net projects between anchoring them under a strong institution
(such as the Prime Ministry or President's Offices) or under technical ministries. In Niger, safety net
activities have been anchored in the past under the Office of the Prime Minister to provide stronger
support and link the activities with the food crises platform. This project, conversely, provided a
strong example of how anchoring safety nets and economic inclusion initiatives under the technical
Ministry and strengthening that Ministry’s decentralized services can be effective and create
conditions for sustainability at the local level. The project's anchoring to the ministry responsible for
social protection and employment allowed for expanding employment services in remote areas and

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



for continued support to youth in those areas. The expertise of the national employment agency
helped successfully expand employment services at the municipality level, paving the way
for stronger engagement with local actors. Municipal employment agents connected the project with
local authorities, provided decentralized employment services, promoted community engagement,
and brought the voice of beneficiaries to the central level. Their collaboration with municipal
structures favored the delivery of employment services in marginal and remote areas and led to the
inclusion of labor market interventions in municipal development plans. Proximity agents also
provided support to spontaneous VSLAs formed in the project areas.

Establishing effective and functional collaboration with the non-profit sector can contribute
to the successful implementation of productive inclusion measures in near-conflict areas.
Framework contracts with local NGOs reduced the number and frequency of procurement
processes, successfully harnessing the capacity of local service providers to deliver different
components of the package at scale in expanded geographical areas.

Project design prioritizing simple high-impact measures and in-built flexibility are important
in FCV settings. Complex implementation arrangements are difficult to implement and monitor,
particularly in FCV contexts. Simple processes facilitate readiness and improve flexibility to quickly
adjust delivery systems to an ever-changing context. Well-developed ongoing monitoring and review
processes inform decisions to overcome implementation and context-related challenges.

In near-conflict but still accessible areas, productive inclusion measures can be an
instrument to reduce youth migration and their potential engagement in illicit businesses and
armed groups. By engaging poor and vulnerable youths in diversified and more remunerative
economic activities, the project addressed key drivers of fragility and significantly reduced migration
rates. This reduction was particularly evident among young men, thereby lowering the risk of their
involvement in illegal activities.

Lessons from IEG:

Impact evaluations using experimental designs can provide valuable information on the
benefits of new approaches or tested approaches being applied in new contexts. The
randomized controlled trial undertaken as part of the project’s impact evaluation generated important
insights on the effects or project interventions, particularly within an FCV context.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and of high quality. The evidence presented was extensive, drawing not only on
the results framework but also on the impact evaluation and other sources. There was a logical link between



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Employment & Productive Inclusion (P163157)



and integration of the various parts of the report, and the reported results were mutually reinforcing. The
lessons presented were rich, providing generalizable insights, including for other projects in FCV contexts.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
