     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024179

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P157473                                      Gabon Statistical Development Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Gabon                                        Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86990                                   31-Dec-2021                                           50,381,891.42

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Mar-2017                                  29-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                           50,298,529.82                                                0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Alma Pekmezovic               Judyth L. Twigg              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey            IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (FA) (p. 5) was "to
   strengthen the statistical capacity of the Borrower, fill key data gaps, improve statistical production, and
   enhance statistical dissemination practices." For the purposes of the ICRR, the objective is unpacked into the
   following two PDOs:

           PDO1: To strengthen the statistical capacity of the Borrower, fill key data gaps, and improve statistical
            production; and

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



         PDO2: To strengthen the capacity of the Borrower to enhance statistical dissemination practices.

   At the first restructuring in October 2021, the target for PDO indicator #3 that tracked the number of welfare,
   agriculture, economic, and business surveys and censuses conducted was increased (from 10 to 15 surveys).
   This adjustment increased the project's scope, and therefore a split rating methodology is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Oct-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components:

   Component 1: Improved Data Collection, Statistical Production, and Dissemination (appraisal:
   US$32.8 million; actual: US$33.3 million). This component covered four main areas: (a) national
   accounts and real sector statistics, (b) welfare monitoring statistics, (c) agricultural statistics, and (d) data
   access and dissemination. These areas were prioritized based on the government's strategic needs and the
   National Strategy for the Development of Statistics (NSDS). The overall purpose of this component was to
   support the National Statistical System (NSS) in delivering reliable and timely statistics to the government,
   citizens, businesses, international organizations, and other institutions for informed decision-making. To this
   end, the project was to support a range of targeted activities.

   First, the project aimed to address the shortcomings in source data and the insufficient capacity and staffing
   of the General Directorate of Statistics (DGS) unit responsible for compiling National Accounts (NA). It was
   to prioritize building staff capacity and improving data collection and processing, as well as upgrading the
   NA methodology to align with international standards. The project also sought to fund the realization of a
   national economic census, to update the business register and quarterly business surveys. It aimed to
   improve price statistics by updating the Consumer Price Index (CPI) base year and expanding the
   geographical scope of price data collection, while supporting the regular production and dissemination of
   macroeconomic statistics and labor force indicators (Project Appraisal Document, PAD, p. 7)

   Second, in terms of welfare monitoring, the project sought to finance major household income, expenditure,
   and living standards surveys (the Gabonese Survey for Poverty Assessment (Enquête Gabonaise
   pourl'Evaluation de la Pauvreté, EGEP II and III) that were to be conducted in 2017 and 2020, respectively.
   The 2017 survey was planned to contain a module on the informal sector, and both surveys were planned
   to include a module on employment. The project was also to support the development of poverty maps,



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



socioeconomic atlases, and a Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) to update welfare and gender
indicators (PAD, pp. 7-8).

Third, for agricultural statistics, the project was to support two main data collection activities: (a) an
agriculture census in 2018, and (b) at least three annual production surveys to be conducted by the Ministry
of Agriculture with the support of the National Statistical Agency (NSA) and Technical Assistance (TA) from
the FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (PAD, p. 8).

Fourth, the project also aimed to improve data access and dissemination by redesigning NSS and ministry
websites for better openness, implementing data dissemination and microdata access policies, and
establishing a small-scale printing and publishing unit to enhance the production and distribution of
statistical reports and bulletins (PAD, p. 9).

Under the project’s first restructuring in October 2021, some new activities were added under Component 1.
The added activities included high frequency phone surveys for COVID-19 monitoring, a Census of
Vulnerable Households (Recensement des Gabonais Economiquement Faibles, RGEF), and a school
census.

Component 2: Build Technical Capacity and Modernize Infrastructure (appraisal: US$13.5 million;
actual: US$12.7 million). This component aimed to strengthen human capital and modernize infrastructure
to finalize ongoing institutional reform as part of the planned implementation of the approved decree
creating the NSA. The project intended to support these efforts through training of staff, financing of
scholarships for students, and financing of the renovation and refurbishment of the future headquarters of
the NSA.

This component aimed to build technical capacity by investing in a comprehensive training program for
existing staff and providing scholarships for Gabonese candidates to study abroad in internationally
accredited statistical schools. The goal was to enhance the proportion of National Statistics Office staff with
formal degrees and specialized training in statistics, demography, economics, and information technology
(IT), particularly programming. The in-house training program was to be tailored to address specific needs
and improve the quality of statistical products (PAD, p. 9).

The component was also to modernize infrastructure with an investment in renovating the building
designated as the headquarters for the new NSA. This included interior renovations, procurement of office
furniture, and upgrades to electrical and IT systems. The project also aimed to finance the acquisition of
essential equipment for data collection, processing, analysis, storage, and dissemination, such as vehicles,
servers, computers, and web servers. Additionally, it aimed to support the establishment of a modern data
center to manage IT systems, facilitate data dissemination and archiving, and support tablet-based data
collection processes (PAD, p. 11).

During the first restructuring, component 2 was revised to support the purchase and renovation of a building
for the DGS, replacing the initial renovation of an assigned office building.

Component 3: National Statistical System Institutional Reform and Project Management Capacity
Building (appraisal: USS$3.57 million; actual: US$4 million). This component aimed to support
implementation of statistical institutional reform efforts and ensure that there was adequate capacity for
project management. It was to support activities related to: (a) development of the next NSDS and TA to
develop, implement, and monitor the agency’s annual business plans; (b) recruitment of a senior statistics
adviser to support the establishment of the NSA; (c) TA to develop a results-based management system;

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



  and (d) statistical coordination activities through the National Commission for Statistical Information. The
  NSDS aimed to provide an action plan for producing better statistics to meet the needs of decision-makers
  and civil society. The senior statistics advisor, based at the Statistics Office, was to guide the Director
  General and senior management in implementing institutional reforms (PAD, p. 11).

  The component was also to finance the National Commission for Public Infrastructure Works and Promotion
  of Small-Scale Enterprises (Commission Nationale des Travaux d’Intérêt Public pour la Promotion de
  l’Entreprenariat et de l’Emploi, CN-TIPPEE) to manage all non-technical aspects of the project.
  Furthermore, funding was to be provided to the DGS to organize user satisfaction surveys, aimed at
  strengthening dialogue with the users of statistics and assessing the impact of the project activities.

  As part of Component 3, the project originally aimed to support the transformation of the DGS to an NSA
  based on the 2014 Statistics Law. It also emphasized developing the NSA's annual business plans,
  implementing an effective human resources management system, and strengthening the National Council
  for Statistical Information (PAD, p. 10). However, during project implementation, the government amended
  the statistics law to instead establish a National Statistical Institute (Institut Nationale de la Statistique,
  INSTAT). Therefore, the project supported the amendment of the 2014 Statistics Law to the 2022 Statistics
  Law (loi n°016/2022) and the transformation of the DGS to an INSTAT.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At appraisal in 2017, the total budgeted cost for the project was US$ 50 million. The actual
  amount disbursed was US$ 50.3 million.

  Financing: The project was financed through an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
  (IBRD) loan. The Borrower did not contribute any funds to the project.

  Dates: The project was approved on March 30, 2017, and the FA was signed on April 18, 2017. The project
  became effective on November 9, 2017. A Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted in November 2020. The
  original project closing date was set for December 31, 2021. However, the project was restructured twice,
  with the first restructuring approved on October 23, 2021, extending the closing date to October 31, 2023.
  The second restructuring was approved on November 1, 2023, further extending the closing date to
  December 29, 2023, when the project officially closed. The project was restructured twice. Activities were
  planned sequentially but were disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic and, subsequently, by a political crisis.

        Restructuring No 1: The first restructuring was approved on October 23, 2021. During the project's
         first restructuring, several new activities were introduced under Component 1, while Component 2
         was revised. Additionally, calculation methods for key performance indicators were revised, as
         outlined below:
                o For PDO indicator 1, the Statistical Capacity Index (SCI) score calculation was updated to
                  include specific indicators like agriculture census, child malnutrition, and others, while
                  keeping the rest constant. The indicator was revised to focus on project-specific attributes
                  and make progress measurement more realistic, as some elements under the original
                  composite indicator were not attributable to the project.
                o For PDO indicator 2, the focus was shifted to the timely dissemination of the CPI and other
                  improvements in national accounts and price statistics. The reason for the change was to
                  enable the measurement of various improvements in national accounts under a single

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



                  indicator, rather than as separate yes/no measures, thus capturing overall progress more
                  holistically.
               o The target for PDO indicator 3, which tracked the number of welfare, agriculture, economic,
                  and business surveys and censuses conducted, was increased from 10 to 15. During the
                  COVID-19 pandemic, Gabon halted field work for statistical operations and established a call
                  center to conduct high-frequency surveys on the impact of COVID-19 on households and
                  businesses. These surveys, using Computer Aided Telephone Interviews (CATI), followed
                  the same phases as traditional surveys and involved around 2,000 households. They aimed
                  to strengthen the DGS's capacity to perform rapid surveys during crises, with each wave
                  considered as significant as a traditional survey.
               o The restructuring also extended the project closing date by 22 months, moving it from
                  December 31, 2021 to October 31, 2023. Under Component 1, the COVID-19 pandemic had
                  caused significant delays in planned surveys essential for updating the national accounts
                  system. The extension allowed the completion of these surveys, the update of the national
                  accounts base year, and the transition from the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA) to
                  the 2008 SNA. Under Component 2, the project aimed to implement delayed capacity-
                  building activities, resume international and regional training, and allow students to complete
                  their courses, all of which were impacted by COVID-19 travel restrictions. The government
                  requested purchasing a building for the DGS due to safety issues and occupancy conflicts
                  with the initially planned buildings, requiring additional time for renovation. Under Component
                  3, the extension allowed the completion of ongoing activities to meet PDO indicators. The
                  new Statistics Act, creating an INSTAT instead of the initially planned NSA, was adopted by
                  parliament and awaited Senate approval before implementation.
         Restructuring No. 2: The second restructuring was approved on November 1, 2023. During the
          second restructuring, the project’s closing date was extended from October 31, 2023 to December
          29, 2023. The purpose of the extension was to allow the government to finalize the rehabilitation of
          DGS facilities, disseminate statistical products, and enable the World Bank (WB) financial
          management team to review project expenses. The political context, including the presidential
          election campaign and a coup d’état on August 30, 2023 (that triggered WB OP 7.30 on Dealing with
          De Facto Governments) had led to a pause in project disbursement and client contact, necessitating
          the extension to ensure the completion of expedited activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: At the time of project appraisal, Gabon faced significant challenges in its NSS, including
weak and declining statistical capacity, outdated data, and insufficient resources. The country's SCI score
dropped from 47.8 in 2005 to 36.7 in 2016, far below the Sub-Saharan African average of 59.9 (including
both low- and middle-income and both fast- and slow-growing economies) (PAD, p. 2). This decline was
due to a lack of qualified staff, poor infrastructure, and an inadequate working environment. Only a handful
of staff were able to use the statistical software tools used to compute and produce statistical outputs from
raw household survey, census, and administrative data (PAD, p. 3).

The low and declining SCI for Gabon reflected deepening gaps in source data and the lagging, low volume,
and poor quality of official statistical production. Key statistical activities, such as household expenditure

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



and poverty surveys, agricultural and enterprise censuses, and informal sector surveys, were not
conducted. Since 1968, Gabon had not conducted agriculture census or annual agriculture surveys (PAD,
p. 2). The latest gross domestic product (GDP) figures dated back to 2010, and the last poverty assessment
survey was conducted in 2005.

At project appraisal, few statistical products were disseminated, and household survey microdata were not
available. The annual statistical yearbook was last published in 2011. Until April 2015, the 2013 Population
Census’ provisional results were not released, and it took more than two years after that before the final
results were disseminated. Administrative health data for 2008 and 2011 were collected and compiled but
never disseminated. The health statistical yearbook was last published in 2005.

In 2010, the government launched the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan (PSGE) Vision 2025, prioritizing the
strengthening of the NSS to support evidence-based economic policy. The PSGE recognized frequent data
collection and timely dissemination of statistics as essential for designing and implementing effective
economic policies. It aimed to consolidate the legal and institutional framework of the NSS and strengthen
its capacity to generate and disseminate high-quality, timely, and policy-relevant data and statistics.

A new Statistics Law was adopted in 2014, leading to the establishment of an autonomous NSA to
coordinate the NSS and improve statistical production and dissemination. The law aligned with the African
Statistics Charter and the African Union Strategy for the Harmonization of Statistics in Africa (SHaSA).

The project provided support to the government’s NSDS reform plan with the objective of making the DGS
more efficient in collecting, producing, and disseminating official statistics. By supporting national capacity
in the production and dissemination of statistics, the project sought to enhance evidence-based decision-
making, measure development impacts, and foster better governance. The demand for recent statistical
information was consistently expressed by national and international users, including the government,
private sector, civil society, academics, and development partners.

Alignment with WB Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) at appraisal: The project was fully aligned with
the CPS FY2012–2016. The project aimed to generate missing data necessary to inform the WB’s focus on
eradicating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. It was aligned with the WB’s strategic priorities
in the Africa region, including generating better-quality poverty and shared prosperity data, developing
collaboration models with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and building capacity for greater use of
statistics. Through CPS Objective 2, "Increased Access to Basic Services," the WB aimed to build a solid
and flexible social protection system. In particular, the project sought to improve the robustness of the
economically weak Gabonese economic registry (Gabonais Economiquement Faibles), which was the
primary registry for targeting government social protection programs.

Alignment with the FY23-27 Country Partnership Framework (CPF): Although there was no CPS in
place between FY18 and FY23 due to political instability and the pandemic, the project remained relevant to
the FY23-27 CPF, which replaced the previous country strategy that ended in FY18. In particular, the
project aligned with CPF Objective 2, "Increased Access to Basic Services,", which supports initiatives such
as the Digital Gabon project, aimed at enhancing statistical systems and digital registers to improve the
targeting of social protection and safety nets. The FY23-27 CPF emphasizes strengthening public service
delivery, improving public sector accountability and access to public digital platforms, making the project’s
focus on better targeting through improved data and statistical systems directly relevant to this framework.




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



               Overall, the relevance of the project and its PDO is rated as high, given its strategic alignment with WB
               strategy, government reform initiatives, and the PSGE.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the capacity of the Borrower to fill key data gaps and improve statistical production

                             Rationale
                             The original project did not include a Theory of Change (TOC). A TOC was reconstructed subsequently. The
                             TOC aimed to address key issues in Gabon's statistical system, specifically focusing on the disorganized
                             structure, lack of political ownership, bureaucratic and complex decision-making processes, insufficient
                             funding for statistical activities, low-quality data, limited public access to high-quality data, and inadequate
                             human and institutional capacity at the DGS. To address these problems, the project planned to
                             implement activities such as revising national accounts and real sector statistics, rebasing the CPI,
                             conducting welfare monitoring statistics (EGEP II, III, and DHS III), and conducting agriculture censuses and
                             agricultural production surveys. Additionally, the project focused on enhancing staff training and skills through
                             training programs and scholarships for advanced degrees in statistics. These activities were designed to
                             produce specific outputs such as updated national accounts, a rebased CPI measure, completed welfare and
                             agricultural surveys, and enhanced staff training. These outputs, in turn, were expected to translate into
                             higher-level objectives by improving the quality and coverage of national statistical data, enhancing the DGS's
                             capacity to produce timely and reliable data, increasing public and policy access to high-quality data,
                             strengthening institutional capacity and human resources, and improving data infrastructure and
                             dissemination practices. By strengthening institutional capacity and human resources within the DGS and
                             improving data infrastructure, the project aimed to bolster Gabon's ability to fill key data gaps and enhance
                             statistical production. The TOC was based on several critical assumptions, including that CN-TIPPEE (the
                             selected implementing agency) would implement the project efficiently and effectively and that there would be
                             commitment at highest government levels for statistical reforms (ICR, p. 8).

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes

                                        Number of staff at the statistics office with improved skills. The project supported the
                                          implementation of a training and skill enhancement program for existing staff. With the project’s
                                          support, the DGS developed and partially executed a training plan for 2020–2023. Training included
                                          preparation of production surveys on livestock and animal production, economic data analysis, data
                                          trends (price indexes), database evaluation, urban area price determination surveys, and data
                                          production, cleaning, and analysis. The project achieved 162.5 percent of its target, with 130 staff
                                          members (target: 80) benefiting from capacity building (Achieved).

                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)




     Number of women of the statistics office with improved skills. In total, 56 women (350 percent of
        the target for women) were part of the capacity building efforts. The project exceeded its target (16
        women) (Achieved).
       Data collection for the next welfare survey was completed. The project financed EGEP II for 2017
        and the preparatory phase for EGEP III (2021–2025). The ICR (p. 9) explains that the target was for
        EGEP III to be completed during the project’s lifetime, in keeping with international standards that
        household welfare surveys be conducted every three years. However, COVID-19 restrictions
        prevented data collection in 2020 and 2021, delaying EGEP III implementation. The target of EGEP III
        data collection being completed was therefore not reached. (Not Achieved).
       Data collection for the next DHS was completed. The project financed DHS III covering 2019–
        2021. The final report was disseminated in July 2023. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, data collection
        was conducted in two phases: (a) the first phase was officially launched on November 23, 2019, and
        (b) the second phase was conducted from June 7 to October 30, 2021 (Achieved). The updated DHS
        provided up-to-date statistics on fertility, mortality, domestic violence, diseases, and knowledge about
        HIV and hepatitis B, updating key indicator reports for 6 out of 12 sub-indicators.
       Base year of the CPI was updated. The previous CPI only covered the Libreville district (including
        Owendo and Akanda), and its base year of 2004 was outdated. The project improved CPI calculation
        by updating the base year to 2018 and expanding geographical coverage to include urban and rural
        areas nationwide (Achieved).
       Increase in number of qualified technical staff working on national accounts at the statistics
        office. The team now includes 14 technical staff, with 7 junior accountants gradually recruited by the
        project, exceeding the target of 8 (from a baseline of 2) by 175 percent (Achieved).
       Other surveys and censuses: Overall, the project supported the conducting of 23 surveys and
        censuses, including EGEP II, COVID-19 impact surveys, DHS III, two school censuses, RGA, and
        plant and animal production surveys (EPVA). In addition to those cited above:
              o Agriculture Census (RGA): Produced structural data on Gabon's agricultural sector in 2019,
                with eight volumes and leaflets published in collaboration with FAO.
              o COVID-19 Impact Monitoring: Conducted 10 waves of surveys analyzing the impact of
                COVID-19 on household living conditions and activities of production units.
              o Census of Educational Provision (RGOE): Published education statistical yearbooks for
                2018–2019 and 2020–2021, and created an online education dashboard.
              o National Accounts: Published accounts from 2011 to 2018 under SNA 1993, with preliminary
                accounts for 2019 and 2020.

Outcomes

Progress toward the PDO was monitored through the following PDO indicators:

     Increase in Gabon's Statistical Capacity Index score. The SCI value increased from 36.7
      (baseline) in 2017 to 58.9 in 2023. The end target of 65.0 was not met (Substantially Achieved,
      Achievement: 58.9 (90.6 percent of target)).
           o Furthermore, the transition from the SCI to the Statistical Performance Indicator (SPI) by the
              WB highlights broader improvement, with Gabon’s SPI score increasing significantly from 28 in
              2017 to 42.82 in 2022.
     Number of welfare, agriculture, economic and business surveys, and censuses conducted: The
      project significantly exceeded its target for conducting welfare, agriculture, economic, and business
      surveys and censuses. With a baseline of 2 and an end target of 15, the achievement reached 23,

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



       equating to 153 percent of the target. The project carried out several surveys and censuses, including
       EGEP II, ten waves of COVID-19 impact surveys on households, DHS III, two rounds of school
       censuses (2019 and 2020–2021), ongoing RGEF and census mapping, RGA, EPVA, two surveys on
       the impact of COVID-19 on informal production units, one on formal production units, RGOE, and the
       Survey on Trade and Transport Margins (Achieved).
      Improved national accounts and price statistics: The project achieved 40 percent of its target, with
       the indicator formulated as follows: updated CPI year base (30 percent), timely dissemination of CPI
       (10 percent), improvement of national accounts timeliness (10 percent), updated GDP year base (30
       percent), and use of the 2008 SNA (20 percent). Key accomplishments include updating the CPI year
       base to 2018, conducting the CPI survey across Libreville and nine provinces with AFRISTAT's
       assistance, and achieving timely dissemination of the monthly CPI series from December 2017 to
       September 2023. However, improvement in national accounts timeliness was not achieved, with the
       national accounts series from 2010 to 2018 produced but not released, and accounts from 2019 to
       2022 not finalized. The GDP base year update is pending completion of essential surveys and
       censuses, such as the General Enterprise Census (RGE), EPVA, EGEP III, and the population and
       housing census. The use of the 2008 SNA remains incomplete, as it is tied to ongoing GDP rebasing
       efforts (Not Achieved).

Overall, based on improvements in the DGS's ability to collect, produce, and disseminate data for evidence-
based policy making, achievement of Objective 1 is assessed as Substantial. The significant improvements in
statistical capacity, the successful conduct of numerous surveys and censuses, and the enhancement of staff
skills and institutional capacity demonstrate substantial progress. Out of the three PDO indicators, two were
achieved or partially achieved. The third PDO indicator, improved national accounts and price statistics, was
not fully met, achieving only 40 percent of its target. Additionally, five out of six IRIs were achieved, with
significant gains in staff training and skill enhancement, especially among women. Despite some targets,
particularly those related to national accounts timeliness and GDP rebasing, not being fully met, the overall
progress made in enhancing Gabon's statistical capacity and production is noteworthy.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the Borrower to enhance statistical dissemination practices

Rationale
The TOC for this objective focused on the development of a national data dissemination policy and the
establishment of a national data portal to disseminate socioeconomic data. Efforts were concentrated on
developing a comprehensive strategy for data dissemination, which included creating detailed guidelines and
a concrete action plan aimed at upgrading the Gabonese statistical information system. Additionally, the
formulation and adoption of data dissemination and microdata access policies, capacity building to roll out an
"Accelerated Data Program" initiative, and provision of free online access to anonymized census and
household survey microdata were integral parts of the strategy. These activities were to lead to improvement



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



                            in the capacity of the NSS to disseminate high-quality, timely, frequent, and policy-relevant data and
                            statistics.

                            Outputs

                                  The DGS website and its open data portal were modernized to host all recent and past survey results
                                   and their microdata.
                                  A data dissemination strategy was developed as part of the NSDS, including guidelines and action
                                   plans.
                                  Online publications on the DGS website now include the Bulletin and Foreign Trade Indices, the
                                   Wholesale Price Index for Building Materials, and demographic projections.
                                  Results of key surveys (RGA, RGOE I, EGEP II, and DHS III) were distributed to relevant ministries,
                                   published in local newspapers, and discussed on Gabonese television.
                                  Seminars were organized with Gabonese employers and civil societies to disseminate survey and
                                   census results.
                                  Regular statistics dissemination events were held, including several on African Statistics Day and
                                   a first Gabon statistical dissemination event in December 2023.

                            Outcomes

                            Achievement of the objective was measured by the following PDO indicators:

                                  Number of survey and census microdata files freely available online. The project exceeded its
                                   target for publishing survey and census microdata files online. With a baseline of 0 and an end target
                                   of 8, the achievement reached 10, equating to 125 percent of the target. The project financed and
                                   published microdata for various surveys and censuses, including RGA, price statistics, EGEP II,
                                   COVID-19, RGE, school censuses, international trade data, food balance surveys, DHS III, and vital
                                   statistics. These datasets are available at the following link:
                                   https://gabon.opendataforafrica.org/data/#menu=topic (Achieved).

                            The project exceeded its target for publishing survey and census microdata files online. This is likely to
                            improve sustained access to vital data, facilitating transparency and more informed decision-making. Despite
                            limitations in the results framework (RF) (discussed further in Section 9), the overall impact on improving data
                            dissemination as measured by the PDO indicator was significant and aligned with the project's higher-level
                            objectives. The ICR noted that the statistical products disseminated under the project are being used by the
                            government, development partners, and researchers/students (ICR, p. 20).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)




  Rationale
  Overall, efficacy is rated as Substantial. The project supported relevant activities to improve the statistical
  capacity of the Borrower. Achievement of objective 1 is rated Substantial, with some minor shortcomings. The
  project significantly improved the statistical capacity of the DGS, evidenced by an increase in the SCI score
  (from 36.7 in 2017 to 58.9) in 2023. Key activities such as revising national accounts, rebasing the CPI, and
  conducting various welfare and agricultural surveys were successfully implemented. Furthermore, the project
  enhanced staff training and skills, with a notable increase in the number of qualified technical staff. However,
  there were some shortcomings, particularly in the timeliness and finalization of national accounts and GDP
  rebasing efforts, which were not fully completed. Achievement of Objective 2 is likewise rated Substantial,
  despite limitations in the RF. The modernization of the DGS website and the successful publication of 10
  survey and census microdata files demonstrated substantial progress.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Efficiency is rated Modest. Official statistics and data production are public goods typically funded by
government revenue and contributions from development partners, without direct financial returns, and therefore
a conventional economic analysis is not possible or appropriate. However, the project’s absence would have left
Gabon’s NSS with significant data gaps, particularly in poverty, employment, and agricultural statistics. Even if
the country had managed to conduct these surveys independently, data quality would have been low, and
reliance on external consultants would have remained high, limiting the government’s capacity for informed
decision-making.

The cost per household survey in Gabon was higher compared to regional counterparts—US$822 per
household in Gabon versus US$203 in the Republic of Congo and similar figures in Benin, Niger, and Mali.
However, this higher cost can be partly attributed to necessary investments in modernizing the NSS, including
the transition from paper-based questionnaires to digital data collection (CAPI), as well as the purchase of
vehicles and other equipment critical for conducting the surveys. These investments, while increasing initial
costs, were essential for long-term improvements in data quality and timeliness; the ICR (p. 19) notes that they
“helped avoid the use of paper questionnaires and reduced long delays for data entry after field work and data
processing.”

The project supported the implementation of 10 waves of surveys on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
households, which were conducted via high-frequency phone surveys. (ICR, p.21). These surveys provided
critical data on household conditions during the pandemic. However, in terms of broader household welfare
surveys, while the project financed EGEP II (which informed the 2020 poverty assessment) and supported the
preparatory phase of EGEP III, the full implementation of EGEP III was delayed due to the pandemic and
remains ongoing.

Several factors contributed to project inefficiencies and delays. The absence of a Project Steering Committee,
which was supposed to supervise, control, monitor, and evaluate the project, hampered effective oversight.
Additionally, the lack of a dedicated project management team at CN-TIPPEE, which was established four years

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



after project effectiveness, further complicated project execution. (ICR, p. 20). High turnover of technical
directors and general directors within the DGS disrupted continuity and delayed census and survey activities.
For instance, from 2021 to 2023, the DGS saw the appointment of three different director generals, each
transition causing significant delays. (ICR, p. 23). The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated these challenges,
causing significant delays due to travel restrictions and other related disruptions. Moreover, the project faced
bureaucratic hurdles, such as slow decision-making processes at the government level, which delayed crucial
activities like the EPVA survey by six months. This was due to ministerial decisions that postponed all DGS data
collection activities except for census mapping, despite the fact that field workers were already deployed. (ICR,
p. 24).

Additionally, a prolonged decision-making process regarding the DGS premises significantly delayed
rehabilitation activities. Initially, the project aimed to refurbish the existing DGS facilities, but concerns about
asbestos contamination led to a three-year delay as the government debated alternative solutions, resulting in
the allocation of a different building that was partially occupied and inadequate for the DGS’s needs.

Procurement inefficiencies also impacted implementation, including weak procurement performance and a lack
of planning and coordination between CN-TIPPEE and DGS. Financial management issues, coupled
with ineffective use of the WB’s procurement system (Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement), led to
significant delays and administrative burdens, negatively impacting critical service delivery. (ICR, p. 27; see also
Sections 8a and 10b).

Despite these setbacks, the project managed to make considerable progress towards its objectives, particularly
after the political crisis in August 2023. Although WB disbursements were halted for six months due to the crisis,
efforts to accelerate project activities were successful once disbursements resumed, with 20 percent of the total
funds being disbursed after the lifting of WB OP 7.30.

The cumulative impact of these significant inefficiencies justifies a Modest rating for the project’s overall
efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



6. Outcome

Based on the assigned rating for the three criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy, and Efficiency), the
Outcome of the project is rated Moderately Satisfactory. Although the objectives were highly relevant to country
context, government strategy, and WB strategy, and substantial progress was made in improving the statistical
capacity of the Borrower and enhancing statistical dissemination practices, efficiency was rated Modest,
resulting in an overall Moderately Satisfactory rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project faces several critical risks that could impact its development outcomes. One major concern is the
potential lack of sustained funding for ongoing statistical capacity building. Additionally, there could be delays
in executing planned institutional reforms, and the project might struggle with a shortage of qualified
personnel. Various political risks also pose potential challenges.

To further bolster the DGS's capabilities in statistical production, new staff recruitment through the project is
underway. The project provided scholarships to 18 statisticians, with 16 successfully completing their studies
in regional statistical schools. While one has already been hired into the civil service, 15 are in the process of
being hired. However, the DGS faces difficulties in attracting and retaining these individuals due to low
salaries and poor working conditions.

The WB has developed a new regional statistics project, Additional Financing of the Harmonizing and
Improving Statistics in West and Central Africa - Series of Projects Two (HISWACA - SOP 2). Gabon is one
of the project beneficiaries. Approved in March 2024, the parent project includes Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, Chad, and the Central African Economic and Monetary Community. The project aims to
improve the countries' statistical performance, regional harmonization, and data access and use, and to
enhance the modernization of the statistical system in participating countries. For Gabon, the financing
amount allocated is an IBRD loan of US$90 million, with a project closing date of December 31, 2029. The
project aims to strengthen investments made under the previous project to structurally transform the
statistical system, guided by lessons learned from the earlier project. Specifically, the follow-on project aims
to complete the 2024 population census and EGEP III, strengthen routine data collection in key sectors such
as education and employment, develop a national data dissemination policy, and establish a national data
portal for socioeconomic data. It also plans to modernize data collection systems and implement human
resource management reforms, including annual training for young Gabonese statisticians. Additionally,
following the approval of regulations and decrees establishing the INSTAT, annual business plans and a new
human resources management system will be implemented. This system will consider personnel
qualifications and career plans to better retain competent staff. The project also includes the establishment of
statistical training programs in a university or national school in the country, and the construction of a building
for the DGS (future INSTAT) with modernized IT and statistical infrastructure.




                                                                                                       Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project preparation phase identified several constraints facing NSS, as highlighted in Gabon's first
  NSDS for 2011-2015. An evaluation of the NSDS conducted by the WB in 2016 identified significant
  statistical deficiencies in the country, which the project aimed to address. Project design incorporated
  lessons learned from similar statistical capacity-building initiatives and considered ongoing efforts by
  development partners to ensure complementarity. Extensive consultations were held with key
  stakeholders, including the DGS, members of the NSS, and relevant ministries such as education, health,
  agriculture, and the economy, to identify priority activities and collaboration opportunities. Additionally, the
  project sought input from development partners like FAO, UNESCO, and the United Nations Population
  Fund. As a result, the project was well aligned with overall country development objectives, as well
  as international conventions and frameworks such as the African Statistics Charter and ShaSA.

  Despite these efforts, project design appears to have been ambitious, but achievable before the COVID-
  19 pandemic. However, the pandemic's impact in 2020-2021 significantly disrupted project activities,
  leading to the first restructuring, which reduced the scope of the SCI to focus on a more limited set of
  metrics. This suggests that the initial ambition of the indicator became overly ambitious in the context of
  the pandemic, as the project faced significant capacity constraints due to COVID-19-related delays.

  The project's challenges were further exacerbated by overestimation of existing implementation capacity,
  particularly in M&E. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the CN-TIPPEE was responsible for the
  M&E function. Here, the project's assessment of the CN-TIPPEE's fiduciary capacity was overly
  optimistic. During implementation, the project faced significant financial management (FM) and
  procurement challenges. These included difficulties in managing small expenditures, issues with
  selecting service providers, specifying equipment, and adhering to bidding procedures. Furthermore,
  contract management for survey operations was inefficient, leading to delays in payments and the
  identification of ineligible expenses, which required reimbursement to the WB.

  Additionally, the institutional setup of the CN-TIPPEE proved inadequate for managing the project's
  fiduciary responsibilities independently. All project activities required approval from the central FM and
  procurement heads, leading to administrative bottlenecks. The CN-TIPPEE was also responsible for
  managing multiple large WB-financed projects, which further strained its capacity and led to
  disagreements among fiduciary staff. These issues, along with contract management challenges for large
  statistical operations and building rehabilitation activities, contributed to significant delays and
  complications during project implementation.

  Given these challenges, the project's quality at entry is assessed as Moderately Satisfactory. The
  project’s ambitions at appraisal were not matched by the on-the-ground capacity, leading to
  implementation difficulties and necessary adjustments that reflected a more realistic assessment of what
  could be achieved.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)




b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation support was conducted adequately, with the WB’s supervisory role facilitating effective
 project implementation and ensuring transparency and accountability. The WB team conducted regular
 supervision missions and worked to resolve issues as they arose, as evidenced by the series of project
 Implementation Status and Results Reports. Regular project updates and check-in meetings with the PIU
 and DGS were crucial in achieving the project’s objectives. Throughout the project's life cycle (2017–2023),
 there were at least two supervision missions per year, several technical missions, an MTR mission, and a
 virtual project closing mission. In addition to task team leaders, technical experts based in Libreville,
 Yaoundé, and Washington DC provided ongoing training and advice. TA was provided on survey design,
 questionnaire design, sampling design, real-time monitoring systems, poverty measurement and data
 analysis, and inflation analysis and projection.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E system was grounded in a logical and well-structured RF that clearly aligned project activities
 with intended outcomes and overall objectives. The RF featured a balanced set of PDOs and intermediate
 indicators, with predefined baselines and targets. This design ensured that project components were well
 linked, each contributing effectively to the overall achievement of the PDO.

 However, while the RF successfully captured key aspects of data production and dissemination, it had
 some limitations in reflecting the full scope of the project’s achievements. The project had achievements
 beyond what was captured by the RF. For example: (a) additional surveys and censuses were conducted
 (e.g., the project helped conduct the Census of Educational Provision [RGOE] focused on the enumeration
 of all the structures of the education system in the nine provinces of Gabon, with two editions carried out in
 2019 and 2021); (b) human resources capacity for producing and disseminating statistics was enhanced
 (e.g., the project financed scholarships and preparatory sessions for Gabonese candidates to study abroad
 in regional statistics schools); (c) institutional reform activities were carried out (e.g., the project provided
 TA to help the DGS prepare for the migration to an INSTAT by reviewing and validating several draft texts,
 such as decrees on the attributes, organization, and functioning of INSTAT and the NSS); (d) the
 dissemination of statistics was enhanced (e.g., the project supported the modernization of the DGS website
 and its open data portal, development of a data dissemination strategy, and regular organization of
 statistics dissemination events); and (e) the existing DGS premises were rehabilitated (e.g., the project
 financed the modernization and equipment of three DGS buildings, addressing immediate needs for safe



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



 and up-to-standard offices). Additionally, the project supported the development of the NSDS for 2023–
 2025, enhancing the overall statistical system in Gabon.

 Finally, the PDO indicator for national accounts, which aggregated various elements into percentage
 points, lacked the granularity needed to track specific activities' progress. A more detailed approach, using
 simple 'yes' or 'no' indicators for each activity, could have provided a clearer and more accurate picture of
 the project's status at each stage (ICR, p. 25).

 Overall, while the M&E framework was well designed and cogent, some additional adjustments were
 needed to fully capture some of the project's broader contributions, such as capacity building, institutional
 reforms, and infrastructure upgrades. Nevertheless, the framework in place was effective in tracking key
 outputs and aligning the project's components with its primary objectives.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation benefited from ongoing oversight by the WB, which ensured that, despite
  challenges, there was a structured approach to M&E throughout the project’s lifecycle. The PIU, despite
  initial limitations, produced quarterly and annual progress reports, providing valuable overviews of project
  activities and identifying key challenges.

  However, M&E implementation faced some shortcomings, as noted earlier in this Review (see Section
  8a). Notably, the recruitment of a dedicated M&E specialist was significantly delayed, occurring only in
  April 2021, more than three years into the project. This delay meant that for a substantial period, the
  project lacked specialized oversight in monitoring and evaluation. Additionally, the initial staffing of the
  PIU within the CN-TIPPEE was inadequate, with only a procurement specialist, an accountant, and a
  management assistant.

  These limitations, however, were addressed over time, with the recruitment of a project coordinator in
  September 2020, following external audit feedback and recommendations from the WB.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E reports provided evidence of the project's achievement of intended outcomes. Progress indicators
  were documented in ISRs. Implementation support missions consistently included a list of recommended
  activities for upcoming periods and status updates on previously suggested actions. The M&E system
  was fully implemented as designed, despite some limitations in the RF, as noted above.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



  Environmental Safeguards. The project’s environmental performance was rated satisfactory at project
  closure. The project was classified as category B due to low to moderate risks. A health, safety, and
  environment (HSE) specialist were recruited to manage associated risks, primarily centered on Components
  1 and 2. A Safety Management Plan was developed for Component 1 to address travel risks and potential
  conflicts, with awareness campaigns and protective equipment provided. Accidents were monitored
  according to WB procedures, and quarterly reports tracked HSE statistics. For Component 2, only asbestos-
  free buildings were selected for rehabilitation, with an Environmental and Social Management Plan
  prepared to meet fire safety requirements. At project closure, all sites were cleaned and rehabilitated, with
  no non-compliance issues or accidents reported.

  Social Safeguards. After the first restructuring, OP/BP 4.10 was triggered due to the presence of
  Indigenous peoples in the project area. Furthermore, data collection, including surveys, posed risks like
  inappropriate behavior and potential sexual exploitation and abuse/harassment. To ensure social
  compliance, the Borrower implemented several key measures. These included COVID-19 safety protocols,
  a grievance redress mechanism, a plan to prevent gender-based violence and sexual
  exploitation/harassment, a labor management protocol with a worker Code of Conduct, and a protocol for
  engaging with Indigenous peoples in a culturally appropriate manner. At project closure, the project's
  performance was rated satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The CN-TIPPEE was responsible for financial management (FM) and procurement. While FM and
  monitoring reports were regularly submitted on time with overall acceptable quality, the project experienced
  ineligible expenditures due to inadequate or poor-quality supporting documentation. An institutional and
  organizational audit of CN-TIPPEE in 2023 identified several weaknesses affecting the project's financial
  performance.

  The institutional setup of the CN-TIPPEE did not allow for stand-alone fiduciary management of the
  project, with all activities having to go through the main FM or procurement head, introducing
  administrative complexity (see Section 5). There were also disagreements among fiduciary colleagues,
  and CN-TIPPEE had limited contract management capacity for handling large statistical operations. These
  issues contributed to project management challenges and delays. Furthermore, the entity's inexperience
  with complex operations involving numerous small expenses led to significant difficulties in effective FM
  and documentation archiving. Moreover, project procurement execution and management suffered from a
  lack of planning and coordination between the CN-TIPPEE and DGS, integrity issues, and administrative
  burdens, all of which negatively impacted critical service delivery. In response, corrective measures were
  implemented to strengthen the documentation process and enhance compliance with audit requirements.
  These actions, alongside improvements in survey management, aimed to reduce FM risks and bolster the
  project's overall performance (ICR, p. 27). A subsequent fiduciary review in April 2024 observed notable
  progress in the documentation of project expenditures.

  To address project procurement issues, the project refined its procurement strategy, including the adoption
  of automated solutions to streamline processes and ensure timely payments to data collectors and
  consultants (ICR, p. 27). Additionally, ongoing training and capacity-building initiatives were emphasized.



                                                                                                 Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



   The WB provided regular training in FM, procurement, and environmental and social risk management,
   which was crucial in mitigating bottlenecks and enhancing project implementation (ICR, p. 25).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The project enabled DGS to collaborate successfully with AFRISTAT (Economic and Statistical
   Observatory of Sub-Saharan Africa), ISSEA (Institute of Statistics and Economics), ICF Macro, and
   UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization), standardizing its partnerships
   with these institutions.



d. Other
   n/a



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                  Overly ambitious project design,
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    given implementation capacity
                                                                                  constraints
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the lessons set out in the ICR (pp. 29-31). IEG adds the following:

      Periodical revisions the RF are important for ensuring that all significant aspects of
         a project's impact are assessed and documented. Revisions to the RF allow for a more
         thorough evaluation of a project's effectiveness and contribution to development goals.
         Revisions help projects to better reflect their impact and address any gaps that might exist in
         the original RF. For example, in the Gabon project specifically, monitoring the number of
         scholarships provided would help assess the enhancement of human resources capacity.
         Other indicators could have included the number of decrees and policies developed and
         implemented, such as the establishment of the INSTAT and new regulations for the NSS.
         Additionally, tracking the time taken from data collection to publication for various surveys
         and censuses would have helped assess improvements in data dissemination.



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)



        Strengthening the institutional capacity of statistical agencies is foundational for long-
         term project success. Such programs should encompass technical training, management
         development, and infrastructure improvement, tailored to meet the specific needs of the
         institution. Additionally, ongoing TA and mentorship should be provided to support
         continuous development. By building a robust institutional framework, the project can sustain
         its benefits, allowing institutions to independently enhance their capabilities.
        Investment in modern data technologies for data collection, processing, and
         dissemination can significantly improve the accuracy, efficiency, and timeliness of
         statistical outputs. The project incorporated some technological advancements like the
         CATI system for data collection, which enhanced the capabilities of DGS staff. While
         constituting an initial investment that increases cost in the short-term, advanced data
         technologies are in the long-term important for streamlining operations and providing real-
         time data insights, which are inputs for timely decision-making and project adjustments.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was candid and well written, providing an excellent discussion of the assumptions underlying the
project’s TOC. Furthermore, the ICR effectively set the background context for the project and outlined its
objectives clearly. The report offered a comprehensive evaluation of the project’s achievements and
shortcomings, highlighting both successes and areas needing improvement. By presenting a thorough analysis
of the project's implementation and outcomes, the ICR effectively conveyed what worked well and what did not,
thereby offering practical recommendations for similar initiatives in the future. To this end, the ICR set out
several valuable lessons for future projects. The lessons drawn from this report are not only relevant to the
Gabon project but also provide insights applicable to a broader range of development projects.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Gabon Statistical Development Project (P157473)




                                                                               Page 20 of 20
