     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024079

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151075                                    Community Support Project (CASA-1000)

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-B2589,TF-B2594,TF-B2595                 30-Jun-2022                                         12,676,107.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Jun-2020                                30-Sep-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                    15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            14,859,768.00                                    14,859,768.00

 Actual                                        12,676,107.00                                    12,676,107.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gouthami Padam             Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Pakistan Community Support Project (PCSP) as stated in
   the PAD (page 9) was “to improve access to local infrastructure and strengthen community
   engagement in the project areas”.

   This can be parsed as follows:

       1. to improve access to local infrastructure in the project areas

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



        2. to strengthen community engagement in the project areas

   These objectives are directly inferred from the PDO statement. However, both the ICR (Para, 17) and the
   PAD (Para, 42) note that the ‘project areas’ in the PDO represented the Corridor of Influence of the Central
   Asia-South Asia Project (CASA-1000) transmission line, and it is clear in the Theory of Change (ToC) that this
   community engagement project was implemented to mitigate for negative reactions to the construction of the
   CASA-1000 transmission line. As a result, the ICR’s efficacy assessment included a third objective on the
   ‘provision of an effective response to local impacts of the CASA-1000 transmission line'. However, going by
   the ICRR Guidelines, this review, in following the ICRR Guidelines, will assess the project results based on
   the PDO statement as formulated in the financing agreement.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. Community Outreach and Communications for the Central Asia-South Asia Project
   (CASA-1000) (appraisal estimate: US$0.5 million; actual cost at closing: US$ 0.5 million) This component
   involved the Implementation of the CASA-1000 Community Outreach and Communications Plan, including
   the carrying out of community consultations and capacity building and training for Project Management Unit
   (PMU) staff. Activities were to be rolled out in close coordination with the construction schedule of the
   CASA-1000 to ensure that communities were informed about the transmission line before the construction
   work took place on the ground, and to generate support for it.

   Component 2. Community Mobilization and Capacity Building (appraisal estimate: US$2.0 million;
   actual cost at closing: US$ 2.0 million). This component facilitated community participation in the planning,
   implementation, and operations and maintenance (O&M) of community infrastructure schemes in the
   Project areas. The Project was to establish Community Development Councils (CDCs) of elected
   community members to serve as the main mechanism for community participation and oversight.

   Component 3. Community Investments in Small Infrastructure Schemes (appraisal estimate: US$10.5
   million; actual cost at closing: US$ 8.18 million): This component financed subgrants for local infrastructure
   schemes, including (a) rehabilitation of damaged or inactive infrastructure; (b) construction of new
   infrastructure; and (c) operations and maintenance of rehabilitated or constructed infrastructure. The
   subgrants were expected to vary between US$30,000 and US$50,000 per community. All selected
   schemes and their O&M plans needed to be technically viable and sustainable according to criteria that
   were to be detailed in the Project’s Operations Manual. The menu of infrastructure schemes was expected
   to include: i) local on-grid and off-grid electricity infrastructure, including renewable energy (e.g., solar, wind,
   biogas, smokeless stoves, micro-hydro plants); (ii) street lighting in urban/peri-urban areas; (iii) school and
   health facilities; (iv) water supply and sanitation infrastructure; (v) rehabilitation of tertiary roads and farm-to-
   market access roads; (vi) local farm irrigation systems; and (vii) other local economic infrastructure that
   serves a public purpose



                                                                                                          Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



  Component 4. Project Management, Implementation, and Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal
  estimate: US$ 2.0 million; actual cost at closing: US$ 2.0 million). This component financed costs related to
  project management, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation to the Project Management Unit,
  including technical expertise and studies, procurement and contract management, financial management,
  local governance, social and environmental risk management, and maintenance and reporting of project’s
  monitoring and evaluation, as well as feedback mechanisms.

  Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) (appraisal estimate: US$0.00;
  actual cost at closing: US$ 0.0): Provision of immediate response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency in
  Project areas.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual project cost was US$ 12,676,107, lower than the appraisal estimate of
  US$15,000,000 and also lower than the revised estimate of US$ 14,859,768.

  Project financing. The project was financed by an IBRD grant. Approved as a Recipient Executed Grant,
  the allocated project cost was US$15 million. This included US$2 million from the CASA-1000 Project Multi-
  Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) and US$13 million from the MDTF for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP)/ Federally
  Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)/Balochistan.

  Borrower contribution. There was no Borrower contribution.

  Dates. The project was approved on 03-June-2020, became effective on 29-June-2020, and was scheduled
  to close on 30-June-2022. It was extended twice on June 28, 2022 (for 12 months) and on June 28, 2023
  (for 3 months), i.e., a total extension of 1 years and 3 months (15 months). The final closing date was 30-
  September-2023.

  Other changes. There were two level 2 restructurings during the project lifetime, one in June 2022 and the
  other one in June 2023.

  During the first restructuring of June 28, 2022, the MDTF Steering Committee, comprising of 10 active
  donors and the Government of Pakistan (including provincial Governments of KP and Balochistan),
  recommended the extension of the end disbursement date of the MDTF from December 31, 2022, to
  December 23, 2023, to make up for delays caused by COVID-19.

  During the second restructuring of June 28, 2023, the closing date for PCSP was extended by another three
  months to September 2023, to facilitate disbursement and completion of infrastructure schemes related to
  flood protection.

  Other than the extension of closing dates, there were no changes to the PDO, Results Framework, or any
  other salient aspects of the project due to these restructurings.

  Split rating. Since the PDO, project scope and its key indicator targets did not change during
  implementation, a split evaluation will not be undertaken.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context:

The Central Asia-South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project (CASA-1000), supported by the
World Bank, aimed to facilitate electricity trade between hydropower-surplus Central Asia and energy-
deficient South Asia by establishing the necessary electricity transmission infrastructure and institutional
arrangements. Approved in March 2014, the CASA-1000 transmission line was to pass through four
countries, from Kyrgyz Republic through Tajikistan and Afghanistan to Pakistan. In Kyrgyz Republic,
Tajikistan, and Afghanistan, Community Support Projects (CSPs) were implemented to mitigate social risks
and maximize the socioeconomic benefits of the energy investments, mainly to ensure that people living
along the transmission lines benefited from and support the CASA-1000 project, as they were likely to
experience modest social and environmental impacts without receiving additional power supply.

In Pakistan, the CASA-1000 transmission line was to pass through approximately 100 kilometers of the
Khyber Agency in the Merged Areas (previously Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa (KP)) and the Peshawar Subdivision, connecting to a grid station in Nowshera. The regions of
KP and erstwhile FATA in Pakistan’s northwest have historically faced significant challenges. Almost 85
percent of the province’s population live in rural areas, where access to public services and income
generation opportunities are low. The province faced significant gender inequalities, with severe restrictions
on women's mobility and access to services, and limited opportunities for its large youth population. The
region also struggled with governance problems stemming from its complex legal and administrative
history, compounded by the difficulties of integrating traditional tribal structures with modern systems. In
addition, the militant insurgency between 2007-2009 and the subsequent extensive military operations
launched by the Government of Pakistan (GoP) to combat militants resulted in substantial loss of life,
economic damage, and the displacement of approximately three million people and significant damage to
physical infrastructure. The floods in 2010 further damaged infrastructure and disrupted key industries like
tourism and mining and intensified internal migration. These combined crises had a particularly severe
impact on KP and FATA compared to other regions of the country.

The merger of the FATA with KP in May 2018 further increased the province's development needs, but
Pakistan’s fiscal constraints limited development spending in the region. The World Bank has been
engaging in the crisis-affected areas of KP, FATA and Balochistan since 2010 through a series of projects
financed by a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) with the aim of providing financing for restoring infrastructure,
improving public services and livelihoods, and addressing factors that contributed to destabilization in these
regions.

The Pakistan Community Support Project (PCSP) was developed to mitigate the social risks and maximize
socio-economic benefits of the CASA-1000 transmission line and targeted communities within a four-
kilometer-wide "Corridor of Influence" (COI) along the transmission line from the Afghanistan border to
Nowshera. It was to use a community driven development (CDD) approach to create community
engagement platforms and fund infrastructure schemes that were responsive to local needs. The PCSP
aimed to expand to other districts based on government demand and funding availability.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



Alignment with Government strategy:

The project aligned with the long-term agenda of the Government of Pakistan (GoP) outlined in the Tribal
Decade Strategy (TDS) (2020-2030) and the Accelerated Implementation Plan (AIP) process. These
initiatives aimed to systematically address institutional and service delivery gaps through accelerated
investments. The TDS emphasized beneficiary contributions to small infrastructure costs and their
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of village schemes. Additionally, the commercial
framework of the CASA-1000 Project was designed to continue supporting communities along the
transmission corridor by providing them a share of energy transaction revenues. The Government of
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (GoKP) also viewed the PCSP as a precursor to the government supported TDS,
specifically in developing the institutional architecture and technical capacity needed to implement CDD and
scale up TDS across all districts of the Merged Areas.

Alignment with Bank strategy:

The Pakistan Community Support Project (PCSP) was designed to align with the World Bank Group’s
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for fiscal years 2015-2020. It aimed to contribute to Results Area 3
(Inclusion), specifically sub-outcome 3.2 (Reduced Vulnerability for Groups at Risk), and Results Area 4
(Service Delivery). The project remained pertinent at closing, especially with the extension of the CPF
through FY23.

Previous World Bank Experience:

The World Bank was a key partner in the CASA-1000 project across Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan,
Afghanistan, and Pakistan, supporting the GoP and the GoKP in implementing the Community Support
Project (CSP). The PCSP leveraged the Bank's global experience to deliver infrastructure responsive to
local needs, enhance social mobilization, and build local capacity for the CDD approach. It was also able to
incorporate lessons from past community-based projects in crisis-affected regions of Pakistan and South
Asia into its design and execution. By focusing on public goods rather than private benefits, the CSP aligns
with the GoKP's strategy to mitigate conflict and implementation challenges seen in earlier initiatives. The
Bank's other projects in KP and the Merged Areas (MA) that informed the design of the CSP included
Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA Project; the KP Community Infrastructure Project; FATA Rural
Livelihoods and Community Infrastructure Project (RLCIP); and KP Southern Areas Development Project
(SADP). The World Bank also partnered with agencies like the Department for International Development
and the United States Agency for International Development, which contributed co-funding through the
CASA-1000 Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MTDF).

Level of the PDO:

There is clear alignment between the project’s development objectives and the country- and WB strategies
and the project was strategically relevant given its location. However, the PDO does not capture the full
scope of the project. The PDO formulation fails to acknowledge the CASA-1000 transmission line even
though the project was mainly developed to mitigate the negative reactions to the construction of the
transmission line. Both the ToC in the PAD and the results framework acknowledge this shortcoming and
the ICR assessment also included an additional PDO objective to reflect the project’s impact on the
provision of an effective response to local impacts of the CASA-1000 transmission line.

This review rates the relevance of the PDO as Substantial.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to local infrastructure in the project areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The project was to finance activities that supported both rehabilitation, new construction and operation and
                             maintenance of local infrastructure (this included schemes such as street pavements, roads connecting farms
                             to markets, water supply and small-scale water channels, irrigation tube wells channels, and flood protection
                             walls). The specific types of projects were to be decided locally through a participatory process using a
                             community engagement model, reflecting local development priorities. These activities were to result in
                             outputs such as improved community infrastructure that was consistent with local development priorities.
                             This, in turn, was expected to enable households in the community to benefit from improved infrastructure
                             access, which would ultimately foster overall development of the local communities.

                             The critical assumptions, which are relevant for both Objective 1 and 2, include: (a) communities will be
                             willing to engage with the Project; (b) communities’ decision-making authority will not be stifled by public
                             authorities; (c) high-capacity Social Mobilization Partners (SMPs) will be available and willing to operate in
                             project areas; and (d) funds to community institutions are managed efficiently and transparently and released
                             in a timely manner.

                             The TOC’s causal links between project activities, outputs and intermediate outcomes were logical and
                             convincing. The indicators identified for the outputs and outcomes are measurable and logical. The critical
                             assumptions, which apply to the PDO and all objectives, were well identified and needed to be in place for the
                             project to be able to deliver its outcomes.

                             Outputs:

                                        144 community infrastructure schemes were completed by the project, not achieving the target of 200.
                                         These projects included water supply schemes, street pavements, farm to market roads, irrigation
                                         channels, and flood protection walls, supporting both new construction and rehabilitation.
                                        144 community infrastructure projects were completed consistent with local development priorities,
                                         almost achieving the target of 150. These included the same kind of projects as described above, but
                                         the beneficiaries of these projects were more at the local village level (IEG discussion with the project
                                         TTL dated 8/16/2024)


                                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



Outcomes:

The ICR reported the following outcomes, evaluated using a mixed-methods approach that included a
representative household survey of three communities (in Khyber, Peshawar and Nowshera), focus group
discussions, and key informant interviews:

      A total of 96,329 households benefited from community infrastructure schemes, exceeding the target
       of 70,000.
      97 percent of households reported that community infrastructure schemes met their needs, exceeding
       the target of 75 percent.

The output targets were only partially achieved. The ICR reported that CDCs implemented community
infrastructure projects based on local development priorities identified through participatory processes for
Community Development Plans (CDP). Before funding any community scheme, the CDCs and the Project
Management Unit (PMU) ensured that the social mobilization process and participatory selection of schemes
was put in place as per approved methodology. Funds were then deposited into the CDC’s registered bank
account. PMU engineers provided technical support to improve construction quality, materials, and ensure
timely completion. CDC’s contributed labor (ranging from 10% to 25% of total cost). This extensive process of
community consultations, prioritization, and mobilization around construction and rehabilitation led to some
output targets not being fully achieved. The project was, however, able to exceed its outcome targets on
improved access to local infrastructure for a number of households benefiting from the infrastructure schemes
and those reporting that the community infrastructure schemes met their needs.

Hence, the overall efficacy for Objective 1 is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen community engagement in the project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change:

The project was to finance activities on citizen engagement and youth-focused development in target
communities; implementation of the CASA-1000 community outreach and communication plan; and social
mobilization and capacity building of community institutions (CDC’s, PMC’s) for citizen engagement etc.
These activities were to result in outputs that included outreach and communication activities completed in
target communities in the CASA corridor of influence; citizen engagement and youth-centric activities
implemented; CDC’s established and development priorities identified; PMC’s established and youth trained
on participatory development, conflict resolution and soft skills. These outputs were to lead to outcomes such
as improved community capacity to implement community-driven development schemes; improved youth
capacity and participation in local development activities and community participation in social activities;
improved counterpart capacity in management of CDD projects; and communities being informed about

                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



CASA-100 transmission line benefits. These outcomes would in turn lead to an overall strengthened
community engagement in the project areas and garner local support for the CASA-1000 transmission line.

Outputs:

      100 percent of community members participated in the planning, decision-making or monitoring
         schemes, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
      94 percent of community members reported increased voice in local decision-making due to the
       project, exceeding the target of 60 percent.
      167 Community-based organizations were formed by the project, exceeding the target of 166.
      615 trainings were conducted by the project, vastly exceeding the target of 300.
      500 community outreach and communications activities were completed, exceeding the target of 100.
      100 percent of households in CASA1000 communities became aware of the CASA-1000 project,
       achieving the target.
      51 grievances were registered about CASA-1000 project, exceeding the target of 50.

Outcomes:

      A total of 51,742 community members participated in citizen engagement activities, exceeding the
       target of 50,000. The project also achieved targets related to woman and youth participation by
       providing them membership of CDCs, Women Sub-Committees (WSC) and Youth Development
       Councils (YDC). CDCs engaged communities in identifying needs and developed 115 Community
       Development Plans (CDPs), which were presented to Village Councils for inclusion in village
       development plans. In addition, all CDCs received training, were registered as Social Welfare
       Organizations, and opened bank accounts for grant implementation, with 615 training sessions
       conducted and nearly 2,000 individuals benefiting from skills and livelihoods interventions.
      98 percent of households in the CASA-1000 Corridor of Influence reported that CSP was an effective
       response to local impacts of the CASA-1000 Transmission Line, exceeding the target of 75 percent.
       This was achieved through outreach and monitoring activities, including media visits and community
       exchanges, which allowed community members to share their experiences with PCSP development
       activities. Citizen-centric accountability was ensured through PMCs set up in each village.

However, the construction work on the transmission line in the project districts was only 70 percent complete
as of February 2024. With the closure of the formal engagement platform that PCSP was providing, there was
some concern that communities’ support for further construction of the transmission line may erode (ICR,
Para 21). The IEG team was informed by the project team that some of these activities were expected to be
undertaken by the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Rural Investment and Institutional Support Project (KP- RIISP,
P176780) as a project building on the lessons-learned of CASA 1000 (IEG discussion with the project TTL
dated 8/16/2024).

In addition to the above, the project was able to achieve the following on issues relating to gender and youth
empowerment:

      The project enhanced female participation in citizen engagement, as indicated by an endline survey
         which found that 80 percent of respondents observed an improvement in women’s status, and 74
         percent noted increased women’s voice and agency in local decisions. This was mainly done by
         requiring each CDC to include at least 20 percent female members and secure endorsements for

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



                                   CDPs from 20 percent of the women in CDCs and two-thirds of the Women’s Sub-Committees. The
                                   project also included activities such as ID card drives, digital skills training, and entrepreneurship
                                   workshops that benefited nearly 1,500 women. Collective spaces for women to safely convene were
                                   set up in 20 villages, which were equipped with laptops and solar power to function as digital hubs for
                                   training. The formation of Women’s Sub-Committees (WSCs) provided a platform for women to voice
                                   their needs. However, WSCs often consisted of relatives of male CDC members and had limited
                                   involvement in implementing schemes after approval. This progress is notable given the region’s
                                   cultural challenges regarding gender inequality. (ICR, para 27 and IEG discussion with the project TTL
                                   dated 8/16/2024)
                                  Youth empowerment: The project introduced a digital skills program that trained 522 youth (179
                                   female, 343 male) in smartphone use, digital marketing, and government portals, along with
                                   entrepreneurship bootcamps. Vocational training in Mobile Repair, Driving, Hospitality, and Solar
                                   Energy integrated 58 young individuals into community projects. The achievements were highlighted
                                   at a Rural Youth Summit, which also attracted private sector sponsors who provided seed funding to
                                   young entrepreneurs. (ICR, para 28).

                            Overall, most of the output targets on number of community-based organizations to be formed, increased
                            community members participating in planning, decision making or monitoring, increased number of training
                            activities, and increased outreach and communication activities to inform communities on CASA-1000 were
                            either achieved or exceeded. As a result, the project was also able to exceed its outcome targets for number
                            of community members being able to participate in citizen engagement activities (with a significant
                            improvement in women and youth participation) and also ensure that households in the areas felt that the
                            project was an effective response to local impacts of CASA-1000 transmission line. However, the timeline for
                            PCSP and CASA-1000 was not fully aligned, and, as mentioned above, there are concerns about sustaining
                            community support for CASA-1000 with this discrepancy in timing for the two projects.

                            The efficacy for Objective 2 is rated Substantial.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Most of the outcome targets were exceeded, resulting in improving access to local infrastructure and
                            strengthening of community engagement and an effective response to the local impacts of the CASA-1000
                            transmission line. However, due to the short time frame and lengthy processes, some of the output targets on
                            local infrastructure were not fully achieved. Although the project was able to effectively mitigate the negative
                            local reactions to the CASA-1000 transmission line, the risk of local opposition to the construction of the




                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



  transmission line remains, as this community project ended before the transmission line has been completed.
  The overall efficacy of the project is rated as Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Operational and administrative efficiency:

The project faced delays in procurement and staffing, which affected disbursement. Given that the project had a
very short timeline (22 months at inception) to complete complex tasks, these operational issues further affected
its efficiency. Even with two extensions, $2.18 million (15 percent of the grant amount) remained unspent at
closure. This led to stakeholder disappointment over the unused funds.

Economic efficiency:

At project appraisal, given the demand-driven nature of the project design, it was not possible to determine ex-
ante what types of subprojects were be funded, or what their returns would be. Hence, there was no economic
and financial analysis conducted at the appraisal stage (PAD, para 56). However, at completion, the
Government of KP conducted a full Cost Benefit Analysis on the completed infrastructure schemes at project
closing, grouping similar projects for financial and economic assessment. Some of the main types of schemes
supported included drinking water supply, street pavements, farm to market roads, irrigation channels, and flood
protection walls. This analysis included benefits such as gains from increased crop yields, increased income
from time and cost savings, reduced expenditure from disease prevention, reduced transportation costs,
enhanced income from improved market access, and asset prevention against floods. The overall Benefit-Cost
Ratio, Internal Rate of Return (IRR), and Net Present Value (NPV) were calculated as 2.11:1, 41%, and 1426.8
million Pakistani Rupees (PKR), respectively, at a 12% discount rate. These figures indicated that all projects
across various scheme categories were financially viable (ICR, paras 23 and 24).

Considering the positive economic outcomes but shortcomings in operational efficiency, the overall efficiency is
rated as Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               41.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives and efficacy was rated Substantial, and efficiency was rated Modest. Hence, the
project's overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional and Capacity Risk: Both the communities in the project areas, as well as the government
agencies involved in project implementation, had limited experience with the social mobilization process and
CDD interventions. The project helped develop institutional capacity in this area, but there is a risk that may
not be sufficient in the long term.

Risk of sustaining community support: There are concerns over how communities in the Corridor of
Influence would react to the closure of the formal engagement platform that PCSP was providing. It is not
clear how and to what degree the KP-RIISP project would be able to provide the same kind of support and it
is possible that project closure could erode support for further construction of the transmission line, just as
the pace of the overall CASA-1000 initiative was expected to increase with work restarting on the
Afghanistan portion after a nearly three-year delay. The ICR reported that there were already a few
documented grievances against CASA-1000 construction work in the Corridor of Influence, with at least one
CDC threatening to not allow contractors to begin work in their area if their demands for local benefit-sharing
schemes are not met.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Despite knowing that the CASA-1000 construction schedule was uncertain and the closing date for MDTF
  was June 2022, the project was approved with a timeline that was too short for effective implementation
  of complex CDD-type activities. The delay in project approval in Pakistan was an issue since benefit-
  sharing was legally required for CASA-1000, and the other participating countries had already started
  their Community Support Projects. However, the project's approach of using community engagement


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



  model to enhance social mobilization and fund local infrastructure schemes was strategically relevant
  given its location and the cultural and historical context of the region. (ICR, para 41).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team was able to provide extensive supervision and support despite facing security challenges
 and difficulty in accessing project locations. The use of digital monitoring and supervision tools like Geo
 Enabled Monitoring System (GEMS), helped address some of the challenges relating to accessing remote
 and unsafe sites. A grievance handling system was established to manage project-specific feedback and
 complaints while coordinating with the CASA-1000 project’s GRM. The project’s Aide Memoires and ISRs
 demonstrated the team’s efforts to flag implementation challenges and identify corrective measures. The
 team was proactive in addressing issues and adjusting the scope of subproject activities. This proactive
 approach also led to significant positive spillover effects, particularly in gender and youth inclusion. Strong
 relationships that the team was able to build with the Government of KP and the community turned out to
 be crucial in preparing a larger investment for the Merged Areas (KP Rural Investment and Institutional
 Support Project). (ICR, para 42)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO statement did not capture the full extent of the project’s scope and omitted of the main purpose of
 the project; to mitigate for a potential negative response to the construction of the CASA-1000 transmission
 line in the corridor. Despite this, the ToC and the Results Framework captured the entire scope and
 included indicators relating to the CASA-1000 transmission line. The Results Framework was robust and
 based on evidence from an extensive baseline survey conducted under challenging security conditions.
 The Project was designed with community-level monitoring for infrastructure schemes through
 subcommittees, and dedicated M&E staff in the PMU. PMCs in each village were trained to conduct
 periodic monitoring visits and Social Audits to assess transparency, usage of funds and quality of civil
 works. (ICR, para 35)




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



b. M&E Implementation
  The Project was the first to use digital M&E tools like GEMS in KP, which allowed for subproject oversight
  and remote supervision. It collected geo-tagged project data, automatically integrated into PCSP’s
  Management Information System (MIS), providing the project team with real-time data for decision-
  making and reporting. This system enabled the World Bank and GoKP to monitor project activities
  remotely. In addition, under the Bank and European Space Agency (ESA) cooperation, PCSP was
  selected for remote satellite monitoring of small infrastructure works through the GDA Fragility, Conflict,
  and Security activity. The results for which are presented on a detailed dashboard mapping all PCSP
  villages and infrastructure schemes, including metadata on population, CDC details, scheme status,
  resources, and analysis of land use and land cover changes in the project areas. (ICR, para 36)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E information was regularly used to inform decision-making and refine the project's
  implementation strategy. The data collected through the M&E system enabled the Government and
  World Bank teams to make informed decisions on procurement and financial management. Mitigation
  strategies were developed to address implementation delays and operational issues, helping to achieve
  targets. (ICR, para 37).

  Overall, the M&E quality is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned Environmental Category "B" and three safeguards policies were triggered. These
   included Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Involuntary
   Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). (PAD, paras 62-67). This necessitated a detailed environmental and social
   assessments. Since the specific nature and locations of subprojects were initially unknown, an
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to address these issues, which
   included a subproject screening procedure. The ICR does not specifically mention the measures taken
   against Natural Habitats and Involuntary Resettlement, but indicates that the overall Safeguards rating
   remained consistently Satisfactory during implementation. The PMU submitted quarterly ESMF
   implementation reports, except during staff transitions. Environmental and social screening checklists were
   developed and utilized for both larger "goodwill" schemes and smaller community-led infrastructure projects.
   (ICR, Para 39)




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



   Financial Management:

   The project consistently received Satisfactory ratings for financial management during implementation.
   Annual Audited Financial Statements (AFS) and Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs) were
   submitted to the Bank on time. The financial management team, led by an experienced Financial
   Management Specialist, included an admin officer and an accounts officer. By project closing,
   disbursements reached USD 12.6 million, about 84% of the total USD 15 million commitment, with no audit
   objections. (ICR, Para 40)

   Procurement:

   The project was able to enhance the GoKP’s understanding of World Bank procurement policies,
   especially those related to CDD operations. The project was compliant with the Bank’s procurement
   guideline and the ratings remained Satisfactory throughout implementation. (ICR, Para 40)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                             Reason for
Ratings                       ICR                      IEG
                                                                             Disagreements/Comment
                              Moderately
Outcome                                            Moderately Satisfactory
                              Satisfactory
                              Moderately
Bank Performance                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                              Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Implementing standalone projects can be highly effective in delivering local infrastructure
and services. The CDD model used by the project was able to efficiently and equitably develop
village-level infrastructure, providing public goods that were acceptable to most villagers. The
endline survey respondents showed high satisfaction with the quality of infrastructure. The
involvement of various sub-committees brought diverse perspectives and expertise. A standalone
project allowed for specialized teams with expertise in community-driven approaches, which might
not have been possible if benefit-sharing activities had been a subcomponent of the CASA-1000
project. It also enabled strategic engagement with the Government of KP on the development of the
Merged Areas, supported by the $200 million KP Rural Investment and Institutional Support Project
(effective September 2023). However, a drawback of implementing a standalone project was the

                                                                                              Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



misalignment between benefit-sharing activities and the CASA-1000 construction timeline,
highlighting the need for better synchronization with larger initiatives.

A well-designed project GRM can significantly enhance citizen-state trust, especially in
regions with weaker state capacity and less empowered citizens. The project benefitted from
the established a robust GRM not just for project specific feedback and complaints, but also to
coordinate with the GRM of the CASA-1000 project. Collaboration with the CASA-1000 Project’s
GRM at National Transmission and Dispatch Company (NTDC) was crucial in resolving issues,
requiring coordination between federal, provincial, and local entities to an extent that was new to the
region. In addition, the GRM's toll-free Interactive voice response (IVR) system regularly surveyed
community members and gathered feedback.

Involving youth and women in project design can significantly enhance social sustainability.
The Project was able to strengthen women's inclusion in development activities in the region, which
was challenging given the traditional norms in the tribal, patriarchal culture of the project villages.
The PMU created Women Sub-Committees (WSCs) which helped to fulfill the minimum
requirements for women's inclusion in the development planning process and also conducted
women-centric activities. To avoid tokenization, CDC members needed a two-thirds majority
endorsement from WSC members for approval of resolution and endorsement from 20% women in
the WSC for release of installments. The project also engaged the Youth Development Committees
(YDCs) to support CDCs in sub-project implementation using digital skills, such as disseminating
project information and conducting audits. These trained youth would be valuable assets for future
community development. However, endline surveys indicated that women struggled to stay involved
in the implementation of schemes post-approval.

Establishing and empowering village-level institutions such as CDCs can significantly
enhance local contribution and accountability. However, their long-term sustainability will
depend on factors such as continued support and integration with evolving local governance
structures. The project was able to officially register CDCs and establish bank accounts, creating a
direct funds flow mechanism to the community level. Community contributions to local infrastructure
exceeded expectations, averaging over US$ 4000 per scheme. The principles of community funding
and beneficiary responsibility require responsive and accountable intermediary institutions. As local
government structures evolve and take on more responsibilities, practices from the project, such as
needs analysis and participatory budgeting, may help establish more inclusive development
processes. However, the long-term sustainability of the CDCs and the infrastructure they manage
remains uncertain, though as of March 2024, 28 CDCs were actively maintaining important public
infrastructure.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Community Support Project (CASA-1000) (P151075)



The ICR is clear, candid and provides a detailed overview of the project's achievement. It correctly identifies the
PDO shortcoming of not including an additional objective to measure the project's performance in responding to
local impacts of the CASA-1000 transmission line, which was part of the original theory of change but omitted
from the PDO formulation. The evidence and analysis presented are adequate for evaluating the project's
performance. The report is results-oriented, focusing on what the project achieved on the ground. It draws good
lessons from the project's implementation, based on evidence and analysis. Overall, the ICR's quality is
Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
