     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024134

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P163387                                      JO: Emergency Health Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Jordan                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87680,IBRD-90000,TF-A5308,TF- 29-Jun-2019                                                  250,000,000.00
 B0686

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jun-2017                                  31-Oct-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                    72,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             250,000,000.00                                    72,800,000.00

 Actual                                         250,000,000.00                                    72,800,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Denise A. Vaillancourt          Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (p. 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 1), the project's
   objective was "to support the Borrower in maintaining the delivery of primary and secondary health services to
   poor uninsured Jordanians and Syrian refugees at Ministry of Health (MOH) facilities."




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



   As the key element of the project was delivery of services to specific targeted populations, this Review will
   assess achievement separately for the two covered target groups:

         Objective 1: Support the Borrower in maintaining the delivery of primary and secondary health
          services to poor uninsured Jordanians at MOH facilities
         Objective 2: support the Borrower in maintaining the delivery of primary and secondary health services
          to Syrian refugees at MOH facilities

   Outcome targets were revised upward at a 2019 additional financing (AF). As the scope of the project
   increased commensurately with the AF, a split rating methodology is not warranted.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  27-Jun-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained two components:

   1. Results-based financing (RBF) to deliver health care services at primary and secondary health
   care facilities of MOH to the target population (appraisal: US$48 million, with US$100 million in parallel
   financing from the Islamic Development Bank [IsDB]; revised with AF US$238 million [International Bank for
   Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) financing only]; actual US$244 million [IBRD financing only]). This
   component, using an RBF model, was to reimburse 80 percent of the costs of specified health services
   used by the target population at MOH facilities nationwide (including retroactive financing of up to 40
   percent of the project amount for eligible expenditures made prior to the signing of the Loan Agreement but
   on or after June 29, 2016). With financing under this component, beneficiaries would be able to continue to
   access health services at a highly subsidized rate, paying the 20 percent co-payment for services that was
   in place prior to the project. The target population was defined as registered Syrian refugees (those officially
   registered with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees [UNHCR] and holding a Ministry of
   Interior [MOI] service card) and poor uninsured Jordanians (those lacking any public or private health
   insurance; at the time of project preparation, there were no mechanisms for identifying the poor, and
   therefore all uninsured Jordanians were considered eligible for project support). Together, both groups
   represented nearly 30 percent of Jordan's population. Disbursements were to be based on the number and
   cost of health services provided to beneficiaries verified by a Utilization Verification Entity (UVE), and on the
   expenditures incurred by the government to deliver these services verified by the Audit Bureau (AB) of
   Jordan. The UVE was also to provide the first sign-off on the technical quality of the verification reports,
   after which the AB would provide final clearance and submit the reports to the Bank. The project was to


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



  cover key recurrent non-medical expenditures, such as human resources and operating costs of health
  facilities; medical items such as vaccines, medicines, equipment, and consumables were to be financed
  separately by the government and other donors. Cost of care estimates were based on recent actual health
  service utilization by the target population. The AF in June 2019 was intended to continue delivery of health
  services to the targeted population groups.

  2. Independent verification and institutional capacity building to improve efficiency of health
  services delivered (appraisal: US$2 million; revised: US$12 million; actual: US$6 million). This
  component was originally to finance all steps of the verification process outlined under the first component.
  It was originally also to support interventions designed to build MOH capacity for monitoring and improving
  efficiency, including development of a road map of efficiency bottlenecks and policy options to address
  them. At the 2019 AF, the component was redesigned to include a US$9 million disbursement-linked
  indicator (DLI) mechanism incentivizing new activities to support the MOH in strengthening primary health
  care (PHC) services by incorporating a family health model and conducting a human resource assessment.
  The DLIs focused on ensuring that PHC services incorporate World Health Organization (WHO)
  recommendations on people-centered integrated health services. Specifically:

        DLI 1: Assessment of PHC coverage and quality gaps (US$2 million total)
              o DLI1.1: Increase in MOH’s budget of US$1 million for the 2020 fiscal year (US$1 million)
              o DLI 1.2: MOH completes an assessment of human resources and skills gaps toward
                  incorporating a nationwide family services model based on WHO recommendations (US$1
                  million)
        DLI 2: Development of an implementation plan to improve quality and coverage of PHC (US$3
         million total)
               o DLI 2.1: Increase in MOH’s budget of US$1 million for a second consecutive year (US$1
                  million)
               o DLI 2.2: MOH developed and approves a costed and phased implementation strategy for the
                  nationwide family health services model, with an M&E system (US$2 million)
        DLI 3: Human resources capacity building to improve outcomes in PHC (US$4 million total)
               o DLI 3.1: Increase in MOH’s budget of US$2 million for the third consecutive fiscal year (US$2
                  million)
               o DLI 3.2: MOH provides a report on Year 1 results of human resources capacity building and
                  training activities (US$2 million)

  Revised Components

  As noted above, the 2019 AF added funds to sustain delivery of health services to the targeted population
  groups for a longer period of time (Component 1) and incorporate a DLI mechanism (Component 2) to
  strengthen the quality and delivery of primary health care services.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Financing: The project was to be financed by a US$36.1 million IBRD loan, US$13.9 million from the
  Global Concessional Financing Facility (GCFF, established in 2016 to provide support on concessional
  terms to middle-income countries impacted by refugee crises), and parallel co-financing of US$100 million
  from IsDB (including another US$21 million from the GCFF), amounting to total planned financing of
  US$150 million. AF of US$200 million (US$141.1 million from IBRD and US$58.9 million from the GCFF)

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



   was provided at a June 2019 restructuring, bringing total Bank/GCFF financing to US$250 million and total
   project financing (inclusive of IsDB) to US$350 million.

   Costs: Estimated project cost at appraisal was US$150 million, and estimated costs increased to US$350
   million with the US$200 million in AF. All planned financing was fully disbursed, bringing total project costs
   to US$350 million.

   Dates: Given the emergency situation of a surging refugee crisis and serious risks of health service
   disruption due to fiscal pressure on the government, the project was prepared in accordance with the
   Bank's Operational Policy 10.00, paragraph 12 (Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or
   Capacity Constraints), allowing for emergency condensed preparation procedures under an accelerated
   timeline and retroactive financing of up to 40 percent of the project amount to cover health services that had
   already been delivered by MOH. The project was approved on June 13, 2017, became effective on July 26,
   2017, underwent a mid-term review in September 2018, and closed on October 31, 2023, over four years
   after its original closing date of June 29, 2019. It was restructured twice:

         June 27, 2019: AF and associated revision of the results framework and targets, and extension of
          the closing date.
         September 3, 2023: Reallocation of US$5.96 million from the second to first component, as the
          former had experienced delays in 2020 and 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In the years preceding the project, Jordan had been experiencing significant fiscal stress stemming from the
2007-2008 global financial crisis, disruption of Egyptian gas supplies, and the Syrian crisis, which led to
total closure of land routes to Iraq and Syria in mid-2015, reducing exports and tourism. The Government of
Jordan provided public services to a large number of refugees from Syria, Iraq, and Yemen, adding to the
fiscal burden and increasing demand for services such as education, health, and wastewater management.
The 2015 Population and Housing Census had found the Syrian population in Jordan to be 1.3 million, of
whom over 650,000 were considered refugees by UNHCR. About 330,000 refugees had cards issued by
the MOI that allowed them access to benefits, including highly discounted care (20 percent co-payment) at
MOH facilities. (Unregistered refugees were not included in the project, given its limited budget envelope
[PAD, p. 16].) The increased demand for health services had led to higher waiting times, medicine
stockouts, a shortage of health workers, and increasing strain on the government budget. The government
was also finding it difficult to maintain subsidies for health care for about 2.1 million uninsured Jordanians,
who had been identified as primarily either unemployed or out of the labor force, and who were receiving
some inpatient and all outpatient services at MOH facilities for a 20 percent co-pay. Overall, the Syrian
crisis threatened to reverse prior gains made by the Jordanian health sector and severely stretch the
limitations of MOH institutional capacity. The project's objective was highly relevant to this context, as it
would support accessibility of services to these two highly vulnerable populations and ease the fiscal
burden on the Jordanian government.

The project was also highly relevant to government strategy. It supported the Jordan 2025 National Vision
and Strategy (a ten-year plan launched in 2014), which expressed a commitment to "ensuring financial

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



               protection for the Jordanian population and Syrian refugees." It was also aligned with two of the four key
               objectives of Jordan's National Health Strategy, 2016-2020: good governance and policy environment to
               promote health system performance, and health, financial, and social protection for all citizens based on fair
               grounds. The government's updated 2023-2025 health strategy focuses on the achievement of universal
               health coverage within a context of improved emergency and crisis response capacity, including refugee
               influxes.

               Finally, the project was strongly aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework with Jordan (FY17-
               22, extended through FY at the May 2021 Performance and Learning Review), which contained a pillar to
               improve the equity and quality of service delivery, a cross-cutting theme on governance that specifically
               focused on support for the health system, and an across-the-board strategy to seek concessional financing
               to alleviate the stress on country systems caused by the Syrian refugee crisis. The new CPF for Jordan
               (FY24-29) contains a high-level outcome on improved human capital outcomes; objectives on (a) more
               targeted, shock-responsive, and sustainable social protection and (b) healthier working-age adults and a
               more efficient health system; and indicators on universal health coverage and out-of-pocket expenditures
               on health. Although the new CPF contains education indicators specific to Syrian refugees, none of its
               health indicators focus specifically on refugees.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Support the Borrower in maintaining the delivery of primary and secondary health services to poor uninsured
                             Jordanians MOH facilities

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective was straightforward, logically connecting outputs to outcomes: the
                             main output, covering non-medical costs such that beneficiaries could continue to access highly subsidized
                             health services (with a 20 percent co-payment), would contribute to the outcome of maintaining delivery of
                             services for the target population. Institutional capacity development under the second component would
                             support effective verification of service provision and targeting. The target population was the 2.1 million
                             Jordanian nationals lacking any public or private health insurance. As there were no mechanisms for
                             identifying the poor at the time of project preparation, all uninsured nationals seeking services were assumed
                             to be poor and were therefore covered by the project. The theory of change assumed that the government
                             would continue to provide subsidized health services to uninsured Jordanians at MOH facilities. It is
                             noteworthy that the theory of change focused entirely on the supply side, with no demand-side outputs for
                             promotion or other demand generation.



                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



Outputs

The project subsidized the non-medical cost of services delivered to uninsured Jordanians at primary and
secondary health care facilities nationwide, as planned, such that the level of co-payment for services was
maintained at 20 percent. The MOH collected and reported information using government systems, facility
registries, and independent verification of utilization reports prior to Bank reimbursements.

The verification process and agencies were supported with training and institutional capacity building
activities. MOH staff were trained on health financing and provided with technical support for an assessment
of gaps in human resources and skills, intended to contribute to incorporation of a nationwide family health
services model based on WHO recommendations and including mother and child health, nutrition, growth,
and development monitoring, and prevention and early diagnosis of diabetes, hypertension, and breast
cancer (DLIs).

Outcomes

The number of health services delivered at MOH secondary health care facilities to the total target
populations increased from 1.238 million in 2016 to 2.518 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of
1.238 million and the revised target of 1.905 million services. (The original targets were the same as the
baseline, as the objective was to maintain the existing level of services; the targets were increased at the
2019 AF.) Of those, the number of health services delivered to uninsured male Jordanians increased from
513,000 in 2016 to 1.092 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 513,000 and the revised target of
792,000 services. The number of health services delivered to uninsured female Jordanians increased from
556,000 in 2016 to 1.349 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 556,000 and the revised target of
1.009 million services.

The number of health services delivered at MOH primary health care facilities to the total target populations
increased from 904,000 in 2016 o 5.528 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 904,000 and the
revised target of 2.67 million services. Of those, the number of health services delivered to uninsured male
Jordanians increased from 381,000 in 2016 to 2.382 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 381,000
and the revised target of 1.115 million services. The number of health services delivered to uninsured female
Jordanians increased from 413,000 in 2016 to 2.985 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 413,000
and the revised target of 1.42 million services.

In all, 967,732 people received essential health, nutrition, and population services through the project
(corporate results indicator), almost meeting the target of 1,101 million people.

Although the covered population—uninsured Jordanians—was identified as primarily either unemployed or
out of the labor force, and therefore was likely mostly poor, coverage of the uninsured population did not
contain a dedicated mechanism to reach the poor uninsured population (as specified in the objective).
However, given that this was an emergency operation, it was a reasonable choice to move forward with this
imperfect targeting mechanism that captured people who were very likely poor.



Rating
High


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Support the Borrower in maintaining the delivery of primary and secondary health services to Syrian refugees
at MOH facilities

Rationale
As was the case with the first objective, the theory of change for this objective was straightforward: Covering
the bulk of the cost for delivering services for beneficiaries (with a 20 percent co-pay at the point of service)
would contribute to maintaining delivery of services for the target population. Institutional capacity
development under the second component would support effective verification of service provision and
targeting. The 330,000 registered Syrian refugees with identification cards were the target population, and the
theory of change assumed that these refugees would remain in Jordan during the project period. The theory
of change also assumed that the government would continue to provide subsidized health services to those
refugees at MOH facilities. As was the case with the first objective, it is noteworthy that the theory of change
focused entirely on the supply side, with no demand-side outputs for promotion or other demand generation.
This shortcoming was particularly noteworthy for this objective, as the refugee population would have
benefited from outreach to inform them of available benefits in their language, through social services or other
targeted media.

Outputs

Outputs were the same as under the first objective.

Outcomes

The number of health services delivered at MOH secondary health care facilities to the total target
populations increased from 1.238 million in 2016 to 2.518 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of
1.238 million and the revised target of 1.905 million services (as noted under the first objective). (The original
targets were the same as the baseline, as the objective was to maintain the existing level of services; the
targets were increased at the 2019 AF.) Of these, the number of secondary health services delivered to
registered male Syrian refugees declined from 69,000 in 2016 to 34,900 in 2023, not meeting the original
target of 69,000 or the revised target of 46,000 services. The number of secondary health services delivered
to registered female Syrian refugees decreased from 100,000 in 2016 to 41,910 in 2023, not meeting the
original target of 100,000 or the revised target of 58,000 services. The ICR explained the shortfall in meeting
these targets as due mainly to the refugees' inability to afford the 20 percent co-pay toward the cost of
services, a situation that worsened during the COVID-19 pandemic (as the refugees worked primarily in the
informal sector, which was disproportionately impacted by the pandemic). The ICR (p. 16) noted that health
care expenses were among the top three reasons that refugees borrowed money during the project period,
with 19 percent of refugees borrowing money to cover these costs. This situation was exacerbated by a cost-
sharing policy introduced by the government in 2018 requiring refugees to pay 80 percent of their health
service costs; this policy was revised one year later, in 2019 (back to the original 20 percent co-pay), but it
took time for refugees and facility administrators to become aware of the revision and adjust back to the
original subsidized service rates. A 2021 survey showed that only 63 percent of Syrian refugees were aware
of their subsidized access to health services, compared with 82 percent awareness in 2018. The MOH
addressed this situation by issuing internal circulars to all health directorates and facilities about refugee
services, and in February of 2023 MOH issued a handbook for refugees to learn about available services at


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



                            MOH facilities. With these interventions, awareness of their rights to health care services among Syrian
                            refugees increased to 83 percent in 2023.

                            The number of health services delivered at MOH primary health care facilities to the total target populations
                            increased from 904,000 in 2016 to 5.528 million in 2023, exceeding the original target of 904,000 and the
                            revised target of 2.67 million services (as noted under the first objective). Of these, the number of primary
                            health services delivered to registered male Syrian refugees increased from 52,000 in 2016 to 68,840 in
                            2023, exceeding the original target of 52,000 and the revised target of 59,000 services. The number of
                            primary health services delivered to registered female Syrian refugees increased from 58,000 in 2016 to
                            102,670 in 2023, exceeding the original target of 58,000 and the revised target of 76,000 services.

                            The percentage of pregnant Syrian women accessing their first antenatal care visits during the first trimester
                            remained stable at 83.2 percent between 2019 and 2023, not meeting the target of an increase to 84.8
                            percent. The ICR did not discuss the reasons for the shortfall, but it was likely due to both affordability and the
                            initial lack of information and outreach activities to stimulate demand for services.

                            The ICR (p. 16) stated that the health status of Syrian refugees improved throughout the project, with a
                            decline in "chronic health issues," an increase in receiving follow-up care for chronic conditions, improvement
                            in mental health, and improvement in access to health care services. However, no specific data were
                            provided to support these statements. In any event, health outcomes were beyond the scope of the project’s
                            objectives.

                            With the shortfalls in reaching targets for delivery of services to Syrian refugees at secondary health care
                            facilities, achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project exceeded the targeted number of health care services delivered at both primary and secondary
                            health facilities to uninsured Jordanians. Targets were also exceeded for delivery of health care services
                            at primary care facilities to Syrian refugees, but inability of beneficiaries to cover the required 20 percent co-
                            payment led to shortfalls in reaching targets for delivery of services to refugees at secondary care facilities.
                            Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.

                            Attribution of observed outcomes to project financing is reasonable, given the integrity of the project’s results
                            chain, though it should be acknowledged that IsDB shared in the financing of non-medical costs of services,
                            and the government and other donors covered the costs of medicines, supplies, and other complementary
                            items.




                                                                                                                                  Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) focusing on maternal and child services, assuming a three-year time
frame and discount rate of three percent, a project-supported reduction in maternal and child mortality rates of
11.5 percent, and a value of statistical life (a commonly accepted calculation measuring, in monetary terms, the
value of preventing a fatality) calculated using standard methodology, found a net present value (NPV) of
USS$82.2 million and benefit-to-cost ratio of 1.6:1. Sensitivity analysis showed that the NPV remained positive
even when the maternal and child mortality rate assumption was adjusted to a reduction of 7.7 percent (NPV =
US$5.5 million).

Using the same CBA approach, the ICR (Annex 4, pp. 38-41)—covering the project's maternal and child
services interventions from 2018 through 2022—found a total five-year monetary benefit of US$200 million. The
ICR also found that maintaining service delivery at MOH primary health care facilities overall produced a three-
fold cost savings to the health system per patient when compared to scenarios without such investment, with
each visit to a PHC center (costing around US$10-15) resulting in savings of US$50 for the health system per
patient annually by averting the need for more extensive and expensive care. Finally, the ICR found that care
provided by MOH secondary care facilities was significantly more cost-effective than care provided by available
non-MOH and semi-public facilities.

Implementation efficiency was strong overall. The use of existing government structures, such as the Ministry of
Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC) for project management and MOH facilities for service delivery
and reporting, reduced operating costs. Financial management and procurement were smooth for the most part
(see Section 10b). The division of labor with development partners was efficient. Although a wide range of
partners was engaged in support to the Jordanian health sector to mitigate the impact of the influx of Syrian
refugees, this project was the only one directly covering the costs of service delivery borne by the government at
MOH facilities for the target population. The Bank collaborated effectively with the United States Agency for
International Development and WHO, which were also engaged in activities to strengthen the health system and
improve MOH institutional capacity, to avoid duplication. Implementation efficiency was moderately
compromised by the government's one-year decision in 2018-2019 to require 80 percent cost-sharing for health
services by Syrian refugees, and by the disruptions to procurement under the second component and to access
and delivery of health services caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly when many health care centers
either closed or pivoted entirely to COVID-19 care. The Borrower's comments on the ICR (pp. 43-44) noted
some minor shortcomings related to the strain on project management capacity at MOPIC (by adding project
management to their regular duties) and lack of familiarity of the Bank team with government procurement
procedures (leading to delays in contracting of services under the second component).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
Appraisal                                                      0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
ICR Estimate                                                   0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's objectives were highly relevant to country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy. The
project exceeded the targeted number of health care services delivered at both primary and secondary health
facilities to uninsured Jordanians. Targets were also exceeded for delivery of health care services at primary
care facilities to Syrian refugees, but affordability gaps for beneficiaries led to shortfalls in reaching targets for
delivery of services to refugees at secondary care facilities. Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, but with
caveats stemming from the noted shortcomings. Efficiency is rated Substantial, with clear positive returns and
only moderate implementation inefficiencies. Taken together, these ratings are indicative of moderate
shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement, producing an Outcome rating of
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project's technical support facilitated sustainable capacity development for MOH staff. However, as the
ICR (p. 27) noted, several important risks persist: economic and fiscal challenges could reduce government
financing for health services; refugee flows could become prolonged or even increase, straining service
delivery capacity; health sector institutions could experience challenges in delivering necessary services; and
upcoming elections could produce shifts in government policy on support for refugees. The current
government's long-term strategies continue to prioritize meeting the needs of refugee and host communities,
and the Bank has launched three follow-on projects supporting health system strengthening, policy and
institutional reforms to enhance human capital and governance of the health sector, and a program-for-
results operation addressing the rise of non-communicable diseases and sustainability of the public health
insurance scheme.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                         Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives were clear and well aligned with country priorities. Project design was rapid,
  simple, and flexible (with limited procurement, retroactive financing, and adaptable financial management
  [FM] practices), an appropriate response to the refugee crisis. Three options were considered for project
  design: an input-based option, which was rejected because financing of inputs alone would not ensure
  that results accrued to the target populations; an output-based option with DLIs, which was considered
  not relevant to this project because of its short planned implementation timeline (two years); and the
  chosen design, an output-based option with independent verification of expenditures and utilization
  against which funds would be disbursed. Key lessons were incorporated from previous Bank experience
  in Jordan and with insecure and conflict situations in other regions: that support for existing government
  systems can allow for a fast response and prevent the creation of parallel systems; that investing in the
  technical capacity of government institutions can ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of Bank
  support; that triggering OP 10.00, paragraph 12 can increase speed and flexibility; and that focus on
  simple design, quick wins, and flexibility is most appropriate in an emergency context (PAD, pp. 23-24).
  Project implementation was to rely on MOPIC, which had demonstrated capacity to manage Bank-
  financed projects in the past.

  Risks at appraisal were rated Substantial. Macroeconomic risk reflected the impact of shocks on Jordan's
  economy, but the government, with donor support, had been managing those risks. Substantial fiduciary
  and stakeholders' risks stemmed from IsDB's limited experience in the health sector, limited prior MOH
  experience with the Bank's FM and disbursement guidelines, potential weak coordination between MOH
  and MOPIC, and the potential for incorrect accounting of the health services received by the target
  populations. Those risks were mitigated by the hiring of a qualified financial officer within the MOPIC
  Finance Department to handle FM and disbursement functions; training and capacity building for MOH
  and the Audit Bureau; the use of simplified formats for quarterly interim financial reports; and the early
  scheduling of initial audits and verifications. Geopolitical and regional risks were high, given the ongoing
  Syrian conflict, insecurity due to terrorist groups, violence in Iraq, and Israeli-Palestinian tensions. Within
  this risk environment, the project was designed to be simple and fast-disbursing.

  Quality at Entry experienced moderate shortcomings. The ICR (p. 26) noted that project preparation
  engaged MOPIC to a higher degree than MOH, despite MOH being the primary agency responsible for
  providing health services at public facilities; "the MOH's early involvement could have better streamlined
  the data reporting process" (ICR, p. 28). In addition, the project's objectives and outcome indicators were
  framed as targeting "poor" uninsured Jordanians, even though data and targeting mechanisms were not
  available to ensure that the covered uninsured beneficiaries were poor. Most importantly, project design
  did not take into account refugees' inability to afford the 20 percent required co-payment for health
  services at the secondary level, affecting outcomes for access to services despite the subsidized rates
  supported by the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



 Bank supervision was engaged and proactive. Reporting was candid, and there was consistent focus on
 development outcomes. Although the core task team was originally based outside Jordan, as the project
 progressed, one staff member was relocated to Amman and another locally recruited in order to enhance
 the Bank's on-the-ground presence. The team made deliberate efforts to engage MOH in the preparation of
 the project's AF, including in the determination of indicator targets. The AF and results framework revisions
 were processed in a timely manner. MOH and MOPIC were supported to ensure that the
 verification agency had access to digital data in the Hakeem electronic health system (see Section 9b). The
 Bank withheld project disbursements in response to the government's 2018 policy change on co-payment
 rates for Syrian refugees, collaborating with development partners to secure reversal of the government's
 decision. It was a shortcoming that outreach activities were not added to make refugees aware of their
 benefits as soon as the 80 percent co-payment policy was lifted; such activities were not added until 2023.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project's objective was clear and monitorable, and the results framework logically connected activities
 to outputs to outcomes. Indicators were well defined and had clear baselines and targets. Initial baselines
 were derived from 2015 data; baselines and targets were revised in 2019 following MOH's implementation
 of a monitoring system capable of tracking data disaggregated by governorate and facility, which provided
 updated and more accurate utilization data.

 Health facilities in each governorate were to manually collect and report data to their respective
 governorate health offices, which would then review and submit the data to MOH. MOH was to centrally
 consolidate data and publish the results annually. MOPIC was to work closely with relevant departments at
 MOH to ensure that disaggregated data would be reported to the World Bank and IsDB on a six-month
 basis. The UVE was to provide independent verification of service utilization.

 At the time of the AF, all overall outcome targets were revised upward to accommodate the AF and
 extension of the closing date. Sub-indicator targets were adjusted upward for service delivery to uninsured
 Jordanians and downward for Syrian refugees to take into account actual service delivery data. In addition,
 the indicator on completion of a health sector road map intended to shape improvements in the efficiency of
 health services was dropped, as that activity was completed by the government with support from other
 development partners. In addition, DLIs were added under the project's second component, and new
 intermediate indicators were added on review of the existing grievance redress mechanism, people who
 have received essential HNP services (corporate results indicator), and increase in access by Syrian
 women to first antenatal case visits during their first trimester.




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)




b. M&E Implementation
  Verification and reporting of utilization and expenditure took place as planned. Multi-layer data quality
  checks included the government's routine checks during collection, verification of results by third parties,
  and verification of expenditures by the AB. The MOH produced regular internally audited expenditure
  reports on project-related expenses, cross-checked by the AB and an independent verification entity. The
  Bank released funds based on verified utilization and expenditure reports.

  The ICR (pp. 23-24) noted some occasional delays in these processes. There were delays in initial hiring
  of the UVE. During the project's initial stages, most health facilities did not have access to the
  government's Hakeem digital health information system. Over time, however, with Bank support, facilities
  gained a better understanding of reporting requirements, and the Hakeem system expanded to cover
  more facilities, improving the quality and timeliness of data collection and reporting. Results from the
  UVE's data verification were compared periodically with MOH utilization data to ensure consistency.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data and analysis tracked progress at the national, sub-national, and facility levels, guided the
  disbursement of project funds, and identified service delivery challenges. M&E activities helped to
  identify data quality gaps, including issues with manual data recording and reporting, and lower rates of
  service utilization among refugees. The ICR (p. 24) also noted that the Bank, government, and other
  health development partners in Jordan used the project's M&E data for sector performance assessment
  and planning.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as Environmental Assessment category "C" and triggered none of the Bank's
   safeguard policies.

   The existing grievance redress mechanism was reviewed in October 2020. All registered grievances related
   to the delivery of project benefits were addressed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



   The Bank assessed MOH and MOPIC FM systems at appraisal, concluding that FM arrangements
   satisfied the requirements under OP/BP 10.00. MOPIC, which had extensive prior experience with the
   Bank's FM and disbursement policies, managed the project's FM and disbursement functions. A dedicated
   financial officer from the MOPIC Finance Department played an oversight role in close collaboration with
   an FM Coordination Officer in MOH. Planning and budgeting used existing government FM information
   systems. In order to avoid double financing with IsDB's parallel contributions under the first component,
   financing was divided between the two Banks such that each financier covered health services during
   different time periods of the project. The Bank used verification mechanisms as planned to guarantee
   eligibility of expenditures prior to disbursement. Quarterly interim and financial report were prepared by the
   MOPIC FM team and submitted for review in a timely manner. The project's audited financial statements
   were audited by a qualified firm. Audit opinions were clean and timely. The ICR (p. 25) confirmed that there
   were no significant FM issues and no waivers from the Bank's FM policies and procedures.

   Procurement was limited to the project's second component. At appraisal, the Bank undertook an
   assessment of MOPIC's procurement system and capacity, finding that necessary policies and procedures
   were in place. Procurement risk at appraisal was rated Moderate, with several risk mitigation measures put
   in place: using a procurement plan as a monitoring tool for processing timely activities; preparing a
   procurement section in the Project Operations Manual; systematizing record-keeping; and staff training.
   Procurement activities were simple and low-cost, consisting mainly of selecting the UVE, conducting two
   training workshops, and selecting the external auditor. Though there were some delays in procurement
   decision-making and processing, overall procurement proceeded without issues.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Affordability gaps led to
                                                                                 shortfalls in reaching targets for
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 delivery of services to refugees
                                                                                 at secondary care facilities.
                                                                                 Project design did not take into
                                                                                 account refugees' inability to
                                                                                 afford the 20 percent required
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    co-payment for health services,
                                                                                 affecting outcomes for access to
                                                                                 services despite the subsidized
                                                                                 rates supported by the project.


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)



Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 28) offered several insightful lessons, summarized and adapted here:

Simplicity and flexibility in project design can expedite support in an emergency context. In
this case, triggering paragraph 12 of OP 10.00, the use of retroactive financing, and use of
government structures for service delivery and project management proved critical for timely delivery
of the project.

Responsive and proactive project management can address unexpected obstacles to
implementation. In this case, the task team's timely engagement with the government and other
partners to reverse the 2018 policy of higher cost-sharing for Syrian refugees was key to mitigating
risks to achieved results.

Independent monitoring requires a well-planned methodology and tools. In this case, early
reliance on manual systems of data collection evolved, through close collaboration with MOH and
the UVE, to adoption of the Hakeem digital information system, enhancing data quality and
efficiency.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear and candid. It conformed with established guidelines. It traced clearly the results chain from
the project's interventions to observed outcomes, and it was careful to assess data sources and quality. It was
particularly strong in its assessment of the project's health service utilization and cost verification mechanisms.
Its lessons were concise, to-the-point, and of high quality. The ICR was occasionally repetitive and could have
been streamlined across several sections.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 16
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
JO: Emergency Health Project (P163387)




                                                                      Page 16 of 16
