     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024163

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Peru                                       Education

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 0                                           0

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P170477                                     Investing in Human Capital




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-90680                                 30-Jun-2021                                        50,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Mar-2020                                30-Jun-2021
                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                          50,000,000.00                                            0.00




P176387_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Peru                                       Education

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P176387                                    Investing in Human Capital DPF II ( P176387 )




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-90680,IBRD-92700                      31-Dec-2022                                            350000000.00

  Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
  24-Jun-2021                                31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Revised Commitment                            350,000,000.00                                                0.00

  Actual                                        350,000,000.00                                                0.00



 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Denise A. Vaillancourt       Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The first Program Document (PD1) for the programmatic series, Investing in Human Capital Development Policy
Financing (DPF) in Peru, dated February 26, 2020, stated that the project development objective (PDO) of the
first operation was “…to support authorities’ efforts in developing effective policies for human capital accumulation
towards: (a) improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development (ECD) services; and (b)
improving teacher management and professional development systems (p. 16). (These objectives were
consistent with those presented in Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement between the Republic of Peru and the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), dated December 10, 2020, pp. 5-6).

As stated in the Program Document for the second operation (PD2) (p. 20), the PDO of the second operation was
“…to support government policies to protect and invest in human capital accumulation through: (a) improving
delivery of social protection and early childhood development services; (b) increasing access to health services
and ensuring continuity of care; and (c) improving teacher management and professional development
systems. (These objectives were consistent with those presented in Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement between
the Republic of Peru and IBRD, dated May 26, 2021, pp. 5-6).

For the purposes of this ICR Review, the PDOs are taken as:

      PDO 1: Improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development services
      PDO 2: Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of care
      PDO 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
IEG’s Guidance Manual for Independent Evaluation Group Validators for completing ICRRs on DPFs (Version
April 2024) notes that “…the terms pillars and policy areas have the same meaning and are used
interchangeably.” In the case of this DPF series, the pillars were aligned and used interchangeably with the three
PDOs, and the policy areas provided the general policy orientation of prior actions supporting the pillars/PDOs.

Under DPF 1, eight Policy Areas (PAs) supported two pillars/PDOs, as follows:

Pillar/Objective 1: Improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development services was
to be achieved through:

      Policy Area 1: Establishing a multi-sectoral results-based budgeting program for ECD
      Policy Area 2: Strengthening decision-making for ECD based on an integrated social protection
       information system
      Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and results

Pillar/Objective 2: Improving teacher management and professional development systems was to be
achieved through:

        Policy Area 4:   Improving pre-service teacher training
        Policy Area 5:   Enhancing teacher allocation
        Policy Area 6:   Strengthening teacher evaluation
        Policy Area 7:   Integrating education information services for improved teaching and learning
        Policy Area 8:   Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support for teachers

Under DPF 2 some pillars and policy actions were revised to address the COVID-19 pandemic and increasing
political tensions: (a) under Pillar/Objective 1, original Policy Area 2 was amended to address the urgent ECD
needs of vulnerable populations; (b) a new (health services) Pillar/Objective 2 was added, along with three new
Policy Areas; and (c) under relabeled Pillar/Objective 3 (previously labeled Pillar/Objective 2), Policy Area 6
(strengthening teacher evaluation), was dropped. Given the urgent need for support in light of the COVID-19
pandemic, the government did not have sufficient time or resources to complete preparations for this policy
area. A new Policy Area 9 (supporting teaching and learning continuity) was added.

As amended under DPF 2, 11 Policy Areas supported three Pillars/PDOs, as follows:

Pillar/Objective 1: Improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development services was
to be achieved through:

      Policy Area 1: Establishing a multi-sectoral results-based budgeting program for ECD
      Policy Area 2: Expanding ECD programs to respond to the pandemic
      Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and results

(New) Pillar/Objective 2: Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of care


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



      (New) Policy Area 4: Increasing access to health services
      (New) Policy Area 5: Improving health personnel deployment
      (New) Policy Area 6: Establishing and monitoring nationwide vaccination programs

Pillar/Objective 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems was to be
achieved through:

        Policy Area 7: Improving pre-service teacher training
        Policy Area 8: Enhancing teacher allocation
        (New) Policy Area 9: Supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching and learning continuity
        Policy Area 10: Integrating education information services for improved teaching and learning
        Policy Area 11: Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support for teachers


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The series consisted of two single-tranche operations totaling US$400 million. The first operation, financed by
an IBRD loan in the amount of US$50 million, was approved on March 24, 2020, and became effective on
December 18, 2020. The second operation, financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$350 million, was
approved on June 24, 2021, and became effective on August 16, 2021. Both loans were fully disbursed and
closed on their original closing dates of June 30, 2021, and December 31, 2022, respectively.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The three PDOs of this DPF series addressed constraints to human capital development, initially
 identified in the World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Peru in 2017, and further
 emphasized in the (post-COVID) 2022 SCD update. According to the 2022 SCD update, the two main
 structural challenges initially identified in the 2017 SCD—low productivity in the private sector and large
 geographic disparities in human development outcomes—have worsened. Living standards in Peru’s poorer
 districts have deteriorated in recent years. Human development outcomes continue to be inequitable. Despite
 significant improvements in malnutrition since 1996, remote rural areas in the Sierra and Amazon regions
 have extremely high stunting rates (at 33.4 percent), which have not declined over the past decade. While
 access to education has increased, education quality remains lower than in most other countries participating
 in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), with Peru ranking 64th of 70 countries in
 2015 and 65th of 77 countries in 2018, and quality uneven across the country. Peru’s human capital index
 was assessed at 0.61 in 2020, indicating that in 2020 (pre-COVID), an average Peruvian child would reach
 61 percent of his/her potential in terms of productivity and lifetime income. Post-COVID estimates indicate a
 substantial worsening after two years of school closures. This national index hides large disparities across
 regions, rural and urban populations, and income quintiles, and among indigenous communities. World Bank
 simulations suggest that learning losses for the bottom income quintile might be almost double those of the
 top quintile. Health outcomes (particularly maternal mortality) in Peru continue to fall behind those of other
 countries in the region.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



COVID-19 highlighted weaknesses in social services delivery. Health sector capacity fell far short of needs to
address and mitigate the pandemic, including testing/case detection and containment. Excessive
centralization and weak capacity undermined contact tracing, quarantines, and other efforts to minimize
transmission. World Health Organization (WHO) data cite Peru’s cumulative COVID mortality rate
(645/100,000 population) as the highest in the world. Lack of facilities, equipment, and personnel, combined
with low capacity (obtaining/deploying needed resources, surveillance, emergency preparedness) undercut
the effectiveness of the health sector’s response. World Bank simulations of learning losses for Peru suggest
that school closures and income losses caused by COVID may lead to a decline in learning-adjusted years of
schooling from 8.6 to 6.9. While the education sector promptly launched a multiplatform distance learning
program early in the pandemic period, the program's uptake was limited due to low access of primary
education students to home computers (less than half), and low access of households to the internet (one in
four). Inadequate synergies of information and information systems also compromised efforts to ensure social
protection and rapid access to critical services (such as ECD) for those most affected by the COVID
crisis. COVID also exacerbated food insecurity, especially among the most vulnerable.

The three PDOs were relevant to key documents on Peru’s current country development strategy,
which aims to promote economic recovery, with social inclusion and equity at the center of its policy
agenda (Country Partnership Framework [CPF] 2023-2027). Peru’s strategy places strong emphasis on:
supporting the most vulnerable segments of the population, including indigenous people, Afro-descendants,
and rural communities; overcoming social exclusion; and promoting equitable access to services and
equitable human development outcomes. Peru’s “Trabajando por el pueblo” (Working for the People)
framework outlines ten priority areas in its General Political Guidelines for 2021-2026, a number of which are
directly focused on human capital development, particularly: welfare and social protection of the population;
education and learning recovery; institutional strengthening and capacity building for better service delivery;
and digital transformation. The Ministry of Economy and Finance’s Impulse Peru Plan seeks to promote
sustainable economic growth and employment generation and maintain fiscal responsibility, with an
emphasis on supporting vulnerable groups. The four objectives of Peru’s Strategic Plan for National
Development 2050, issued in 2022, support human capital development, including (a) the full development of
peoples’ capabilities without leaving anyone behind; (b) management of the territory in a sustainable manner
to prevent and reduce risks and threats that affect people and their livelihoods; (c) increased competitiveness
and productivity levels with decent employment, based on the sustainable use of resources, human capital,
science and technology, and digital transformation; and (d) guarantee of a just, democratic, peaceful society
and an effective State at the service of the people, based on dialogue, national agreement, and strengthened
institutions.

The PDOs were also relevant to the World Bank’s CPF for the Republic of Peru for the period 2023-
2027, dated December 22, 2022. The CPF supports three high-level outcomes (HLOs) identified in the SCD
update, aligned with the Sustainable Development Goals and the World Bank Group’s corporate
strategies: (1) increased access to quality economic opportunities for workers and entrepreneurs; (2)
improved access to quality public services; and (3) increased resilience to shocks. The DPF series is
particularly relevant to HLOs 2 and 3. HLO-2 is supported by Objective 3 (enhance the delivery of public
services in key sectors, including health and education) and by Objective 4 (strengthen institutional
effectiveness at national and subnational levels, with a focus on governance, anti-corruption, and reforms to
improve the fiscal sustainability of local government and the digitalization of local services). HLO-3 is
supported by Objective 6 (strengthen mechanisms to protect people against shocks, including addressing
structural weaknesses in social security and health systems; strengthening sectoral institutions, data, and
policies; and a reform agenda for a more responsive social protection system). Key outcome indicators under
Objective 6 are especially relevant: number of regional public health laboratories equipped and implementing

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for COVID-19 and other pathogens; share of households with
socioeconomic information updated in the National Registry of Households; and share of indigenous
households with socioeconomic information updated in the National Registry of Households.

The PDOs provided strategically complementary support to policy areas directly supported by other
World Bank-financed operations in the health, education, and social protection sectors, thus
warranting direct World Bank involvement in this DPF series. The DPF complemented: (1) the Boosting
Human Capital and Productivity DPF-DDO (P156858), which supported the introduction of a merit-based
teacher recruitment and promotion policy, incentivized better performance in subnational government
institutions, and fostered the participation of the private sector in school infrastructure upgrading; (2) the Peru
Human Development Flagship (P167570, P167460, and P167417), which aimed to improve policy dialogue
and technical capacity to facilitate a strategic and systemic approach to planning health system reforms
moving towards universal health coverage; and (3) several completed World Bank-financed operations,
including a Basic Education Project (P123151), a Higher Education Quality Improvement Project (P122194),
a Social Inclusion DPL (P131028), a Social Inclusion Technical Assistance Loan (P131079), a Results in
Nutrition for JUNTOS Project (P117310), and a Results and Accountability DPL (P101086).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The two operations had a total of (16) prior actions under the three DPOs. For the purposes of this ICR
Review, IEG has renumbered the prior actions (PAs) so that they are grouped by objective. (Note: PA
numbers cited in the text are those assigned by this ICRR, itemized in Table 1, with their original numbering
under DPFs 1 and 2, respectively for ease of reference.)

Table 1. Prior Actions (PAs) and Indicative Triggers (ITs)

 DPF 1                                                DPF 2
 Objective 1: Improving delivery of social protection and ECD services
 Policy Area 1: Establishing a multi-sectoral results-based budgeting program for ECD
                                                      PA 2 (DPF2-PA1): The Borrower has approved the
 PA 1 (DPF1-PA1): The Borrower has approved the
                                                      cross-sectoral institutional arrangements and
 results-based budgeting program for ECD (RBB-
                                                      interoperability structure of information systems for
 ECD), as evidenced by Supreme Resolution No.
                                                      the implementation of the RBB-ECD Program
 023-2019-EF, dated December 30, 2019, and
                                                      (PPoR DIT), as evidenced by Supreme Decree 006-
 published in the Official Gazette on December 30,
                                                      2021-MIDIS, dated May 5, 2021, and published in
 2019.
                                                      the Official Gazette on May 6, 2021.
 Policy Area 2: Expanding ECD programs to respond to the pandemic (DPF 2) (changed from DPF1:
 Strengthening decision-making for ECD-based on an integrated social protection information system)
 PA 3 (DPF1-PA2): The Borrower has approved the PA 4 (DPF2-PA2): The Borrower has approved an
 regulation of Law No. 30435, which creates the       expansion of the JUNTOS and Cuna Mas Programs
 National Targeting System (SINAFO), as               to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, as
 evidenced by Supreme Decree No. 001-2020-            evidenced by the Borrower’s Urgency Decree No.
 MIDIS, dated January 17, 2020, and published in 095-2020, dated August 10, 2020, and published in
 the Official Gazette on January 18, 2020.            the Official Gazette on August 11, 2020, and Article

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                                                        24 of Law 31084, dated November 30, 2020, and
                                                        published in the Official Gazette on December 6,
                                                        2020.
Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and results
PA 5 (DPF1-PA3): The Borrower has approved a
strategy to strengthen territorial coordination for the
delivery of prioritized services at district, regional,
and national levels and has established a set of
                                                        IT 3: The Borrower implements the territorial
management tools comprising: local coordination
                                                        coordination strategy, “Primero la
committees, district mapping, updated children’s
                                                        Infancia.” Dropped under DPF 2.
registry, and district monitoring of service delivery,
as evidenced by the Supreme Decree No. 003-
2019-MIDIS, dated July 17, 2019, and published in
the Official Gazette on July 18, 2019.
Objective 2 (new under DPF 2): Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of
care
Policy Area 4: Increasing access to health services
                                                        PA 6 (DPF2-PA3): The Borrower, through Seguro
                                                        Integral de Salud (Comprehensive Health
                                                        Insurance, SIS), has approved financial coverage
                                                        for remote health services, as evidenced by the
                                                        Administrative Resolution No. 144-2020-SIS, dated
                                                        November 6, 2020, and published in the Official
                                                        Gazette on November 7, 2020.
Policy Area 5: Improving health personnel deployment
                                                        PA 7 (DPF2-PA4): The Borrower, through Ministerio
                                                        de Salud (Ministry of Health, MINSA), has approved
                                                        measures to optimize the supply of human
                                                        resources in health, including: (i) the agile
                                                        contracting of health personnel; and (ii) extension of
                                                        shift duration with adequate compensation as
                                                        needed on a voluntary basis, as evidenced by the
                                                        Borrower’s Urgent Decree No 002-2021, dated and
                                                        published in the Official Gazette on February 17,
                                                        2021, and the Borrower’s Urgent Decree No. 038-
                                                        2021, dated August 10, 2020, and published in the
                                                        Official Gazette on April 15, 2021.
Policy Area 6: Establishing and monitoring nationwide vaccination programs
                                                        PA 8 (DPF2-PA5): The Borrower has approved the
                                                        National Vaccination Plan against COVID-19, which
                                                        includes: (i) the identification of criteria to prioritize
                                                        groups of people for vaccination; (ii) the creation of
                                                        a population-wide National Vaccination Register;
                                                        and (iii) the implementation of geo-referenced real
                                                        time vaccination monitoring systems, as evidenced
                                                        by Ministerial Resolution No. 488-2021-MINSA,
                                                        dated October 16, 2020 and published in the Official

                                                                                                           Page 7 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                                                      Gazette on October 20, 2020, and Urgent Decree
                                                      009-2021, dated and published in the Official
                                                      Gazette on January 30, 2021.
Objective 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems
Policy Area 7: Improving pre-service teacher training
PA 9 (DPF1-PA4): The Borrower, through the
                                                      IT 4: The Borrower, through MINEDU, approves a
Ministry of Education (MINEDU), has approved a
                                                      normative framework to support the quality of
model of service delivery to reform Teacher
                                                      Teacher Training Institutes (IESP) and Schools
Training Institutes (IESP), including inter alia: (i)
                                                      (EESP). This includes (a) the optimization of the
implementation of accreditation processes to
                                                      supply and demand of IESPs and EESPs
become Teacher Training Schools (EESP); (ii)
                                                      responding to regional needs; (b) the strengthening
adhesion to an updated curriculum; and (iii)
                                                      of the technical autonomy through improvement of
implementation of a program of capacity building
                                                      the licensing process; (c) the support to the design
and in-service training for teacher trainers, as
                                                      of the entry and exit profile through formative
evidenced by Ministerial Resolution No. 570-2018-
                                                      evaluation mechanisms for students and
MINEDU, dated October 18, 2018, and published
                                                      trainers. Dropped under DPF 2.
in the Official Gazette on October 19, 2018.
Policy Area 8: Enhancing teacher allocation
PA 10 (DPF1-PA5): The Borrower has approved PA 11 (DPF2-PA6): The Borrower, through
the implementation of yearly contests for assessing MINEDU, has strengthened the model of teacher
tenured positions in public schools for years 2020 attraction, hiring and allocation, including revisions
and 2021, as mandated by Law No. 30747, dated to (i) simplify the teacher contracting and allocation
March 22, 2018, and published in the Official         processes; (ii) expand the eligibility criteria for
Gazette on April 5, 2018 and as evidenced by          teacher contract renewal, as evidenced by the
Vice-Ministerial Resolution No. 033, dated            Borrower’s Supreme Decree 015-2020-MINEDU,
February 21, 2029 and published in the Official       dated November 27, 2020, and published in the
Gazette on February 22, 2019.                         Official Gazette on November 28, 2020.
Policy Area 9 (added under DPF II): Supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching & learning
continuity
                                                      PA 12 (DPF2-PA7): The Borrower, through
                                                      MINEDU, has approved: (i) the criteria for targeting
                                                      beneficiaries of digital devices in the most
                                                      vulnerable areas; and (ii) the use of digital tools for
                                                      curricular planning, support and formative
                                                      evaluation, which complement teaching skills in the
                                                      context of school closures due to the risk of spread
                                                      of COVID-19, as evidenced by Supreme Decree
                                                      016-2020-MINEDU, dated December 16, 2020, and
                                                      published in the Official Gazette on December 17,
                                                      2020, and Ministerial Resolution 334-2020-
                                                      MINEDU, dated August 21, 2020, and published in
                                                      the Official Gazette on August 23, 2020.
Policy Area 10: Integrating education information services for improved teaching and learning
PA 13 (DPF1-PA6): The Borrower, through the           PA 14 (DPF2-PA8): The Borrower, through
Prime Minister’s Office (Presidency of the Council MINEDU, has approved a Decree that creates and
of Ministers, PCM), has approved a law that           defines standards for an integrated and
establishes a framework for the interoperability      interoperable system for human resources

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



between information systems, as evidenced by the management to be maintained and used by
Digital Government Law, approved by Legislative MINEDU and decentralized education management
Decree No. 1412, dated September 12, 2018, and units, as evidenced by Supreme Decree 107-2020-
published in the Official Gazette on September 12, MINEDU, dated December 17, 2020, and published
2018.                                                in the Official Gazette on December 18, 2020.
Policy Area 11: Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support to teachers
                                                     IT 8: The Borrower, through MINEDU, implements
                                                     normative changes that enable: (a) strengthening of
                                                     the career of public schools and educational
                                                     network principals; (b) creating positions in the
                                                     career path of teacher trainers. These changes
                                                     include, among others, improvements in standards
                                                     for the selection process, tenure, training and
                                                     professional development opportunities through the
PA 15 (DPF1-PA7): The Borrower, through              differentiated roles in the career trajectory of
MINEDU, has established a leadership position for principals & teacher trainers. Dropped under DPF
Rural Education Networks to promote the merit-       2.
based career path and strengthen the system of
rural educational support nationwide, as evidenced PA 16 (DPF2-PA9): The Borrower, through
by Ministerial Resolution No. 526-2018-MINEDU, MINEDU, has regulated the stages, criteria and
dated September 25, 2018, and published in the responsibilities for the use and management of the
Official Gazette on September 25, 2018.              School Management Education Network Registry
                                                     (REGES), including the provision of human
                                                     resources to provide managerial and pedagogical
                                                     support to the educational services, as mandated in
                                                     Vice-Ministerial Resolution 002-2020-MINEDU, as
                                                     evidenced by the Vice-Ministerial Resolution 211-
                                                     2020-MINEDU, dated November 10, 2020, and
                                                     published in the Official Gazette on November 11,
                                                     2020.
Note: Policy Area 6 (under DPF I) – strengthening teacher evaluation – was dropped under DPF
II, along with IT 6 (the Borrower approves normative revisions for the institutional strengthening of the
teacher evaluation entity, with sufficient autonomy to carry out its responsibilities. These responsibilities
include (a) the design and implementation of teacher evaluations, and (b) the analysis and
dissemination of results to improve the education system) and RI 9 (schedule of national teacher
evaluation and results dissemination for formative use published for the first time by the strengthened
teacher evaluation entity).

Objective 1: Improving delivery of social protection and ECD services

This objective had a strong results chain, with prior actions logically linked to the achievement of the PDO. It
aimed to address critical factors preventing young children from achieving school readiness and reaching
their full development potential, by improving their access to ECD and social services. Three policy areas
were identified to address constraining factors identified in the SCD/CPF, prioritized in government strategic
plans (see Section 3a), and further explored and discussed during program preparation, specifically: (a) the
lack of a fully defined set of sectoral ECD interventions and the lack of a programmatic results framework
common to all relevant sectors; (b) inefficient data exchange processes inhibiting the timely identification of
vulnerable young children and their age-appropriate access to ECD and social services; and (c) inadequate

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



governance and institutional arrangements undermining the coordination and delivery of safety nets and
social services at the local level.

Policy Area 1: Establishing a multi-sectoral results-based budgeting program for ECD. PA 1 and PA
2 supported the establishment and implementation of a new results-based budgeting (RBB)-ECD program
building on the successful experience of Peru’s RBB program for the Accredited Nutrition Program. The new
RBB-ECD design included: (a) the ECD operational model, an evidence-based theory of change linking
service packages to budgets, target populations, and spending units responsible for implementation; (b) the
definition of service standards; (c) budget programming criteria; (d) monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
procedures; and (e) coverage targets for each service based on data retrieved and analyzed in each
catchment area. Existing ECD services included in the RBB-ECD program included nutrition, provision of
national identification numbers to all newborns, early stimulation and pre-primary education. Newly added
services provided an integrated age-appropriate package to be made available for all children under five and
families in a timely manner. PA 1 (under DPF 1) supported the development and approval of the RBB-ECD
program, and PA 2 (under DPF 2) supported its efficient implementation through the development and
approval by the Borrower of cross-sectoral institutional arrangements and the interoperability structure of
information systems. Both of these PAs addressed key constraints to the provision of ECD services and thus
made credible contributions, through Policy Area 1, to Objective 1. Therefore, the relevance of PAs 1 and 2 is
Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 2: Expanding ECD programs to respond to the pandemic (DPF 2). The original aim of this
policy area, as articulated under DPF 1, was to strengthen decision-making for ECD, based on an integrated
social protection information system. Under DPF 1, PA 3 supported the establishment and implementation of
the National Targeting System (SINAFO) under the National System of Development and Social Inclusion,
led by the Ministry of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS). SINAFO built on existing targeting
instruments to enhance the government's capacity to reach the most vulnerable households with programs
from different sectors, applying shared targeting guidelines and supporting the design, implementation, and
M&E of the social development and inclusion strategy, Incluir para Crecer. SINAFO was expected to
facilitate better planning and decision-making processes and cross-agency information sharing, all supporting
the targeting of programs using a common integrated social protection information technology (IT) platform. It
was originally envisaged that, in a second phase under DPF 2, a multisectoral digital platform (the Social
Information Exchange Mechanism/MIIS) would be established to facilitate the exchange of information
between data systems across public agencies for targeting processes to deliver the prioritized packages of
ECD services. However, in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, DPF 2 (PA 4) was added to support the
expansion of the JUNTOS (a conditional cash transfer program targeted at the poorest populations, initiated
in 2005) and Cuna Mas (an existing large-scale home visiting program to reach vulnerable children and their
caregivers) programs in response to the emergency needs for ECD provision to vulnerable children. Even
with the modified aim of Policy Area 2, PAs 3 and 4 established a solid framework and precedent for the
approval of expansions of two key child well-being programs, which enabled the support of households that
suffered loss of income and restrictions to mobility due to the pandemic. This constituted a significant
contribution, through Policy Area 2, to the achievement of pillar/Objective 1. The relevance of PAs 3 and 4 is
thus Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and
results. The territorial coordination approach used management instruments developed by MIDIS to enhance
delivery of ECD and infant nutrition services in Peru. Under DPF 1, PA 5 supported the development and
approval of a strategy to strengthen territorial coordination for the delivery of prioritized services at district,
regional, and national levels and the establishment of a set of management tools, including local coordination

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



committees, district mapping, an updated children’s registry, and district monitoring of service delivery. It
aimed to operationalize territorial coordination and strengthen local government capacities to coordinate
social policy within their territories, resulting in more effective service delivery benefiting the most
vulnerable. PA 5, through Policy Area 3, made a critical contribution to achievement of Objective 1,
addressing the issue of low capacity at the local levels to coordinate and deliver social services. Therefore,
the relevance of PA 5 is Highly Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of care

This new objective, along with three accompanying policy areas, was introduced under DPF 2 to address
chronic constraints to health sector performance, exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic (limited access to
health services and the unavailability of human resources to meet service demands), and to mitigate human
capital losses from the COVID-19 pandemic through a widespread vaccination program

Policy Area 4: Increasing access to health services. This Policy Area was introduced in Peru’s context of
limited access to health services due to poor access to infrastructure, limited affordability, complex
geography, and low public safety levels, further exacerbated in the wake of the pandemic by social mobility
restrictions and limited health sector capacity overwhelmed by the demands of the pandemic. This Policy
Area was designed to support the government's efforts to deploy and expand telemedicine services to
support MINSA in ensuring access and continuation of care. Under DPF 2's PA 6, the Borrower, through
SIS, approved financial coverage for remote health services, thus directly contributing to improvements in
access to critical services. Telemedicine allows for increased use of health services by those with restricted
access, which in turn allows better response to the demand for services by vulnerable populations. The
relevance of PA 6 is thus Highly Satisfactory,

Policy Area 5: Improving health personnel deployment. While the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
exacerbated fluctuations in the demand for health care resources across the country at short notice, rigidities
in human resource management posed an obstacle to providing adequate services to meet urgent
demand. PA 7 (under DPF 2) supported MINSA in introducing measures that allowed for flexible adaptation
of human resources to sudden surges in demand. Specifically, PA 7 prompted the approval by the Borrower,
through MINSA, of measures to optimize the supply of human resources in health, including: (i) the agile
contracting of health personnel, providing more flexibility in the hiring process; and (ii) the extension of shift
duration for up to 12 hours, with adequate compensation as needed, on a voluntary basis. This PA addressed
a critical constraint and made a significant contribution to achievement of Objective 2 by facilitating an
increase in and better distribution of available human resources to respond to time- and location-specific
needs. It helped ensure continuity of care during the pandemic and equipped the sector to be better prepared
to respond to any future shocks. The relevance of PA 7 is Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 6: Establishing and monitoring nationwide vaccination programs. Widespread vaccination
was the most effective strategy to mitigate human capital losses from the COVID-19 pandemic.
However, despite Peru’s high general immunization rates, a rapid and effective COVID-19 vaccination
response posed a new challenge for the country. This Policy Area supported the government's efforts to
implement and monitor a National Vaccination Plan against COVID-19. Specifically, PA 8 (under DPF 2)
prompted the design and approval by the Borrower of Peru’s National Vaccination Plan against COVID-19,
including: (i) the identification of criteria to prioritize groups of people for vaccination; (ii) the creation of a
population-wide National Vaccination Register; and (iii) the implementation of geo-referenced real-time
vaccination monitoring systems. PA 8 made a significant contribution to achievement of Objective 2 by
increasing the government's capacity to plan and implement an effective response to COVID-19, focused on


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



prevention, a capacity also relevant for undertaking future vaccination campaigns in the event of new disease
outbreaks. The relevance of PA 8 is thus Highly Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems

This objective was designed to support teachers in their professional development and to improve managerial
and pedagogical services that would ensure that teachers are well motivated and fully prepared for
effectiveness in the classroom, both critical for improving learning outcomes. The Policy Areas aimed to close
gaps in access to quality education. As originally conceived, five Policy Areas were to address critical and
synergistic determinants of teacher quality: improving pre-service teacher training; enhancing teacher
allocation; strengthening teacher evaluation; integrating education information services for improved teaching
and learning; and strengthening managerial and pedagogical support for teachers. Under DPF 2: one Policy
Area (strengthening teacher evaluation) was dropped because the evaluation process was considered to be
socially sensitive; and one new Policy Area (supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching and
learning continuity) was added to support the effectiveness of remote learning in the context of protracted
school closures. Even before the pandemic, Peru acknowledged the need to strengthen and expand the
supply of quality education. The need became even more acute with the onset of the pandemic.

Policy Area 7: Improving pre-service teacher training. This Policy Area supported a model of service
delivery to reform Teacher Training Institutes (IESPs), establishing minimum requirements aimed at raising
the quality of both existing and new education services, and closing the gap in service across schools served
by teacher graduates. The new model focused on: (a) establishing basic conditions for infrastructure and
availability of human resources, among others, as requirements for licensing IESPs; (b) regulating curricular
programs, classroom monitoring, collaboration agreements for the development of pre-professional teacher
practices, and research; and (c) identifying training needs of teacher trainers, responding to those needs, and
adapting their practices accordingly. Under DPF 1, PA 9 supported the development and approval by the
government, through MINEDU, of the model of service delivery to reform IESPs, including (i) implementation
of accreditation processes for IESPs to become higher-level Teacher Training Schools (EESPs); (ii) adhesion
to an updated curriculum; and (iii) implementation of a program of capacity building and in-service training for
teacher trainers. The new consolidated licensing system provides high standards to IESPs and EESPs,
aligned with standards applied to other higher education institutions. However, IT 4, identified under DPF 1
(the Borrower, through MINEDU, approves a normative framework to support the quality of IESPs and
EESPs) was dropped under DPF 2, as DPF 2 sought to focus on more outcome-oriented actions (ICR, p.
25). Pre-service training is an important channel through which teachers acquire skills needed to be effective
in the classroom. Evidence shows that high-performing education systems have selective, up-to-date, hands-
on pre-service training programs to prepare teachers before they enter the classroom. PA 9 made a
significant contribution to achievement of Objective 3 by upgrading standards for pre-service training
institutions. The relevance of PA 9 is thus Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 8: Enhancing teacher allocation. This Policy Area supported MINEDU in implementing a
yearly contest for accessing tenured positions. It helped the government improve its system for allocating
teachers to specific positions in schools, addressing constraints, including: (a) delays in job placement; (b)
lack of review and modification of staffing plans according to needs; and (c) difficulties in attracting teachers
to hard-to-staff schools, despite the existing incentive scheme. PA 10 (under DPF 1) prompted the approval
and implementation by the government of yearly contests for accessing tenured positions in public schools
for years 2020 and 2021, as mandated by Law No. 30747 of March 22, 2018. PA 11 (under DPF 2) prompted
the strengthening by the Borrower, through MINEDU, of the model of teacher attraction, hiring, and allocation,
including revisions to: (i) simplify the teacher contracting and allocation processes; and (ii) expand the

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 36
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



eligibility criteria for teacher contract renewal. These measures help reduce teacher vacancies, especially in
hard-to-reach schools. The increase in the frequency of teacher appointment evaluations, as well as
adjustments to the process of hiring contract teachers and renewing their contracts based on performance,
significantly contributed to Peru’s efforts to ensure the availability of qualified teachers in schools and to
reduce their turnover. The relevance of both PAs 10 and 11 is Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 9: Supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching and learning continuity. This
Policy Area was introduced under DPF 2 in response to prolonged school closures due to COVID-19. It
sought to address the urgent need for alternative teaching modalities to ensure learning continuity for all
children. Learning loss calculations by the World Bank estimated large impacts on children from the lowest
quintile, suggesting that a ten-month school closure could reduce learning by seven percent. This highlighted
the need to build a more resilient education system. PA 12 ensured the development and approval by the
government, through MINEDU, of: (i) the criteria for targeting beneficiaries of digital devices in the most
vulnerable areas; and (ii) the use of digital tools for curricular planning, support, and formative evaluation,
which complement teaching skills in the context of COVID-related school closures. PA 12, through Policy
Area 9, addressed a critical constraint—the need for teaching modalities to ensure learning continuity during
the pandemic—and made a significant contribution to this end by distributing digital equipment to students
and teachers in schools operating in vulnerable areas, thus improving their access to learning, and
contributing to the achievement of Objective 3. The relevance of PA 12 is therefore Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 10: Integrating education information services for improved teaching and learning. This
Policy Area supported MINEDU in establishing a common foundation for its various platforms that would
allow the integration of systems, including interfacing and data sharing. It was supported by the
government's commitment to improve digital and technology services across all sectors for its citizens. PA 13
(under DPF 1) supported the approval by the government, through the Prime Minister’s Office, of a law
establishing a framework for interoperability between information systems. Under DPF 2, this Policy Area
aimed to support MINEDU in its efforts to regulate the integration of existing and new information systems
across MINEDU directorates. To this end, PA 14 supported the approval by the government, through
MINEDU, of a Decree creating and defining standards for an integrated and interoperable system for human
resources management that would be maintained and used by MINEDU and decentralized education
management units. The contribution of PAs 13 and 14 to the creation of an integrated and interoperable
system allowed for more efficient and transparent management of human resources. Moreover, enhanced
digitalization of documents and data increase the resilience of the public sector to adverse climate-related
events that may result in data loss or disruption. PAs 13 and 14 addressed an important constraint to human
resources management and, through their support of Policy Area 10, made a significant contribution to
achievement of Objective 3. The relevance of each of these PAs is rated Highly Satisfactory.

Policy Area 11: Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support to teachers. This Policy Area
focused on providing support for teachers in the disciplines of institutional management (managerial positions
in schools and decentralized management offices) and teacher training. It sought to strengthen local and
regional support for these career tracks, provided by the Regional Education Directorates (DREs) and Local
Education Management Units (UGELs), which are mapped to regional governments and not directly to
MINEDU. PA 15, under DPF 1, prompted the establishment of a leadership position for each Rural
Education Network (REN) to promote merit-based leadership career path and to strengthen the system of
rural educational support nationwide.

It was originally envisaged that, under DPF 2, this Policy Area would help attract better-prepared candidates
to the managerial and teacher training career tracks by increasing selection standards, applying adequate

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



 instruments to evaluate required skills, strengthening pre- and in-service training, and providing opportunities
 for professional development. IT 8, as envisaged under DPF 1, sought to support the government through
 MINEDU, in implementing normative changes that would enable (a) strengthening of the career of public
 school and educational network principals; and (b) creating positions in the career path of teacher
 trainers. Planned changes included improvement in standards for the selection process, tenure, training, and
 professional development opportunities through differentiated roles in the career trajectory of principals and
 teacher trainers. However, IT 8 was modified under DPF 2 to conform with a new PA 16 that prompted the
 government, through MINEDU, to regulate the stages, criteria, and responsibilities for the use and
 management of the School Management Education Network Registry (REGES), including the provision of
 human resources to provide managerial and pedagogical support to education services, as mandated in the
 Vice-Ministerial Resolution 002-2020-MINEDU. The reforms supported by PAs 15 and 16 contribute to
 improving student learning outcomes by creating school leader positions and school networks that can
 allocate such positions, while also promoting the quality of teachers in MINEDU’s institutional management
 and teacher training tracks, increasing efficiency in their appointments, and strengthening support for
 teachers in the classroom. As such, these two PAs address the constraint of insufficient support of teacher
 career tracks and positions in the disciplines of management and teacher training, which are critical to the
 development and support of teachers’ (and schools’) effectiveness. They effectively contributed, through
 Policy Area 11, to the achievement of Objective 3. Therefore, the relevance of both PAs 15 and 16 is Highly
 Satisfactory.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Objective 1: Improve delivery of social protection and ECD services

RI 1 (percent of children under the age of 1 receiving prioritized ECD services when age appropriate in
prioritized areas) provided a solid measure of progress towards the achievement of Objective 1 and is directly
related to the adoption of measures under Policy Area 1, specifically PA 1 and PA 2, which supported the
design and implementation of a multi-sectoral results-based budgeting program for the delivery of ECD
services. The definition of the RI is clear (as detailed in the ICR, p. 12, footnote 13), the source of data is MIDIS,
and the data were routinely available. The relevance of the RI is rated Highly Satisfactory.

RI 2 (percent of children under the age of 1 entering JUNTOS during pandemic response expansion receiving
basic package of health services) and RI 3 (percent of children under the age of 1 entering Cuna Mas during
pandemic response expansion receiving family support services) provided good measures of progress towards
the achievement of Objective 1 and are directly related to the adoption under Policy Area 2 of PA 3, which
created a National Targeting System, and PA 4, which expanded coverage of the JUNTOS and Cuna Mas
programs to respond to the COVID pandemic. The definitions of RI 2 and RI 3 were clear (as detailed in the ICR,
p. 13, footnote 14 for JUNTOS and footnote 15 for Cuna Mas), the source of data is MIDIS/SINAFO, and the




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



data were routinely updated and available, supported by cross-sectoral institutional arrangements and the
interoperability structure of information systems. The relevance of the RIs 2 and 3 is Highly Satisfactory.

RI 4 (number of districts of prioritized areas with tools in place for territorial coordination and district monitoring
of an integrated package of prioritized ECD services, according to implementation phase) provided a reliable
measure of progress towards the achievement of Objective 1 and documented a direct outcome of PA 5, under
Policy Area 3, which supported institutional measures to monitor and coordinate the expansion of ECD
services. The definition of the RI is clear (as detailed in the ICR, p. 13, footnote 16), the source of data is MIDIS,
and the data were routinely updated and available, supported by cross-sectoral institutional arrangements and
the interoperability structure of information systems. The relevance of RI 4 is Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of care

RI 5 (monthly average share of total teleconsultations and inter-teleconsultations by SIS patients) provides
adequate measures of progress toward the achievement of Objective 2 and is directly related to PA 6, which
prompted the approval of financial coverage under SIS of remote health services under Policy Area 4. Tracking
of SIS patients’ usage of telemedicine provides a measure of the impact of PA 6 on vulnerable households. The
definition of the RI is clear (as presented in the ICR, p. 13, footnote 17). While not specified in the definition, this
ICR Review notes that the SIS covers vulnerable populations, specifically all uninsured members of Peru’s
population. The project team later confirmed that teleconsultations refer to remote medical consultations
between a health care provider and patient, while inter-teleconsultations are consultations between health care
providers about a patient case. The source of data was SIS, and the data were routinely updated and
available. Specifically, RI 5 performance is estimated directly from data provided by DIGITEL, which specifies in
its tracking of teleconsultations and inter-teleconsultations whether a patient belongs to SIS. The relevance of RI
5 is Satisfactory.

RI 6 (human resources gap as percentage of available human resources) provides a good measure of progress
toward the achievement of Objective 2 and is directly related to PA 7, under Policy Area 5, which approved
measures to optimize the supply of human resources for health, including agile contracting and extension of shift
duration, critical for improved health services access. The definition (as presented in the ICR, p. 14, footnote
17)—the difference between available and required full-time-equivalent human resources according to current
needs—is clear. The source of data is SIS, and the data were routinely updated and available. The relevance of
RI 6 is Satisfactory.

RI 7 (percent of eligible population registered in National Vaccination Registry) provided a solid measure of
progress toward the achievement of Objective 2. It is directly related to PA 8, under Policy Area 6, which
prompted the Borrower to approve the National Vaccination Plan against COVID-19, which identified and
prioritized groups of people for vaccination, created the National Vaccination Register, and implemented geo-
referenced monitoring systems. The definition of RI 7 (ICR, p. 15, footnote 19) was clear. The source of data
was the national civil registry/NVR, and the data were routinely updated and available. However, while RI 7
represents a significant step in monitoring vaccination coverage, it does not measure actual vaccination
coverage of the population in the register. The relevance of RI 7 is Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems

RI 8 (percent of graduates from licensed Teacher Training Schools [EESPs] taking and passing the examination
for entering the public teaching career) was a solid measure of progress towards Objective 3 and directly linked
to PA 9, which (under Policy Area 7) supported the reform, licensing, and accreditation of pre-service teacher


                                                                                                        Page 15 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



training institutions with a view to improving the quality and capacity of new teacher graduates. While the
definition of the indicator (as detailed in the ICR, p. 15, footnote 20) is clear, endline results are not fully
comparable to the baseline. The changes in the 2022 evaluation from the earlier (2015-2021) model place
greater emphasis on pedagogical evaluation and a new structure for evaluation of general abilities. The source
of data is MINEDU, and the data were updated following each examination. The relevance of RI 8 is Moderately
Satisfactory.

RI 9 (percent of vacancies in rural schools offered in the national context for entering the public teaching career
filled with tenured teachers) and RI 10 (percent of contracted teachers in rural areas in the previous year
renewing their contracts) provided appropriate measure of progress toward the achievement of Objective 3 and
were directly linked to PA 10, which approved yearly contests for assessing tenured positions in public schools,
and PA 11, which strengthened mechanisms for teacher attraction, hiring, and allocation with a focus on rural
areas. Together, PAs 10 and 11 helped reduce vacancies in teaching staff and improve the allocation of
teachers, especially in hard-to-staff schools, which were critical for achieving Objective 3. RIs 9 and 10 were
relevant, appropriate, and measurable, reflecting the impact of PAs 10 and 11. The definitions of these
indicators (ICR, pp 16-17, footnotes 21 and 22) are clear, and the source of data is MINEDU. The COVID-19
pandemic and political unrest caused delays in these interventions, which, in turn, delayed the updating of
data. Nevertheless, the RIs effectively captured the progress made in addressing teacher shortages in rural
areas and optimizing teacher allocation, contributing to the overall improvement of the education system in Peru
in general and to Objective 3 specifically. The relevance of RI 9 and RI 10 is Satisfactory.

RI 14 (percent of targeted students and teachers receiving tablets) was an appropriate indicator for measuring
progress towards the achievement of Objective 3 and was directly linked to an expected impact of PA 12, which
(under Policy Area 9) established criteria for providing teachers and students in the most vulnerable areas with
digital devices to facilitate remote learning, critical for improving access to education during the pandemic. It
tracked the share of targeted students and teachers selected to benefit from alternative teaching modalities to
ensure learning continuity, especially in vulnerable areas. The ICR (p. 19, footnote 24) defined the
denominator and provided considerable detail on the definition of the numerator, as well as different sets of
specific school- and individual-level criteria applied, respectively, for the targeting of teachers and for the
targeting of students. However, the indicator was defined at a highly aggregated level (with students and
teachers counted together in both the numerator and denominator). A disaggregation of data and trends, broken
down by students and teachers, and perhaps even further broken down by school- and individual-level
criteria, would have provided more insight and documentation of progress. Also, there was no RI to capture the
use of digital tools by teachers for curricular planning, support, and formative evaluation, also supported by PA
12. The ICR noted that RI 14 was updated regularly based on data from MINEDU. The relevance of RI 14 is
Moderately Unsatisfactory.

RI 11 (percentage of teacher employment records consistent between the staff allocation, staff payroll, and staff
trajectory databases) provided a good measure of progress toward reaching Objective 3 and documented a
direct outcome of PA 13 (establishment of a framework for the interoperability between information systems)
and PA 14 (establishment of standards for integrated human resource management system in the education
sector). The definition of the indicator (ICR p. 18, footnote 23) was clear, and the source of data is MINEDU,
which was updated regularly. The ICR (pages 37-38) noted that, in retrospect, the target of 100 percent was
overly ambitious, given the challenges of perfect synchronization across databases, ongoing staffing changes,
and potential lags in recording updates. Nevertheless, the RI effectively captured the substantial improvements
made in the consistency and integration of teacher employment records across the various databases. The
relevance of RI 11 is Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



RI 12 (percent of filled vacancies for managerial positions in all schools selected through merit-based evaluation
[Concurso de Acceso]) and RI 13 (percent of vacancies for managerial positions in rural schools selected
through merit-based evaluation (Concurso de Acceso) filled by female teachers) were adequate measures of
progress toward the achievement of Objective 3 and were directly linked to impacts of PA 15 and PA 16,
undertaken under Policy Area 11, which supported the creation of school leader positions and rural school
networks, while simultaneously promoting the quality of teachers in MINEDU’s institutional management and
teacher training tracks. The definitions of the indicators are clear, and the source of data is MINEDU. However,
the implementation of these interventions faced delays due to the COVID-19 pandemic and political unrest,
which consequently affected the timely updating of the data. The relevance of RI 12 and RI 13 is Moderately
Satisfactory.

Table 2. Results Indicators (RIs) by Objective and Prior Actions (PAs) – baseline and target values;
status and achievement

                                                                     Actual

                                                                     (date)
                                                 Baseline                                 RI
                                                            Target            Actual as
                      Associated RI                                                       Achieve-
Results Indicator                                                Most recent % of
                      PAs        Relevance (2018-                                         ment
                                                        (date) value          Target
                                           2019)                                          Rating
                                                                 available if
                                                                 not Target
                                                                 date
Objective 1: Improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development services
Policy Area 1: Establishing a multisectoral results-based budgeting program for ECD
                                                                 40.8 (2022)
                                                        DPF 1
                                                        Target:
                                                                 Results
RI 1: % children < 1                                    65                    63% of
                                                                 impacted by
receiving prioritized PA 1                              (2022)                original
                                              41.8               pandemic,
ECD services when                HS                                           target; 82% S
                                              (2018)             when the
age appropriate in    PA 2                              DPF 2                 of revised
                                                                 indicator
prioritized areas                                       Target:               target
                                                                 value
                                                        50
                                                                 dropped to
                                                        (2022)
                                                                 20% (2021)
Policy Area 2: Strengthening decision-making for ECD based on an integrated social protection
information system (DPF 1); changed to Expanding ECD programs to respond to the pandemic
(DPF 2)
RI 2: % children < 1
entering JUNTOS
during pandemic       PA 3
                                                        60                    131%
response expansion               HS           0 (2020)           78.8 (2022)              H
                                                        (2022)                achieved
receiving basic       PA 4
package of health
services.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                                                        DPF 1:
RI 3: % children < 1                                    60                     132% of
entering Cuna Mas                                       (2022)                 original
                                                                 79.1
during pandemic                                                                target;
                                    HS       0 (2020)                                      H
response expansion                                      DPF 2:                 141% of
receiving family                                                               revised
support services.                                        56                    target
                                                         (2022)
Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and
results
RI 4: # districts of
prioritized areas with                                   DPF I:
tools in place for                                                                       H
                                                         800                  42% of
territorial coordina-
                                                         (2022)               original
tion and district
                                                                              target;
monitoring of          PA 5      S           0 (2019)            333 (2022)
                                                         DPF II:              133% of
integrated package                                                                       (against
                                                                              revised
of prioritized ECD                                                                       revised
                                                         250                  target
services (according                                                                      target)
to implementation                                        (2022)
phase).
Objective 2 (introduced under DPF II): Increasing access to health services and ensuring
continuity of care
(New) Policy Area 4: Increasing access to health services
RI 5: Monthly ave %                                      DPF 2:
of total tele-
                                                                              170%
consultations &        PA 6      S           0 (2020) 50         85                      H
                                                                              achieved
interteleconsultations
by SIS patients.                                         (2022)
(New) Policy Area 5 (under DPF II): Improving health personnel deployment
                                                                              Target
                                                                              decline of
RI 6: Human                                  37.2        35.1                 2.1
resources gap as % PA 7          S                               31.5         percentage H
available HR                                 (2020)      (2022)               points
                                                                              271%
                                                                              achieved
(New) Policy Area 6 (introduced under DPF II): Establishing and monitoring nationwide
vaccination programs
RI 7: % eligible pop                                     98      100
                                                                              102%
registered in National PA 8      MS          0 (2020)                                    [H]
                                                                              achieved
Vaccination Registry                                     (2022)
Objective 3: Improving teacher management and professional development systems
Policy Area 7: Improving pre-service teacher training
RI 8: % graduates      PA 9      MS          12          DPF 1: 40            Original
from licensed                                                                 target
Teacher Training                             (2019)                           200%

                                                                                               Page 18 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



Schools (EESP)                                        20                 achieved;
taking and passing                                                       revised
examination (Prueba                                   (2022) Previous    target    [H]
Unica Nacional) for                                          RI8/DPF 1 222%
entering the public                                   DPF 2: (60% IESPs achieved.
teaching career.                                             submitting
                                                      18     licensing
                                                             application
                                                      (2022) by end-2021
                                                             with
                                                             application
                                                             reviewed
                                                             dropped in
                                                             DPF 2 b/c
                                                             target met.

                                                                 Changes in
                                                                 2022
                                                                 evaluation
                                                                 include
                                                                 greater
                                                                 emphasis on
                                                                 pedagogical
                                                                 evaluation &
                                                                 new structure
                                                                 for eval of
                                                                 general
                                                                 abilities
                                                                 compared to
                                                                 2015-2021.
Policy Area 8 (under DPF II): Enhancing teacher allocation
RI 9 (DPF 2): %        PA 10     S          22         Target    66              244%       H
vacancies in rural                          (2018)     (DPF 2)                   achieved
schools offered in the                                           (2024)
national context for                                   27
entering the public                                              Note:
teaching career                                        (2022)    Previous RI9,
Concurso de                                                      DPF 1 %
Nombramiento) filled                                             vacancies in
with tenured                                                     urban
teachers).                                                       schools
                                                                 offered in
                                                                 national
                                                                 contest for
                                                                 entering
                                                                 public
                                                                 teaching
                                                                 career filed

                                                                                                Page 19 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                                                                w/ tenured
                                                                teachers
                                                                dropped due
                                                                to delays
                                                                implementing
                                                                2022-23
                                                                Concurso
                                                                and intro of
                                                                RI 14 under
                                                                Policy Area
                                                                9.
RI 10 (DPF 2): %                                        Target
contracted teachers                                     DPF 2
                                              34                                         H
in rural areas in                                                             149%
                      PA 11        S                             73
previous year                                           49                    achieved
                                              (2019)
renewing their
contract                                                (2022)
(New) Policy Area 9 (added under DPF 2) Supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching
and learning continuity
RI 14, DPF 2: % of
                                              3.7       50
targeted students                                                             156%
                      PA 12        MU                            78.2                    [H]
and teachers                                                                  achieved
                                              (2021)    (2022)
receiving tablets
Policy Area 10 (DPF II): Integrating education information services for improved teaching and
learning
                                                                 97.8
RI 11: % teacher                                        100
employment records                                               Wording of
                      PA 13                   92
consistent between                                      (2022) RI modified 98%
                                   S                                                     S
the staff allocation,                                            slightly in  achieved
                      PA 14                   (2019)
staff payroll & staff                                   (DPF I & DPF 2 but
trajectory databases.                                   II)      not in
                                                                 substance.
Policy Area 11: Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support for teachers
                                                        DPF 1:
RI 12: % Filled                                                               Original   [H]
vacancies for                                 58        67                    target 94%
managerial positions                                             63           achieved;
selected thru merit-               MS         (2018)    (2022)                revised
based evaluation      PA 15                                      (2024)       target     (against
(Concurso de                                            DPF 2:                100%       revised
Acceso)               PA 16                                                   achieved. target)
                                                        63
RI 13 (DPF II): %                  MS         DPF I:    DPF I: 36             Original   [H]
vacancies for                                                                 target
managerial positions                          28        20       (2024)       180%
in rural schools                                                              achieved;

                                                                                             Page 20 of 36
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



    selected thru merit-                                     (2018)     (2022)                  revised
    based evaluation                                                                            target
    (Concurso de                                                                                133%
    Acceso) filled by                                                                           achieved.
    female teachers.                                         DPF II:    DPF II:

                                                             25         27

                                                             (2018)     (2022)

  Note: Achievement ratings in [brackets] denote ratings where efficacy ratings may be adjusted in Section 5 due
  to the relevance of the results indicator.



  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improving delivery of social protection and early childhood development services

               Rationale
               Policy Area 1: Establishing a multisectoral results-based budgeting Program for ECD

               DPF 1 supported the creation of the multisectoral RBB-ECD program, which relies on: (a) programmatic
               budget coordination and planning for all involved sectors and levels of governments; and (b) the allocation of
               resources to evidence-based interventions targeted to the poorest districts (quintiles 1 and
               2). Notwithstanding COVID-19-related delays in the full implementation of the RBB-ECD program in
               2020, ECD service packages were created for different populations. In 2021, MIDIS began defining the
               institutional arrangements, including: (a) the governance structure, a high-level committee of nine ministries
               involved in ECD service delivery, and technical committees charged with defining production lines and
               operational norms of services included in the RBB-ECD; (b) an agenda for progressive inclusion of cultural
               relevance in ECD services; and (c) interoperability mechanisms between ECD service databases and the
               National Household Registry for Social Programs (NHR). Under DPF 1, the government approved the
               regulation of Law No. 30435, which created the National Targeting System (SINAFO). The NHR integrates
               different household databases and uses the national identification card to create a comprehensive social
               registry. It provides the foundation for one of the pillars for the implementation of SINAFO. A complementary
               Bank-financed DPF (Strengthening Foundations for Post-COVID Recovery, P174440) supported the registry
               of households.




                                                                                                               Page 21 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



RI 1 was substantially achieved. The approval of the institutional arrangements for RBB-ECD and the
system interoperability structure has improved the cross-sectoral coordination of budget lines and timely
provision of ECD services. RI 1 set a target to increase the coverage of children under 1 year old with age-
appropriate, prioritized ECD services in prioritized areas from a 2018 baseline of 41.8 percent to 50 percent in
2022. Due to the COVID-19 lockdown, coverage actually dropped by half – to 20 percent – in 2021. As
COVID restrictions were lifted, coverage rebounded to 40.8 percent in 2022, a doubling of coverage in the
space of a year. The 82 percent achievement of the 50 percent target translates into substantial
achievement of RI 1. Moreover, projections presented in the ICR (p. 30) show that the program continues
on a recovery path, with coverage projected to surpass the 2018 baseline in 2023, assuming the current trend
continues. With Highly Satisfactory relevance of RI 1, the achievement rating is Substantial.

Policy Area 2: Expanding ECD programs to respond to the pandemic (previously: Strengthening
decision-making for ECD based on an integrated Social Protection Information System)

The poorest households in Peru were hit the hardest by COVID-19 impacts, especially loss of household
income, restrictions to mobility, and suspension of face-to-face social services. Some of these hardest-hit
households were not included among those regularly targeted by MIDIS’ programs, JUNTOS and Cuna Mas,
which provide early childhood services to the most vulnerable households in Peru. Under PA 4, the
government approved an expansion of coverage of these two programs for 12 months to mitigate COVID's
impact on a broader population. JUNTOS: (a) increased its poverty targeting criteria from districts with
poverty levels above 40 percent to 15 percent, accommodating the inclusion of poor households in urban
areas significantly impacted by the pandemic; (b) adapted its regular conditionalities on health to those critical
for child development under the age of one, including key vaccinations and iron supplementation; and (c)
accelerated the implementation of family support service to promote the use of health services for children
under 2 years of age (growth monitoring, check-ups, anemia screening), as services resumed. Cuna Mas: (a)
expanded coverage in already targeted districts; (b) launched implementation of a remote early stimulation
service with the suspension of in-person services in June 2020; (c) reorganized 25,000 volunteer community
actors into communication groups; and (c) implemented complementary communications strategies
(educational booklets, podcasts, videos, social media images) to promote cognitive and emotional child
development.

These actions culminated in high achievement of extended coverage targets during the pandemic response
by both programs. RI 2 was highly achieved. From a 2020 baseline of zero, 79 percent of all children under
the age of one who entered JUNTOS during the pandemic expansion received the basic package of health
services in 2022, exceeding the target of 60 percent (131 percent achievement). RI 3 was also highly
achieved. From a 2020 baseline of zero, 79 percent of all children under the age of one who entered Cuna
Mas during the pandemic response expansion received family support services, exceeding both the original
target of 60 percent and the revised target of 56 percent (respective achievements of 132 percent and
141 percent). Independent evaluations (Araujo et al., 2016; and Josephson et al., 2017) found that
participation in Cuna Mas had positive impacts on children’s nutrition, particularly a reduction in stunting and
anemia prevalence. They also found other impacts, including better cognitive and language skills and
improved socio-emotional development compared to those who did not participate. The focus of both RI 2
and RI 3 on children under one year of age was appropriate, given that early uptake of vaccines, iron
supplementations, and comprehensive services provided by Cuna Mas are key to achieving results in ECD.

Policy Area 3: Enhancing territorial coordination for effective delivery of ECD services and results



                                                                                                   Page 22 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



PA 5, under DPF 1, supported government approval of a Territorial Management Strategy to strengthen
territorial coordination of the delivery of prioritized services at district, regional, and national levels and
established a set of management tools including local coordination committees, district mapping, an updated
children’s registry, and district monitoring of service delivery. MIDIS undertook the implementation of this
strategy in three phases. The first phase established local coordination committees in all targeted districts by
2020. The second phase involved the development of district maps that geo-referenced service provision and
households with newborns. The third phase included the development of a monitoring system to track the
uptake of the ECD package by children through an updated children’s registry. An impact evaluation
(Macroconsult, 2023) documented improvements in service coverage thanks to improved territorial
coordination. The coverage of the integrated service package increased, with an increase of 2-3 percentage
points in the share of children with timely supplementation, mainly among municipalities that received training
and had a greater presence of other public ECD initiatives. The children’s registry saw an increase of 55
percentage points in children registered, and the share of children aged 6 months with hemoglobin dosage
rose by 22-32 percentage points. These findings provide strong indication that strengthened territorial
coordination has succeeded in enhancing the delivery of the integrated ECD service package.

RI 4 was highly achieved. From a 2019 baseline of zero, a total of 333 districts of prioritized areas had tools
in place for territorial coordination and district monitoring of the integrated package of prioritized ECD services
(according to the implementation phase) by the project’s end in 2022, exceeding the target of 250
districts. The original target of 800 set under DPF 1 was revised downwards to 250 under DPF 2 due to
setbacks caused by the pandemic.

With RI 1 substantially achieved, and RIs 2-4 highly achieved, achievement of this objective was fully
Satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increasing access to health services and ensuring continuity of care

Rationale
Policy Area 4: Increasing access to health services

With a view to ensuring access and continuation of health care services in response to COVID-19, the
government improved infrastructure and equipment and strengthened the capacity of human resources to
deliver health services through telemedicine. Moreover, thanks to PA 6, the government, through SIS,
approved the financial coverage of remote health services, including the monitoring of pregnant women,
neonates, and infants. Telemedicine services were adequate and timely, helping to ensure continuity of care,
reduce medical referrals, and overcome access barriers encountered during the pandemic and during future
shocks. The guarantee of universal access to telemedicine helped remove barriers to COVID-related mobility
restrictions and is poised to remove barriers to physical access in remote locations or in the event of disasters

                                                                                                    Page 23 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



that would obstruct mobility and health facilities’ operations. Financial coverage by SIS also ensures that
telemedicine is affordable even for the most vulnerable households.

RI 5 was highly achieved. From a baseline of zero in 2020, the monthly average percentage of total
teleconsultations and inter-teleconsultations by patients of SIS reached 85 percent in 2022, far exceeding
the target of 50 percent. The 50 percent target was already very ambitious, given the zero baselines of no
teleconsultations covered by SIS at the outset. In the year 2022, alone, a total of 553,980 teleconsultations
and inter-teleconsultations were covered by SIS. This significant increase in the use of telehealth services is
likely to have significantly supplemented foregone care due to fear of infection or mobility restrictions. Indeed,
several international studies (including Ganjali et al, 2022, cited in the ICR, p. 33) confirm the usefulness of
telemedicine for continuation of care during major disruptions such as pandemics. Beyond the significance of
PA 6 in contributing to the high achievement of RI 5, additional support and interventions by the
government also contributed to results achieved, particularly: the provision of equipment and training of
medical staff to strengthen telemedicine capacity, and efforts to increase demand, through communications
campaign and the development of a patient portal for easy access and follow-up on teleconsultations.

Policy Area 5: Improving health personnel deployment

As executed under PA 7, MINSA approved a regulation that allows for flexible adaptation of human resources
for health to sudden surges in demand for health care services. Specific measures approved included: (a)
the flexible hiring of medical professionals through the Administrative Services Contract regime; and (b) the
extension of shift duration for up to 12 hours for a maximum of eight shifts monthly, with adequate
compensation. These measures responded to the needs for increased access and continuity of services
during the pandemic. They will also be relevant and useful in the event of future outbreaks of infectious
diseases or natural disasters.

RI 6 was highly achieved. Thanks to PA 7, the human resource gap as a percentage of human resources
fell from 37.2 percent in 2020 to 31.5 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 35.1. The human resources
gap is a measure developed by MINSA that estimates the difference between available and required full-time
equivalent human resources, according to current needs.

Policy Area 6: Establishing and monitoring nationwide vaccination programs

RI 7: The government took immediate actions to make vaccination against COVID-19 a right for all of Peru’s
inhabitants. Under PA 8, MINSA approved the National Vaccination Plan against COVID-19 for universal
vaccination, which prioritized population groups according to their exposure and vulnerability to the virus
based on demographic, epidemiological, and occupational factors. It also approved the creation of the
National Vaccination Registry, which includes relevant information from different government entities allowing
for centralized monitoring of vaccination programs and strengthening capacity to respond to future diseases
and disasters. Guidelines for the implementation of real-time patient registration, location, and vaccination
information through web-based applications now feed into MINSA’s centralized monitoring systems, enabling
the tracking of vaccine distribution and application and contingency preparation to ensure vaccination
continuity in the event of any emergency.

RI 7 was highly achieved. From a 2020 baseline of zero, the government achieved 100 percent registration
of the eligible population in the NVR, exceeding the target of 98 percent. The NVR was built on data from
the national civil registry and the Superintendence of Migration, ensuring the inclusion of Peruvian residents
and eligible migrants. The full registration of the eligible population in the NVR was pivotal for achieving

                                                                                                   Page 24 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



COVID-19 vaccination rates close to 100 percent, allowing: the effective tailoring of its vaccination strategy;
the concentration of vaccination points in areas with large pockets of eligible populations; and adjustment of
strategies to accommodate the needs of specific groups, such as working adults. The correlation between
NVR coverage and actual vaccination coverage points to the effectiveness of the NVR in facilitating a
successful vaccination campaign. Although the relevance of RI 7 was rated Moderately Satisfactory because
it measured NVR coverage rather than actual vaccination coverage, indicating that the High achievement
rating should be downgraded by one step, the additional information provided by the ICR that actual
vaccination rates were nearly 100 percent merits the full high rating.

With the results of all three key RIs exceeding their targets, achievement of Objective 2 is rated Highly
Satisfactory.



Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improving teacher management and professional development systems

Rationale
Policy Area 7: Improving pre-service teacher training

As intended under PA 9, and carried out under DPF 1, the government approved a new model of service
delivery to reform Teacher Training Institutes (IESPs), including: (a) implementation of accreditation and
licensing processes to becoming Teacher Training Schools (EESPs); (b) adhesion to an updated curriculum;
and (c) implementation of a program of capacity building and in-service training for teacher trainers. Following
MINEDU’s approval of licensing guidelines, by January 2024 MINEDU had evaluated 42 licensing
applications of public and private IESPs, approved licenses for 36 of them, and issued guidance for closing
the remaining ones with denied licenses. MINEDU also approved 11 curricular programs (out of 14) for pre-
service training. In addition, MINEDU completed capacity building and in-service training for teacher trainers
and scheduled their performance evaluation for 2021. The government approved a National Policy for Higher
and Technical Education, which incorporates pre-service training offered by post-secondary non-university
institutions into the higher education system and sets the institutional framework with articulated standards
and governance for a nationwide post-secondary education system. MINEDU also approved: (a) a framework
to improve the admission process to EESPs, including definition of competencies, modalities of admission,
and an evaluation framework and tools for the admission process; and (b) a regulation for formative
evaluations of EESP students to assess and track their performance for adequate support and feedback.

RI 8 is assessed as substantially achieved, even though its target was surpassed. From a baseline of 12
percent, the share of graduates from licensed EESPs taking and passing examinations for entering public
teaching careers increased to 40 percent, exceeding the original target of 20 percent under DPF 1 and the
revised target of 18 percent under DPF 2. The ICR (pp. 35-36) stated, however, that this large increase
should be viewed with caution because the examination for entering public teaching underwent substantial

                                                                                                 Page 25 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



modifications in 2022 that challenge the comparability of 2022 endline scores to scores in prior years (2015-
2021). The updated model placed greater emphasis on pedagogical evaluation and introduced a new
structure for evaluating general abilities. With the relevance of RI 8 rated Moderately Satisfactory,
achievement of RI 8 is rated Substantial.

Policy Area 8: Enhancing teacher allocation

RIs 9 and 10: Under PA 10, the government approved the implementation of yearly contests for assessing
tenured positions in public schools for years 2020 and 2021, as mandated by Law No. 30747 of March 22,
2018. DPF 1 thus supported an increase in the frequency of teacher appointment evaluations from every two
years to every year, with the aim of eliminating delays in job placement for newly graduating teachers. Even
with this approval, the 2020 evaluation was postponed to 2021, due to the pandemic. In an effort to increase
the number of vacancies filled as a result of future evaluations, MINEDU also: (a) revised the teacher
allocation mechanism using evidence-based behavioral incentives to improve the system’s efficiency; (b)
increased the number of vacancies to which teachers can apply and the number of candidates interviewed by
schools; and (c) introduced a point system for junior teachers and incentives for hard-to-staff schools. In
addition, MINEDU stepped up its efforts to institutionalize, consolidate, and strengthen its evaluation system
to ensure long-term sustainability.

Under PA 11, executed under DPF 2, MINEDU approved regulations for two key mechanisms through which
schools are staffed: simplification of teacher contracting and allocation processes, and expansion of eligibility
criteria for teacher contract renewal. Revisions for hiring contract teachers included streamlining the
processes for contracting teachers according to teacher evaluation results and introducing special conditions
for hard-to-staff schools by allowing high-performing teachers to apply for these positions directly. MINEDU
also regulated the conditions allowing schools to renew contracts for well-performing teachers with detailed
responsibilities specified, respectively, for the ministry, its decentralized management units, and schools. The
regulations required a detailed schedule and overall requirements and conditions for the contract renewal
process, and a standardized tool to evaluate contract teachers’ performance adapted to the distance learning
modality. Schools and their evaluation committees are responsible for evaluating teachers’ performance and
renewing their contracts.

RIs 9 and 10 were both highly achieved, thanks to the comprehensive reforms introduced through PAs 10
and 11. The percentage of rural vacancies filled by tenured teachers through the national recruitment contest
(Concurso de Nombramiento) (RI 9) increased from a 2018 baseline of 22 percent to 66 percent in 2024, far
exceeding the target of 27 percent (244 percent achievement). This achievement resulted from the major
overhaul of the 2022 Concurso de Ingreso, which featured changes to test structure, scoring, vacancy
assignment, new process phases, and a substantially increased number of positions offered. The percentage
of contracted teachers in rural areas in the previous year renewing their contract (RI 10) more than doubled
from a 2019 baseline of 34 percent to 73 percent (149 percent achievement). This achievement was made
possible by the streamlined processes, expanded eligibility criteria, and standardized performance
evaluations for contract teacher renewals. PAs 10 and 11 strengthened and optimized Peru’s systems for
attracting, evaluating, and deploying teachers to rural areas.

(New) Policy Area 9, introduced under DPF 2: Supporting teacher adaptation to shocks for teaching
and learning continuity

In response to COVID-19 restrictions, MINEDU implemented a distance learning modality, Aprendo en Casa,
which delivered educational content through web, television, radio, and printed material. To address

                                                                                                   Page 26 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



inequities in access to remote learning, the government approved the procurement of tablets for students and
teachers. It also invested in training to ensure that teachers made full use of the technology and remote
learning strategies. PA 12, implemented under DPF 2, culminated in MINEDU approval of criteria for targeting
beneficiaries of digital devices in the most vulnerable areas, guiding the distribution of nearly 1.4 million
tablets based upon household income and surrounding conditions, including connectivity. The criteria aimed
to cover all rural students enrolled in Grades 4-11 from all quintiles, urban students from the lowest two
quintiles, and their teachers. These children were also among the most vulnerable to climate shocks. PA 12
also included MINEDU approval of a regulation establishing pedagogical orientations for the use of digital
tools for curricular planning, support, and formative evaluation, in the context of the new distance learning
modality. In complement to this policy, MINEDU launched virtual courses for remote teaching through a
national platform (PeruEduca), which provides free teaching resources, and implemented a 150-hour digital
skills training program for 130,000 of those slated to receive tablets.

RI 14 was highly achieved as formulated. From a baseline of 3.7 percent in 2021, the percentage of targeted
students and teachers receiving tablets increased to 78.2 percent in 2022, exceeding the target of 50 percent
(156 percent achieved). This result was due to the government's strong commitment to bridging the digital
divide and enabling continuous remote learning for the most vulnerable populations during the
pandemic. While remote learning cannot fully substitute for classroom instruction, especially for the
disadvantaged, their access to tables allowed for some continuity of learning and helped mitigate learning
losses. The ICR (pp. 39-40) cited a cross-country study finding that students with access to online resources
saw smaller losses in reading skills compared to those with no access (Donnelly and Patrinos, 2021). Peru’s
own assessments (MINEDU, 2022) also indicated less severe learning losses in schools that implemented
remote learning, enabled by the tablet distribution. The program’s focus on reaching rural and low-income
areas played a vital role in preventing a further widening of already deep educational inequities. However, the
relevance of the results indicator was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, as the RI did not disaggregate results
between teachers and students, and it did not capture use of digital tools by teachers for curricular planning,
support, and formative evaluation, also supported by PA 12. With these shortcomings in relevance of the RI,
achievement of RI 14 is rated Modest.

Policy Area 10: Integrating education information services for improved teaching and learning

Under DPF 1, PA 13 supported government approval of the Digital Government Law that establishes a
framework for the interoperability between information systems to improve digital and technology services
across all sectors. The law set the foundation for a digital government that builds on digital solutions to solve
problems, increase transparency and communications with citizens, and strengthen public service
provision. In compliance with this law, MINEDU set up a Digital Government Committee, under its Secretariat
of Strategic Planning, that led the formulation of MINEDU’s first Digital Governance Plan, detailing the
ministry’s availability of physical and human resources, digital and technology service goals, and projects to
be undertaken during 2020-2023. A diagnostic of the sector’s information systems identified human resource
management systems as among the most critical, given their scope and use. Under DPF 2, PA 14 supported
the creation and definition by MINEDU of standards for an education sector human resources management
system, which integrates information on staff allocation, payroll, and employment history into one system.

RI 11 was substantially achieved. From a 2019 baseline of 92 percent, 98 percent of teacher employment
records were consistent between the staff allocation, staff payroll, and staff trajectory databases by 2022,
substantially achieving the target of 100 percent. Despite not fully achieving the very ambitious target,



                                                                                                  Page 27 of 36
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



results achieved under RI 11 have contributed to enhanced efficiency and transparency in the management
of human resources in the education sector.

Policy Area 11: Strengthening managerial and pedagogical support to teachers

With DPF support, MINEDU adopted important measures to improve management careers for teachers,
including the implementation of merit-based selection, performance evaluations, and extensive training
programs for school management positions. Under DPF 1, PA 15 prompted MINEDU to introduce
improvements and standards in managerial, tenure, training, and professional development opportunities
through differentiated roles in the career paths of principals and teacher trainers. PA 15 introduced a new
merit-based tenured leadership position to track Rural Education Networks to address the low demand for
managerial positions in rural areas. MINEDU also approved a new position for administrative staff in rural
networks to provide support to participating schools, trained principals, piloted the program of Rural Education
Networks, and set targets to attract more women into these roles. These changes were expected to
contribute to reducing the gender gap in accessing managerial posts. MINEDU approved the reorganization
of small schools into school management educational networks, made up of five to ten small schools (under
140 students each), with the objective of staffing the network with a principal, vice-principal, administrative
staff, and school life coordinator. Implementation of these school management educational networks is
expected to be gradual (covering a 15-year horizon), reaching around 5,500 networks by 2037 (of which 85
percent will be in rural areas). Ultimately, this management structure is expected to consist of approximately
22,000 management staff who will have received specialized training and higher compensation due to
additional responsibilities. PA 16, under DPF 2, supported MINEDU’s regulation of the stages, criteria, and
responsibilities for the use and management of the School Management Education Network Registry,
including the provision of human resources to provide managerial and pedagogical support to educational
services, as mandated in Vice-Ministerial Resolution 002-2020-MINEDU. PA 16 represented a modification of
the original IT (noted in Table 1) to include improvements and standards for the selection process, tenure,
training, and professional development opportunities through differentiated roles in the career trajectory of
principals and teacher trainers. PA 16 defined clear tasks among MINEDU, its general directorates, and the
decentralized offices for registering and updating the REGES to request budget and determine which schools
will be allocated a leadership team. By 2021, MINEDU had piloted 186 education networks, all of which were
allocated the appropriate staffing budget as planned.

RI 12 was highly achieved. From a 2018 baseline of 58 percent, 63 percent of filled vacancies for
managerial positions in all schools were selected through merit-based evaluation (Concurso de Acceso) in
2024, fully achieving the target of 63 percent set under DPF 2. (The original target of 67 percent set under
DPF 1 was slightly lowered.) RI 13 was also highly achieved. The percentage of managerial positions in
rural schools selected through merit-based evaluation (Concurso de Acceso) filled by female teachers
increased from a 2018 baseline of 25 percent to 36 percent in 2024, greatly exceeding the target of 27
percent. (Although the relevance of both RI12 and RI 13 was rated Moderately Satisfactory due to lags in
data availability, the ICR was able to present updated results, such that achievement of these RIs is not
downgraded due to relevance.) These results were achieved following an effective communication campaign
targeted to female teachers, especially those participating in the Concurso, informing them of positions
available and how to submit applications online. These achievements are especially impressive, given that
the Concurso was delayed due to social unrest. The ICR noted that while the PAs under Pillar 3 contributed
to better learning outcomes and to improved resilience of the education system, volatility in teacher policies
arising from frequent changes in sector leadership, political unrest, and the need to adapt to shocks can



                                                                                                 Page 28 of 36
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



                  hinder their impact. Both sustainability and coherence of teacher policies are crucial for maximizing the
                  benefits of investments.

                  With one RI modestly achieved, two RIs substantially achieved, and four RIs highly achieved, achievement of
                  Objective 3 is Satisfactory.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With one objective rated Highly Satisfactory and two objectives rated Satisfactory, overall Efficacy is rated
Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Taking into consideration the DPF series’ Highly Satisfactory Relevance of Prior Actions and Satisfactory
Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy), the Overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The turnover of ministers and key staff posed challenges in reaching consensus on policy priorities, but
the World Bank’s experience in Peru has shown that DPF-supported policies under two prior human
development-related DPLs have had substantial continuity in implementation. The ICR (p. 44) asserted that the
DPF instrument has proven to be extremely effective in supporting Peru’s human development policies. While

                                                                                                                   Page 29 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



initial agreement requires dialogue and consensus-building, once policies are adopted and yield results, they are
likely to be sustained, especially in human capital development. Macroeconomic risks are minimal, as Peru has
consistently allocated necessary resources for its social programs, and overall macroeconomic management
and prospects remain strong. In addition, the objectives supported under the DPF series benefit from ongoing
support under complementary Bank-financed operations and/or analytical advisory services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The DPF series was underpinned by extensive analytical work, specific to Peru and more general in
nature, and related policy dialogue. The World Bank studies specific to Peru included: (a) the Public
Expenditure Review (2017); (ii) Standing Tall: Peru’s Success in Overcoming Its Stunting Crisis (2017); (c) Peru
– Building on Success: Boosting Productivity for Faster Growth, Flagship Report (2015); and (d) Peru – Human
Development Flagship: Evaluating Education Incentive and Reform (2019), among others. Consultations with
various stakeholders and ongoing policy dialogue, particularly on the policy areas supported under the DPF,
helped foster government ownership and the continuation of the reform process.

The design also drew on relevant lessons from prior operations. Previous social protection operations had
contributed to improved demand and supply of nutrition and preventive health services, strengthened targeting
and M&E of social inclusion policies and programs, improved social program performance, and strengthened the
institutionalization of MIDIS stewardship and coordination roles. Education sector support helped scale up
national and international student assessments, school principal selection and training, and the design of
teacher evaluations. Relevant Bank-supported operations included: (a) Boosting Human Capital and Productivity
DPF-DDO (P156858); (b) Basic Education Project Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) (P123151); (c) Higher
Education Quality Improvement (P122194); (d) Social Inclusion DPL (P131028); (e) Social Inclusion Technical
Assistance Loan (P131029); (f) Results in Nutrition JUNTOS SWAp (P117310); and (g) Results and
Accountability DPF (P101086) (ICR, p. 42).

The original Program Document clearly states the lessons learned from the Bank’s previous engagements in
Peru and other upper middle-income countries, which were considered to be essential for achieving the results
of the DPF series. The lessons pointed to the importance of: (a) seeking strong government ownership by
supporting policy initiatives directed to high-priority issues and supporting systemic change; (b) reinforcing the
consolidation and continuity of the recent reform agenda, helping the government signal commitment to critical
reform pillars; (c) investing in strong and cross-sectoral safety nets that prevent the most vulnerable (in most
cases, children) from having their livelihoods and future opportunities affected by external shocks; (d) investing
in local government capacities, needed to ensure coordination of services at the district level; and (e) providing
analytical support developed through long-standing engagement (including the above-cited Human
Development Flagship report and public expenditure reviews).

Individual risks were properly assessed, but the overall Moderate rating of risks may have been
underestimated, since risks associated with the political situation, governance, sector strategy and
policy, institutional capacity for implementation, and sustainability were all rated as

                                                                                                     Page 30 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



Substantial. Mitigation of risks was largely appropriate, as it was grounded in the extensive and ongoing
experience of the Bank engaging in Peru’s social sector policy processes and reform. The ICR (pp. 42-43)
noted that the risk of high turnover of ministers and key staff was properly raised and came to pass, though
there was little the Bank could do to mitigate this risk, which did pose a burden on the implementation support
team.

Alignment of the DPF series with support provided by Peru’s other development partners and by the
Bank’s pandemic response in Peru was achieved through broad consultations. Consultation with the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) ensured that structural reforms were in line with sound macroeconomic
management and responded to the government's financial needs. DPF 1 preparation included consultations with
the following (noting their areas of support): (a) the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB, higher education
and a reform program to increase productivity); (b) UNICEF, in partnership with Canada (adolescents’ rights,
social inclusion, and secondary education access); (c) World Food Programme (Adaptive Social Protection
Strategy); and (d) UNICEF (JUNTOS and Cuna Mas/ECD, first 1,000 days of life). Multiple partners came to
support Peru’s human capital development and response to COVID-19. During DPF 2 preparation the Bank
team coordinated with: (a) the IMF, which provided a two-year Flexible Credit Line arrangement equivalent to
US$11 billion, and (b) the IDB, which was preparing a contingent budget support operation of US$600 million to
protect vulnerable populations in areas complementary to DPF 2.

The Bank’s pandemic response in Peru included analytical support and technical assistance on distance
learning and health surveillance and a cross-sectoral DPF (Strengthening Foundations for Post COVID-19
Recovery/P174440), which supported the crisis response for the most vulnerable and macroeconomic stability
for long-term inclusive growth. Additionally, complementary operations were being prepared, including: (a) an
education project to strengthen distance and hybrid learning capacity; (b) a health project to strengthen
epidemiological surveillance, public health emergency preparedness, and detection; and (c) a social protection
project to support integrated ECD service delivery at the local level.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

During implementation, and especially in response to COVID-19, the Bank continued its practice of
coordinating with Peru’s development partners supporting human development and the delivery of key
social services and with other World Bank teams preparing COVID response operations. Indeed, the
Bank team prepared DPF 2 under challenging circumstances. Its daunting task of providing immediate
assistance to support Peru’s pandemic response efforts was further complicated by the difficult political situation
in the country at that time, especially the significant turnover in MINEDU of leaders at the highest levels and
other critical staff. Obtaining consistent positions from the different teams posed a challenge to the finalization of
the Policy Matrix for DPF 2.

Adjustments to the Policy Matrix under DPF 2, introduced at the levels of objectives, policy areas, PA,
RIs, and targets, were appropriate responses to COVID-19 and to the difficult political situation and high

                                                                                                       Page 31 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



staff turnover. The COVID-19 pandemic was unanticipated at the time of DPF 1 design. Staff turnover,
however, had been identified as a risk at the time of DPF 1 design. The risk mitigation perspective on high
turnover proved to be accurate. First, DPFs have been important in ensuring continuity in policies, as evidenced
by two prior Human Development DPLs, and this could be expected to continue under DPF 2 even in a
challenging political environment. Second, two recommended measures were implemented and did mitigate the
risk of a breakdown in continuity of policies and reform: (1) maintaining an ongoing open dialogue with client
institutions to ensure awareness and commitment to the proposed operation; and (2) ongoing provision of
technical assistance for implementation. The project team clarified that the Bank team remained in close
coordination with government counterparts during the preparation of DPF 2. Adjustments to the DPF 2 Policy
Matrix are itemized in Tables 1 and 2 of this ICRR.

The World Bank undertook regular monitoring of performance against targets under the DPF series
through the production of three Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and detailed Aide-
Memoires reporting on implementation support missions. The ISRs rated PDO and Implementation
Progress as Satisfactory in the first two ISRs. The third ISR downgraded these ratings to Moderately
Satisfactory due to a lag in progress under Objective 2. The ISRs were results-oriented, providing updates on
the progress towards the achievement of RI targets, made possible by regular updating of results data. A final,
multi-sectoral implementation support mission undertaken in late 2021 worked with the government to update
data and document further progress.

Strong Bank engagement proved to be vital for facilitating course corrections and maintaining
continuity in the face of changing contexts and leadership turnover. Despite numerous changes in key
ministries alongside the broader disruptions caused by the COVID-19 crisis, the World Bank team's diligent
engagement, including detailed implementation status reports, aide-memoires, and close coordination with
government counterparts, enabled the identification of bottlenecks, adaptation of action plans, and sustained
progress towards objectives amidst an evolving situation.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The DPF series focused on Peru’s most relevant human development challenges, supported by robust analytical
work and complementary operations. Despite political and governance risks that materialized, the Bank team
successfully navigated the complex environment, particularly during DPF 2 preparation, in the face of the
COVID-19 pandemic and changes in government staffing. The DPF series achieved its objectives,
demonstrating the World Bank’s ability to maintain focus on key development challenges, provide technical
expertise, and adapt to changing circumstances during a difficult period for the country.


Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                  Page 32 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Despite recent progress, poverty remained high, with significant disparities in development outcomes. Objective
1 aimed to improve the prioritization, targeting, monitoring, and delivery of ECD and related social programs,
which were expected to have positive effects on poverty and equity of access to these services. These
measures focused on young children from disadvantaged groups. The implemented measures likely played a
role in the 5.8 percentage point reduction in poverty among rural children under the age of five in 2021,
compared to 2020. This progress was partially offset by a 3.1 percentage point increase in poverty in 2022 due
to social unrest and political instability.

The reforms under Objective 3 were expected to have a long-term impact on poverty reduction by supporting
better quality education for poorer groups and schools in rural areas. The share of teachers in rural schools with
a university degree in teaching rose to 36.3 percent, a 1.3 percentage point increase over 2020, a promising
step in improving educational quality in rural settings. Moreover, the share of rural students successfully
completing high school reached 68.8 percent in 2022, 8.5 percentage points higher than in 2020. Improved
educational outcomes prompted by these reforms improve the income-earning capacity of students, especially
those attending disadvantaged schools in rural areas. The labor income (in US$ PPP 2017) in rural areas is
3.61 percent higher in 2022 than before the pandemic.

While the pandemic led to a significant increase in poverty in 2020, the expansion of the JUNTOS and Cuna
Mas programs aimed to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on young children and vulnerable
populations. World Bank estimates suggest that in the absence of the government's swift response, rural poverty
would have surged by an additional 5.5 percentage points (World Bank, 2023). Reforms under Objective
2 aimed to increase access to health services and continuity of care, especially for poor and vulnerable groups
in disadvantaged areas. (The vaccination program provided benefits to the entire population.) During 2020-
2022, the share of the poor population with health insurance increased from 79.6 to 88.3 percent. PA 12
targeted teachers and students, particularly those attending schools in disadvantaged areas that lacked access
to technology for distance learning. The share of secondary rural schools with access to the internet increased
from 51.7 percent in 2020 to 60.2 percent in 2022.



b. Environmental

The DPF was not expected to have any environmental, forest, or natural resource impacts. The PAs, especially
those introduced under DPF 2, are expected to have positive impacts, since the activities supported will be
relevant in the event of any climate-related or natural disaster emergency.



c. Gender

The DPF series contributed to the promotion of gender equality and to the creation of a more inclusive
environment for women in the education and social sectors. Improved information systems for ECD facilitated

                                                                                                   Page 33 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



increased investment and monitoring in programs benefiting pregnant women and mothers. The expansion of
daycare services for children aged 6-36 months through Cuna Mas enabled the participation of more women in
the labor force. The share of female principals leading rural schools increased from 25 percent in 2018 to 36
percent by 2024, attributable to PA 15, which introduced merit-based selection processes and targets to attract
more women into these roles. Professional development opportunities and enhanced support services
strengthened skills and career prospects of the teaching force, 70 percent of which is female. This progress
notwithstanding, significant gender gaps persist, with female labor force participation and income levels still
lagging behind their male counterparts in 2022. Sustained efforts to promote gender parity across all sectors
remain crucial.



d. Other

While the DPF series did not articulate a specific institutional strengthening objective, a number of PAs
supported reforms that would impact the institutional structure, responsibilities, efficiency, and processes of
government agencies. Improvements in information management systems that support more effective and
efficient allocation and use of resources for delivery of key social services, and a more strategic allocation of
teachers and health workers, are among the most notable institutional strengthening achievements.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

Quality of Evidence. The relevance of 13 of the 14 RIs was assessed to be in the Satisfactory range. The
RIs were based on data from reliable sources in government (mostly from sector ministries and cross-sectoral
targeting and information systems), which were updated on a regular basis. The ICR also cited other relevant
sources appropriately to strengthen the evidence base. The ICR's Annex 3, “Borrower Comments,” is included in
the Table of Contents, but the text in Annex 3 does not contain any comments, detailed or summarized, from the
Borrower. Such comments would have contributed to the richness of the ICR’s evidence and analysis.

Quality of analysis and outcome orientation were strong. The evidence was systematically presented and
assessed, following the program logic (or results chain), clearly linking the prior actions (and their impacts),
under each of the policy areas, to the objectives, in terms of how the PAs contributed to outcomes. Assessments
of relevance and efficacy were well developed and substantiated. The ICR was systematic and comprehensive
in presenting, and then analyzing, a complex DPF series, covering a range of sectors, and substantially adjusted
in light of COVID and political tensions. Matrices, and changes thereto, were clearly laid out, accompanied by a
strong narrative of progress and results in the face of unfolding challenges. The ICR’s analysis also deftly wove
into the narrative the Bank’s long experience and rich lessons associated with its support of the social sectors in
Peru.

Quality of lessons. The ICR provided salient, insightful lessons drawn directly from the experience of this DPF
series that would be extremely useful to Bank teams and countries attempting to design and implement a human
capital development DPF series in a middle-income country.

Outcome orientation. The ICR was sufficiently outcome oriented.


                                                                                                      Page 34 of 36
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



Consistency with guidelines. The structure and ratings in ICR indicate coherence with the ICR guidelines and
methodology.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The design of flexible programs with adaptable components, contingency plans, and well-defined, multi-
sectoral coordination mechanisms is crucial for an effective response to shocks and integrated service
delivery. The adjustments made in DPF 2 and the establishment of formal coordination structures demonstrated
the importance of building flexibility and accountability into program design, enabling agile responses to crises
and ensuring effective implementation across sectors and levels of government.

Temporarily expanding safety net programs and incorporating remote service delivery models can
effectively mitigate adverse impacts on poverty and human capital during crises. The targeted expansion
of programs like JUNTOS and Cuna Más to new geographic areas and beneficiary groups provided a successful
means of extending social assistance to households affected by income loss, job losses, and mobility
restrictions during the pandemic. Having pre-existing targeting systems and programs in place provides a solid
foundation for such crisis response expansions.

Incorporating telemedicine and remote service delivery models can enhance access to services and
ensure continuity of care during mobility restrictions or shocks. The inclusion of telemedicine under the
SIS insurance mechanism allowed for the continuation of preventive and chronic care. Leveraging technology
like tablets and training teachers in alternative delivery methods enabled remote alternatives when in-person
services were disrupted, helping to maintain service continuity during crises. These delivery models are
particularly crucial for disadvantaged populations in remote areas who would otherwise be disproportionately
affected. The provision of tablets to teachers and students in disadvantaged areas is a critical step in ensuring
their access remote service delivery models.

Development Policy Financing is a powerful tool for policy dialogue, achieving continuity in challenging
policy areas, and securing key reforms in human development by engaging the Ministry of Finance. The
DPF series in Peru demonstrated the effectiveness of this instrument in supporting critical reforms, maintaining


                                                                                                    Page 35 of 36
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Human Capital (P170477)



focus on human capital development objectives, and ensuring the prioritization and sustainability of investments,
even amidst political volatility and the COVID-19 pandemic. By aligning the DPF's objectives with the
government's broader development strategies and securing the support of the Ministry of Finance, the program
was able to leverage budget allocations and institutional commitments necessary for implementing and scaling
up critical reforms in social protection, health, and education. The DPF's focus on policy actions and results,
along with the provision of technical expertise and implementation support, enables sustained engagement and
progress in complex policy environments.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 36 of 36
