     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024135

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P153702                                   REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                Poverty and Equity


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1120                                31-Dec-2021                                         36,376,805.26

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Apr-2016                              31-Oct-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,500,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             40,500,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                         40,074,622.62                                            0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by               ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Sarosh Sattar                Vandana Chandra           Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA) (Schedule 1, p. 5) and the Program Appraisal Document
   (PAD) (p. 6), the Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Regional Program to Harmonize and
   Modernize Living Conditions Surveys Project is "to support the West African Economic and Monetary Union
   (WAEMU) Commission at strengthening the capacity of its member countries to conduct living conditions
   surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards and to make the collected micro-data publicly accessible."



                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



   For the purpose of this review, the PDO is parsed into two objectives, reflecting distinct results chains:

   PDO1: To support the WAEMU Commission at strengthening the capacity of its member countries to conduct
   living conditions surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards.

   PDO2: To strengthen the capacity of the WAEMU member countries to make the collected-micro-data publicly
   accessible.

   Note: The eight WAEMU member countries covered by this ICRR are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d’Ivoire,
   Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-May-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   To achieve the PDO, the project was structured to deliver results through two components (FA, Schedule
   1): (a) Capacity building and survey harmonization and modernization through data collection and
   dissemination; and (b) quality control and coordination. The project implementing entity (PIE) was the
   WAEMU Commission.

   Component 1: Capacity building and survey harmonization and modernization through data collection and
   dissemination (Approved: US$36.3 million; Disbursed: US$36.9 million) contained the following activities.

         i. Implementing a program of national and regional training events in WAEMU Member Countries with
             a view to: (i) designing, testing and adopting a set of modernized and harmonized living conditions
             survey tools, including, inter alia, appropriate questionnaires, manuals and protocols (for sampling,
             data collection, consistency checks, cleaning, compilation of consumption and income aggregates,
             setting of poverty lines, and calculation of core living standard statistics); (ii) testing and adopting
             computer assisted personal interviews for data collection; (iii) reviewing sampling methods; and (iv)
             strengthening PIEs' capacities for data analysis, archiving and dissemination of micro-data.
         ii. Implementing: (i) phase 1 of the harmonized living conditions survey in each WAEMU Member
             Country; and (ii) phase 2 of the harmonized living conditions survey in each WAEMU Member
             Country, all with a view to compiling a regional database with comparable national data sets.
        iii. Strengthening PIEs' capacities for preparation and implementation of phases 1 and 2 of the
             harmonized living conditions surveys and for processing and analysis of collected national data sets,
             all through the provision of technical advisory services.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



  Component 2: Quality control and coordination (Approved: US$4.2 million; Disbursed: US$3.6 million)
  contained the following activities:

       i. Supporting (i) the preparation of a draft regulation for the harmonization of living conditions surveys
           in WAEMU Member Countries; and (ii) establishment and operationalization of a WAEMU joint
           donor coordination mechanism for implementation of harmonized living conditions surveys, all
           through the provision of technical advisory services and training.
       ii. Strengthening: (i) partnerships between data producers and data users in WAEMU Member
           Countries with a view to promoting analysis and utility of, inter alia, said micro-data; and (ii)
           statistical training curricula in regional institutions, all through the provision of training to statistics
           students and staff from regional and international statistics institutions and research centers.
      iii. Supporting independent and peer quality reviews of said national data sets

  Strengthening the capacity of the WAEMU Commission for implementation, coordination and management
  of Project activities and results, all through the provision of technical advisory services, non-consulting
  services, operating costs, training and acquisition of goods for the purpose.

  Changes during implementation:

  One restructuring was approved on May 24, 2021, to address the 15-month delay of the start of project
  activities. The delay was due to the unfilled position of the President of the WAEMU Commission. The two
  main changes to the original project as a result of the restructuring were:

         (i) the project closing date was extended by 22 months from December 31, 2021, to October 31,
          2023.
         (ii) Reallocation of budget between Components 1 and 2. The project costs for activities under
          component 1 increased from $36.3 million to US$36.9 million to cover the additional costs (e.g.,
          health care supplies to project enumerators) accrued due to COVID-19. Costs for the second
          component decreased from US$4.2 million to US$3.6 million.

  The following changes were made to the PDO indicator and one intermediate indicator during restructuring
  (ICR, paras. 15-16):

   Indicator                                                                                    Revised Indicator
   PDO: Adoption by the WAEMU's Council of Minister of a ruling committing all member           PDO: Submission by th
   countries to apply WAEMU living conditions survey standards with respect to methodology, countries to apply WAE
   contents and periodicity.                                                                    contents and periodicit
   Intermediate Indicator: Living conditions survey that have been subject to quality review by
                                                                                                Living conditions surve
   peers and by independent external parties.

e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The program was approved on April 6, 2016, and became effective three months later, on July 8, 2016. The
  Mid-Term Review was conducted on November 25, 2019. The original closing was December 31, 2021.
  The Program was restructured on May 24, 2021, to (i) change the Results Framework, (ii) change the loan
  closing date, (iii) reallocation between disbursement categories, (iv) change in implementation schedule,
  and (iv) other changes. The actual closing occurred on October 31, 2023.



                                                                                                             Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



   The original project cost remained at US$40,500,000. This amount excluded borrower contributions. The
   Borrower/Recipient originally committed to providing US$1.5 million (3.7 percent) of the total program cost.
   As this amount was revised to zero, there was no counterpart funding. However, according to the PAD (p.
   10), “the WAEMU Commission contributes in kind to the financing of coordination activities (component 2.4)
   inter alia by designating a project coordinator, other staff (procurement; statisticians).” Although the financial
   contribution amount changed, the borrower provided in-kind contributions.

   The project was financing with a grant from the International Development Association (IDA). The grant was
   for Special Drawing Rights (SDR) 29.4 million (US$40.5 million equivalent). The payment currency was in
   Euros. The final amount disbursed was US$40,074,623. This was due in part to underspending caused by
   recruitment delays, exchange rate gains, and fewer activities and missions due to the COVID-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
With 46 million people in the eight WAEMU member countries living below the international poverty line in
2016 (US$1.90 per person per day in 2015 PPP), the extreme poverty rate was close to 40 percent. The
WAEMU member countries had a population of 116 million at the time of project appraisal in 2016. Except
Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, and Senegal (which are lower-middle-income countries), the other five countries are
low-income economies faced continued insecurity in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger that had spread to the
northern parts of Benin, Côte d’Ivoire, and Togo. In addition to extreme poverty, countries grappled with
huge development challenges such as high under-five and maternal mortality, low primary school
enrollment rates, poor access to electricity etc., as well as high regional disparities. The WAEMU member
states had poverty reduction as an overarching goal but lacked good household-level data to monitor and
identify the drivers and trends in poverty and other socio-economic development indicators. Reducing
poverty in a setting with multiple challenges required informed policy making which, in turn, was dependent
on reliable poverty statistics and other socio-economic data generated from household surveys.

Low financing and inconsistent design of household surveys had led to data gaps and difficulty in
comparing poverty indicators over time. National Statistics Offices (NSOs) had been conducting household
surveys for many years, some of them for more than 30 years at the time of this operation’s appraisal. But
the surveys, were not conducted regularly and resulted in data gaps. In addition, the design of the surveys
varied, making it difficult to produce consistent poverty trends. While comparability over time was difficult, it
was even more challenging across countries. The data produced was poorly disseminated, leading to low
usage. This regional project was designed to address these issues.

The WAEMU member countries suffered from weak statistical systems in 2016. The average overall score
of the Statistical Performance Index was 48.1 which fell in the second lowest quintile globally and was only
slightly above the low-income country average of 45.4. WAEMU’s member country scores ranged from 32.3
for Guinea-Bissau to 53.6 for Niger. The timing of the project was appropriate since the World Bank, the
WAEMU Commission and the member countries were aligned on the need to harmonize and improve
household statistics.

Relevance to WBG’s priorities


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



The weaknesses in the statistical systems of the WAEMU members were highlighted as obstacles to
development in the respective Country Partnership Strategies (CPSs) and/or Interim Strategy Notes. Thus,
this project was well aligned with the priorities identified by the Bank for each of the countries. The ICR
(para. 5) notes various examples taken from the CPSs such as:

      Benin CPS FY13–17 (Report No. 75774-BJ) “identifies, under the component on Governance and
       Public Sector Capacity, the need to provide technical assistance (TA) and capacity building to the
       Institut National de la Statistique et de l’Analyse Economique (INSAE).”
      Niger CPS FY13–16 (Report No. 76232-NE) “identified the need to support the INS to boost
       capacity in the collection of quality living conditions survey data and monitoring of service delivery.”
      Mali CPF FY16–19 (Report No. 94005-ML) “highlighted the need to improve the quality of statistics
       and to invest in a household survey program.”

The project would contribute to filling the data gap leading to corporate requirements of the World Bank
(WB) analytical work which could have not been done without those data, including poverty assessments,
poverty and vulnerability maps, Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA), Commitment to Equity and
Gender assessments, and Country Climate and Development Reports (CCDRs).

The choice of the IPF instrument was appropriate as it served as a channel for global knowledge transfer
and TA to build national statistical capacity in these eight countries. The project addressed critical gaps in
the statistical system through its two components: (i) capacity building and improved living conditions
survey quality for better data collection and dissemination, and (ii) quality control and coordination through
improved regulations encouraging data harmonization, better donor coordination, development of regional
statistics training programs, and strengthened relationship between producers and users of data. The PAD
noted that international good practice had shown the importance of combining technical assistance (know
how) with survey design and implementation, and data collection, archiving, and dissemination (outputs) —
thus, following a “learning by doing” approach.

The regional approach to the project was appropriate as it had the advantage of scale and efficiency, in
terms of (i) delivering training and capacity building in the areas of data collection, processing, archiving,
and dissemination for living condition surveys; (ii) improving harmonization of surveys and poverty
measurement across WAEMU; and (iii) opportunities for financial sustainability through pooling resources.
These activities were fundamental to strengthening statistics institutions, creating a professional statistics
community, encouraging peer-to-peer learning, and increasing demand for data.

Relevance to WAEMU development agenda

The direct recipient of this project was the WAEMU Commission which would use the project to
advance regional integration in West Africa and improve statistics. The project was aligned with the
WAEMU regional statistical program (2015–2020) which had four axes: (a) consolidate gains realized in
statistical harmonization; (b) improve statistics related to trade; (c) improve social statistics, particularly
household surveys; and (d) strengthen coordination among member countries and with regional and
international bodies (PAD, para. 17). This project supported the realization of three of the four axes
(excluding improving trade-related statistics).




                                                                                                         Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



               The project was important for the WAEMU Commission since it was seeking: (i) to extend the scope of
               social statistics to poverty issues to facilitate better information for the design of future regional policies; and
               (ii) to conduct regional poverty analysis.

               The project was relevant to WAEMU member countries’ National Statistical Development Strategies
               (NSDSs) and/or national development plans which were aligned with the post-2015 development agenda.
               These strategies and plans included poverty reduction as a priority but member governments lacked the
               necessary data to inform the implementation of development plans and policies. As an example, the Plan
               Senegal Emergent (2014-2019) had poverty reduction as one of its pillars and intended to achieve this
               objective by promoting human capital and investing in social protection programs. In Cote d’Ivoire, the Plan
               National de Développement (2016-2020) emphasized human development as one of the goals to becoming
               an emergent country. Moreover, all the countries adhered to the post-2015 development agenda to end
               poverty in all its forms, among other goals. To better inform those policies, countries indicated the desire to
               break the cycle of low comparable poverty and socioeconomic statistics, but doing so on a country-by-
               country basis had proven to be difficult. The data generated by the project would facilitate the WAEMU
               countries to monitor progress they were making in attaining the Sustainable Development Goals and other
               socioeconomic indicators.

               The regional project led by a regional body such as the WAEMU Commission, which already had
               experience in harmonizing price, national accounts and financial statistics had a better chance of success.
               Improving statistical capacity, data quality, availability and dissemination of data at the country-level was
               also important in WAEMU. A regional approach to improving socio-economic statistics was considered a
               viable alternative, especially due to the progress that was achieved regionally in harmonizing national
               accounts and financial statistics.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the WAEMU Commission in strengthening the capacity of its member countries to conduct living
                             conditions surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (TOC) for this objective held that the WAEMU Commission and member countries were
                             facing four main challenges: (i) irregular household surveys leading to socio-economic data gaps, (ii)
                             inconsistent survey design leading to lack of comparability of poverty data over time and across countries, (iii)
                             absence of important data dimensions that limited relevance of data produced for policy, and (iv) low access



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



to micro data restricting their use in research which, in turn, could lead to improved survey design, and (v) low
institutional capacity and limited human resources.

The vision was to put in place the foundations of a new system of timely, comprehensive, high-quality, and
accessible household surveys that met harmonized, regional standards.

The strategy focused on capacity building (for NSOs and schools of statistics) in WAEMU member countries.
The TOC identified that activities such as the harmonization of survey and data processing methodologies at
all stages; launching living conditions surveys; making data accessible; and modernizing and increasing
sustainability of the statistical infrastructure and capacity were all critical inputs that would help to fill data
gaps. The project activities also included investments in information technology infrastructure (computers,
tablets, software etc.) which are necessary for the collection, production, and dissemination of reliable and
timely data, and essential for capacity building.

The activities/inputs would lead to outputs such as building capacity and strengthening the role of the
WAEMU Commission through legislation in helping member country national statistics offices (NSOs) adopt
and implement harmonized surveys regularly to fill data gaps. These would contribute to the achievement of
the PDO by making the surveys freely accessible for the eight countries, expanding the use of surveys for
evidence-based policy and decision-making and strengthening the demand (including from governments) for
high-quality data.

The PAD did not include a TOC. The ICR constructed a detailed TOC (p. 7). Although the ICR’s TOC
presents an easy-to-understand list of activities/inputs, it is not fully aligned with the Results Framework. The
TOC highlights infrastructure modernization inputs that could not be included ex post into the Results
Framework. For example, the TOC and the Financing Agreement both refer to ‘statistical training curricula in
regional institutions offered to statistics students and staff from regional and international statistics institutions
and research centers.’ Though not included in the Results Framework, IEG determined that this was
completed, and the curricula was adopted in all the schools.

The key activities (inputs) were:

     i. Harmonization of household survey tools
            o Design of a harmonized survey methodology through regional events
            o Design of harmonized questionnaires and other survey instruments through regional events
            o Design of a harmonized sampling approach
            o Develop modernized data collection tools [e.g., Computerized Assisted Personal Interviews
                (CAPI)]
             o Develop a harmonized methodology for poverty measurement
    ii. Implementing the harmonized survey and making data accessible
            o Strengthening NSOs capacities on survey design and implementation through workshops,
                webinars, etc.
             o Recruitment of technical staff (household survey, CAPI, etc.) in NSOs
             o Implementation of two episodes (also called “rounds”) of the survey
             o Data processing of the two rounds of the survey and production of poverty numbers and other
                socioeconomic indicators
             o Anonymization of micro-data and making them accessible
    iii. Modernization of statistical Infrastructure and sustainability
            o Modernization of the statistical infrastructure (acquisition of laptops, tablets, software, etc.).

                                                                                                        Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



             o Modernization of the curricula of the “Economics of Poverty” course for the network of
                Statistics schools.

Outputs:

        Harmonized survey methodology is adopted.
        Harmonized questionnaires, other survey instruments are adopted.
        Harmonized Survey Solutions application is adopted.
        Harmonized methodology for poverty measurement is adopted.
        Recruitment of survey statisticians in NSOs is effective
        Regional capacity-building events on survey implementation are organized.
        Two episodes of the harmonized survey are carried out and data are produced.
        Statistical abstracts were published by the WAEMU Commission.
        Data are documented, anonymized and archived by the WAEMU Commission.
        NSOs are equipped.
        The Economics of Poverty curricula is adopted.

Outcomes:

The outputs listed above were expected to enable the WAEMU Commission to strengthen the capacity of its
eight member countries to regularly conduct harmonized living conditions surveys that met the regional
standards, and make the collected micro-data publicly available.

Achievement of PDO1:

PDO1: To support the WAEMU Commission in strengthening the capacity of its member countries to conduct
living conditions surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards.

Achievement of PDO1 is assessed by two development outcome indicators (DOIs):

      DOI 1: WAEMU member states which completed the collection of harmonized living conditions
       surveys that made the anonymized micro-data available to the public through the WAEMU website.
       Baseline: 0 percent of WAEMU countries' micro-data are publicly available. Target: 85 percent of
       WAEMU countries' micro-data are publicly available. Actual: 100 percent of WAEMU countries' micro-
       data are publicly available. The project exceeded the target. Achieved.
      DOI 2: WAEMU member states which completed a second living conditions survey according to
       harmonized, regional standards by December 2020. Baseline: 0 countries completed second
       harmonized survey. Target: 7 countries completed second harmonized survey. Actual: 8 countries
       completed second harmonized survey. The project exceeded the target. Achieved.

There were 5 Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) to measure the achievement of PDO1.

      IRI 1: Draft standardized questionnaires, disaggregated by gender, are reviewed by data users.
         Baseline: 0 standardized surveys. Target: 2 standardized surveys. Actual: 2 standardized
         questionnaires. The project fully met the target. Achieved.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)




        IRI 2: Standardized living conditions survey instruments manuals developed, and jointly adopted by
         the NSOs of all eight WAEMU member countries. Baseline: No. Target: Yes. The project met the
         target. Achieved.
        IRI 3: Regional capacity building events. Baseline: 0 events. Target: 8 events. Actual: 25 events. The
         project exceeded its target. Achieved.
        IRI 4: Statistical abstracts with selected official welfare statistics for WAEMU countries and the region
         are published by the WAEMU Commission. Baseline: No abstracts. Target: Abstract produced. Actual:
         Abstract produced. The project exceeded the target since two abstracts were produced - one for each
         round. Achieved.
        IRI 5: WAEMU member countries archive their harmonized living conditions survey. Baseline: 0
         surveys archived. Target: 8 surveys archived. Actual: 8 surveys archived. Achieved.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the capacity of the WAEMU member countries to make the collected-micro-data publicly
accessible.

Rationale
The TOC for this objective held that anonymization, documentation and archiving of micro-data would lead to
making living conditions survey data accessible and facilitate research. It also indicated that submission of a
decision to the WAEMU Council of Ministers committing all member countries to apply certain standards to
living conditions would strengthen capacity.

Inputs:

Under PDO2, there was 1 input that fell under "Modernization of statistical Infrastructure and sustainability:"

        Preparing the decision to committing all member states to apply WAEMU living conditions survey
          standard[s].

Outputs:

WAEMU Ministerial Council is the entity which has the authority to make the decision to commit all member
states to apply living conditions survey standards when they conduct surveys.

        The decision has been prepared and is waiting submission to the WAEMU Ministerial Council.
        The decision is validated at the country level.

Outcome:




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



The outcome of PDO2 was to ensure that the adoption of regional standards of conducting living conditions
surveys is sustained into the future by all eight WAEMU member states.

Development Outcome Indicators and Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs) for PDO2:

PDO 2: To strengthen the capacity of the WAEMU member countries to make the collected-micro-data
publicly accessible.

The project ’s DOI for monitoring implementation of the input for PDO2 was DOI3. However, as DOI3 does
not directly address PDO2, IEG used both DOI1 which is directly related to PDO2, and DOI3 to evaluate the
efficacy of PDO2.

      DOI 1: WAEMU member states which completed the collection of harmonized living conditions
       surveys that made the anonymized micro-data available to the public through the WAEMU website.
       Baseline: 0 percent of WAEMU countries' micro-data are publicly available. Target: 85 percent of
       WAEMU countries' micro-data are publicly available. Actual: 100 percent of WAEMU countries' micro-
       data are publicly available. The project exceeded the target. Achieved.
      DOI 3: Submission to the WAEMU’s Council of Ministers a decision committing all member countries
       to apply WAEMU living conditions survey standards with respect to methodology, contents and
       periodicity. Baseline: No decision. Target: Yes, decision is adopted. Actual: No. The decision is
       planned to be submitted to the June or September 2024. Not Achieved.

Achievement of PDO2 is measured using one IRI:

      IRI 6: Living conditions surveys that have been subject to a peer review process. Baseline: 0 surveys
       subject to peer review process. Target: 6 surveys subject to peer review process. Actual: 2 surveys
       subject to peer review process. The project did not meet the target. Not Achieved. The main reason
       for the delay and missing of the target was the COVID-19 pandemic that led to travel restrictions and
       delays in activities such as the review of surveys by peers, and the observance of specific protocols
       that contributed to delays.

Essential pre-requisites to submitting the decision to the WAEMU Council of Ministers have been completed:
(i) The decision has been endorsed by all eight WAEMU member states. (ii) The WAEMU Commission's legal
department has reviewed the decision. According to the TTLs, during the Regional Committee of Statistics
meeting, the WAEMU Commission has been asked to strengthen the technical and methodological document
that supports the decision (by including more methodological and technical details on the survey process),
and to have it validated by: (a) the experts in the NSOs, (b) the Departments at the Commission, and (c) the
Directors General of the NSOs before its submission to the Council of Ministers. According to the revised
estimate by the TTL, the document will be submitted to the WAEMU Council of Ministers in December 2024.
The TTLs noted that the decision should “definitely” be endorsed before the implementation of the next WB
financed statistics project. All WAEMU member countries are ready to start the preparation of the third round
of the survey as agreed in early March 2024 by the WAEMU Director Generals Steering Committee (ICR, p.
30).



Rating


                                                                                               Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project ’s efficacy is rated Substantial as PDO1 is rated High and PDO2 is rated Substantial. PDO1
                            covers most activities, outputs and outcomes of the project and was fully achieved since all eight WAEMU
                            countries successfully completed two harmonized living conditions surveys that meet regional standards and
                            made the anonymized micro-data publicly available. This was a significant achievement and almost
                            unprecedented in Western Africa. PDO2 addressed the public availability of the data, which was achieved, as
                            well as the sustainability of the project and the process by having WAEMU member states commit to carrying
                            out living conditions surveys with appropriate methodology, contents and periodicity. While the achievement
                            of the sustainability aspect was important, the timeline of obtaining the WAEMU Ministerial Council’s decision
                            was overly optimistic. All eight WAEMU countries have endorsed the decision and are ready to commence on
                            the third round of the living conditions survey.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Cost comparison across countries and across surveys: if disaggregated data on expenses was collected, it
   would have been possible to determine the expenditures on preliminary work (e.g., methodologies) and each
   phase of the country-level survey implementation, processing, and dissemination. Since survey implementation
   is usually the largest part of the cost, the ICR could have compared the costs across the two surveys for each
   country, as well as the cost per household interviewed across countries. The project could have also tracked
   and disaggregated the resources used in each country for various survey-related activities (for example,
   payment to enumerators, vehicle rentals/purchase, computers, tablets, etc.). This information would enable the
   Bank to advise countries on how to achieve greater survey efficiency.

   The project experienced a cost under-run since the final disbursement rate was 91 percent of the total grant.
   This was due to delays in starting the project resulting from the absence of a President at the WAEMU
   Commission, signing of subsidiary agreements with the member countries NSOs, long recruitment times of key
   staff at the Commission and in the countries, “savings” due to activities derailed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
   and currency exchange gains. It is not clear what activities were not undertaken as a result.

   The project’s closure was delayed by 22 months due to issues related with project management and the COVID-
   19 pandemic. (i) The 15-month postponement at the start of the project was due to the absence of a President
   of the WAEMU Commission who was responsible for making administrative decisions such as the creation of
   the PIU and hiring of staff; and (ii) delays in the WAEMU Commission’s signing of the subsidiary agreements
   with member countries and fund transfers for data collection activities. The extension allowed NSOs to


                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



implement the second round of the survey. Preparing and conducting a living conditions survey needs a
minimum of two years.

There were aspects of procurement and financial management of the project that also led to delays in project
implementation. The ICR notes several reasons: (i) slow WAEMU Commission validation procedures and weak
NSO FM capacity led to difficulties in the timely transfer of funds to NSOs; (ii) delays at the WAEMU
Commission’s end due to the lack of a dedicated procurement specialist assigned to the project; and (iii) weak
NSO capacity in FM management.

In sum, except for the peer review process, the project responded to the remaining delays to ensure completion
of most project activities through the extension of the closing date. Positive steps were also taken to mitigate
delays caused by the weak procurement and financial management practices of the WAEMU Commission and
the NSOs. About 9 percent of the project resources were not used due to such unforeseen delays. As the
project remained within the original budget envelope, the project’s efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s objectives of supporting the WAEMU Commission (i.e., to strengthen the capacity of its member
countries to conduct living conditions surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards and to make the
collected micro-data publicly accessible) remain relevant to the WAEMU member countries development
challenges and the WB's priorities.

The average Statistical Performance Indicator (SPI) increased from 48.1 in 2016 to 61.6 in 2022. The SPI
prepared by the WB is a composite score assessing a country’s statistical system based on five pillars (data
use, data services, data products, data sources, and data infrastructure). The increase in the score for the
WAEMU countries was driven the most by the data infrastructure described as “standards and methodology
used in classification” whose average more than doubled in value from a score of 21 to 54 during 2016-2022.
Data services (censuses and surveys, admin data, geospatial) and data products (ability of country to produce
relevant indicators, especially SDGs) also increased by over 30 percent each.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



The project’s objective is rated Substantial and continues to remain relevant even after project closure since
improved national integration in the WAEMU, and the availability and sharing of accessible, timely and quality
data is especially important for policy making in a context of economic volatility, fragility, and widespread
poverty. Overall, project efficacy is rated Substantial since the governments of all 8 WAEMU member states
successfully completed two living conditions surveys that were harmonized and met regional standards, and the
data was made publicly available to inform policymaking by WAEMU governments and their development
partners including the WB. The project's efficiency is rated Substantial due to not exceeding the original project
cost though with some under-run, reasonable procurement and financial management, and moderate delay.
The overall Outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR highlighted several potential risks to development outcomes which the project successfully
addressed during implementation, but they persist in the medium- and longer-term. These include the
following:

      The risk of worsening fragility is substantial. Increasing insecurity in the Sahel countries as fragility
         worsens and leads to displaced populations. During implementation, the Sahelian states identified
         country-specific solutions to ensuring the representativeness of the surveys, but this may become
         increasingly difficult if fragility worsens.
        The political and governance risks are substantial. The project mitigated these risks by establishing
         the methodology and standards prior to survey implementation, data analysis, and publication of
         results but these methodologies may not be honored by future governments due to political pressure.
         Additionally, the ICR notes that while the WAEMU Commission was a trustworthy partner to its
         member governments, and sensitive to their concerns during project implementation, it is strict when
         it comes to adherence to commonly agreed standards and may not agree if a member government
         decides to make changes.
        Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability. The continuation of institutional capacity is
         dependent upon the availability of adequate funding. The WB is planning to fund a third round of the
         survey which will continue providing financing for living conditions surveys in the short-term, but future
         funding uncertainly is a substantial risk that could rapidly erode the institutional capacity to conduct
         quality surveys.
        Fiduciary risks during implementation were mitigated by ensuring WB financial management support
         missions, a dedicated accountant, financial oversight of WAEMU member states NSOs,
         and adequate auditing. This can change rapidly in one or more WAEMU states in the future.
        The main risk to the sustainability of the development outcomes hinges on ensuring that there is a
         more sustainable mechanism to finance statistical activities. This is a longer-term development
         challenge in WAEMU.




                                                                                                        Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was informed by the demand from the WAEMU Commission and the member country
  governments for implementing updated and harmonized living conditions surveys regularly though the
  region had limited resources to fund data collection. The country demand may partially have been a
  result of their commitment to the African Union - SHaSA I and II initiatives that set out a goal of “An
  efficient statistical system that generates reliable, harmonized and timely statistical information covering
  all dimensions of political, economic, social, environmental and cultural development and integration of
  Africa,” (ICR, para 66). The WAEMU Commission held the mandate of harmonizing statistics across its
  eight member countries, strengthening modernization through TA, and providing funds to carry out
  surveys to produce better-quality data. The project was aligned with the regional and national interests in
  statistics compliance. The institutional setting was based on a detailed analysis of the WAEMU
  Commission (particularly its mandate on harmonizing statistics) and the WB’s experience in working with
  NSOs. The project also benefitted from the WB’s vast expertise and experience in designing and
  implementing living standards surveys across developing countries.

  The project was well-designed in terms of achieving tangible outputs (i.e., two living conditions surveys),
  assuring harmonization of surveys, and improving NSO capacity. By working with the WAEMU
  Commission, the project ensured that the data would be publicly accessible, reduced the risk of member
  country government interference in the survey design and implementation, and achieved economies of
  scale in delivering training, although it underestimated the amount of training needed by NSOs and their
  financial implications. However, the nature of a regional project made it difficult to address the important
  issues of NSO institutional reform, human resources management, and targeted training for NSOs,
  especially the weaker ones. These oversights could affect the sustainability of the progress made during
  the project.

  The project overlooked two important aspects of sustainability. First, it did not identify or explore ways to
  reduce the cost of data collection. This is particularly important given the known risks to the sustainability
  of surveys due to financial limitations in low- and lower-middle income countries such as the WAEMU
  member countries. Second, no measures were put in place to collect data on the cost of the surveys in
  either each country, or across the eight countries. This was a lost opportunity for the WB team as this
  information is essential for sustainability, the efficiency of surveys, as well as for the design of new
  surveys in developing countries. Since the sustainability of data collection requires government funding, it
  is essential that the costs and benefits of survey data collection are available to governments interested
  in conducting future surveys.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WB conducted regular supervision missions plus a mid-term review. According to the ICR, these
 missions helped to “remove some of the project’s bottlenecks and promote its favorable outcome, including
 hastening the recruitment of staff, discussions on FM issues (such as justification of advance to the NSOs),

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



 [and] discussions on handling procurement issues in the absence of a procurement specialist” (ICR, para.
 67). The Aide Memoires were helpful records for and of follow-up recommendations. The TA provided
 through support missions to the individual countries supplemented regional workshops which were the
 primary vehicle for delivering technical assistance on key topics related to surveys, data processing,
 poverty measurement, and accessibility. Due to the high variation of capacity among the eight member
 countries, additional (unplanned) support missions by the WB and the WAEMU Commission were
 necessary to address the needs for specific countries. As this was a regional project, additional
 supervision/ support missions were an essential component of the project’s ability to achieve its PDO,
 especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Results Framework provides a useful method for tracking the PDO and outcomes. It was developed
 before the theory of change since the PAD did not have one. There is incongruence between the RF and
 the TOC included in the ICR. The RF’s indicators were broadly relevant, measurable, and time-bound. The
 targets were also clearly defined. However, there were weaknesses in the M&E design: (i) misclassification
 of indicators, (ii) vague indicators, and (iii) missing indicators.

 Classification of indicators:

 PDO1 states “To strengthen the capacity of the WAEMU member countries to conduct living conditions
 surveys that meet harmonized, regional standards”. There are two indicators (DOI 1 and IRI 4) that may
 have been classified under PDO2.

 Specifically,

       DOI 1 under PDO1 states “WAEMU member countries which completed the collection of
        harmonized living conditions surveys that made the anonymized micro-data available to the public
        through the WAEMU website” (underline added). However, it is PDO2 that states “To strengthen the
        capacity of WAEMU countries to make the collected-micro-data publicly accessible.” Thus,
        reference to public accessibility in DOI 1 is misplaced.
       IRI 4 under PDO1 states that “A statistical abstract with selected official welfare statistics for
        WAEMU countries and the region are published by the WAEMU”. Publication implies accessibility of
        data and, thus, should also have been placed under PDO2.

 Lack of clarity of indicators:


                                                                                                Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



       IRI 2 states “standardized living conditions survey instruments and manuals are adopted by the
        NSOs ….”. It would have been better to be specific about what survey instruments were being
        referred to. If there are several, then only the key ones could have been specified. For example, IRI
        3 states “regional capacity-building events are organized”. Adding more information such as
        capacity building on “survey methodology” or “poverty measurement” or “financial management”
        would have provided more information to be able to measure achievement of the indicator.
       DOI 3 (which falls under PDO2) states “Submission to the WAEMU Council of Ministers a decision
        committing all member countries to apply WAEMU living conditions survey standards with respect
        to methodology, contents and periodicity”. How this applies to PD02 which is more about public
        accessibility is unclear.
       IRI 6 states “Living conditions surveys that have been subject to quality review by peers and by
        independent external parties”. It is unclear how it relates to public accessibility. This is an indicator
        of quality and/or relevance of data rather than accessibility.

 Missing indicators:

 The M&E design overlooks two important areas. Though the PAD's Results Framework did not cover them,
 the ICR could have benefited from providing a short summary.

       Training curricula. The FA (pp. 5-6) refers to “strengthening…(ii) statistical training curricula in
        regional institutions, all through the provision of training to statistics students and staff from regional
        and international statistics institutions and research centers”. This is also listed in the TOC.

       Modernization of statistical infrastructure. The TOC lists as one of the project’s 13 activities/inputs
        “Modernization of the statistical infrastructure (acquisition of laptops, tablets, software, etc.)” (ICR,
        p. 7). The ICR (para. 3) mentions briefly that “the project supported the beneficiaries on several
        areas including … (d) statistical infrastructure modernization, including software and equipment of
        the eight NSOs and statistical center of the WAEMU Commission."



b. M&E Implementation
  The Results Framework (pages 29-34) incorporated baseline and target values for all the outcome and
  intermediate indicators. The ICR reported achieved values and dates. Almost all targets were met except
  IRI 6 (“Living conditions surveys that have been subject to quality review by peers and by independent
  external parties”). The ICR states that the COVID-19 pandemic interrupted implementation of this step.
  However, the project substituted peer review with regional workshops that “allowed countries the
  opportunity to work together on different aspects of the survey and these exchanges of experiences
  provided elements of bilateral reviews” (ICR, p. 34). This appeared to be an acceptable substitution since
  other NSOs are indeed “peers.”



c. M&E Utilization
  The PIU did not have a designated M&E specialist on board. However, it produced progress reports
  which provided a summary of recent developments in the areas of procurement and financial
  management. According to the ICR, the reports from the PIU discussed implementation challenges,


                                                                                                       Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



  status updates, recommendations, and progress on actions agreed previously in ISRs and Aide
  Memoires.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project did not trigger any environmental or social safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The project performed satisfactorily in terms of financial management, though it was characterized by
   significant delays in hiring and reporting. Significant support had to be given to the WAEMU Commission
   and to member countries’ NSOs, several who had not worked on investment projects with the WB before.
   This support was delivered through technical assistance, regional workshops, and during implementation
   missions. The project was managed in accordance with the WAEMU Commission rules. The PIU had a
   full-time accountant who was supervised by a WAEMU Commission financial management specialist. The
   ICR did not indicate whether this arrangement was adequate or whether it would have been better to have
   a dedicated financial management specialist.

   The PIU regularly produced progress reports. The following challenges occurred in this area: (i) a non-
   eligible expense by an NSO that was successfully reversed, (ii) delay in hiring an external auditor due to
   WAEMU Commission’s reluctance given the existence of the Court of Audit, (iii) delays in internal audit
   reports due to the COVID-19 pandemic-related delays, and (iv) delays in the justification of funds
   transferred to the NSOs requiring “many FM supervision missions” (ICR, para. 64).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   First, the project helped to inform public policy in the member countries during the COVID-19 pandemic.
   This was possible due to (i) the availability of funds under the project that could be allocated (along with
   other sources of funding) to high frequency surveys to collect household-level data rapidly; (ii) the
   existence of a sampling frame (from the first round of the living conditions survey) served to increase the
   robustness of the data; and (iii) the trust from the NSOs who turned to the Bank for design and
   implementation support.

   Second, nine other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa adopted the methodological approach of the
   harmonized survey and poverty measurement methodology used in the WAEMU countries. These
   countries are Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of Congo,
   Gabon, Guinea, Republic of Congo, and São Tomé and Príncipe. According to the ICR, several of these

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



   countries not only used the technical tools such as questionnaires, manuals, CAPI application, and STATA
   programs for poverty measurement, but they also enhanced their capacity by participating in the WAEMU
   regional workshops on technical topics. The harmonization of surveys and poverty methodologies
   increases the comparability of survey indicators (including poverty measurement) across countries and
   time. This is an important public good.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                               Some indicators were missing;
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest                    others were incorrectly specified,
                                                                               and could have been improved.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offers important lessons with which IEG concurs. They are:

    1. The regional design resulted in positive impacts that could not have been achieved through
       eight individual projects. Some of the main benefits were: (i) the regional capacity-building
       workshops were an effective way to introduce new concepts and approaches to household
       surveys and socio-economic indicators. (ii) the harmonization of living conditions surveys
       was more easily achieved in a group context in WAEMU. (iii) The existence of regional
       institutions (WAEMU Commission) with credibility among its member countries facilitated the
       adoption of politically sensitive steps such as public access to data. (iv) Cooperation with a
       regional institution (WAEMU Commission) did not mean that all aspects of a project needed
       to go through that institution—the World Bank could retain certain responsibilities (e.g.,
       design and methodology of the surveys). (v) A regional project had a strong demonstration
       effect that led to other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa adopting harmonized living conditions
       surveys including the initiation of more regional projects in Africa.
    2. Regional projects in member countries that have diverse implementation capacity need
       disproportionately larger TA budgets to succeed. The regional design required a significantly
       larger technical assistance budget to succeed. First, the supervision budget was insufficient
       to cover the cost of supervising the activities and providing necessary implementation
       support to one regional institution and eight countries with diverse levels of client (NSO)


                                                                                                 Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)



         capacity. Second, given the low-capacity environment in several of the WAEMU countries,
         the support implementation missions, and regional workshops did not provide enough
         technical assistance for these countries to consistently achieve the desired level of quality in
         outputs. Consequently, budgets from other WB Analytical and Advisory tasks had to be
         diverted to this project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a good overview of the project’s objectives and achievements. The document conveyed the
benefits and challenges of a regional project, including the lack of adequacy of supervision funds. The
discussions on the WAEMU Commission provided a good sense of the advantages as well as some of the
disadvantages of its being the direct recipient of the grant. The ICR also provided a persuasive explanation for
the project extension date. The section on unintended outcomes and impact was especially illuminating and
welcome.

The ICR could have been improved if it provided greater clarity on (i) what was not achieved as a result of 9
percent of grant funds that were not disbursed; (ii) when the first and second surveys were actually
implemented in each country; (iii) what improvements were or were not achieved at the NSO level; (iv) whether
and where the project design could have been improved or could have performed better; (v) greater emphasis
in project design on integrating survey data into government processes and systems; and (vi) how the second
survey (carried out three years after the first one) affected/benefited government policy and programs as
distinct from the first survey.

Finally, the ICR could have done a better job of ensuring that the indicators used to measure the efficacy of the
two PDOs were accurately identified and supported by a coherent discussion. As presented, there are missing
indicators and a mismatch between the PDOs and indicators without any explanation. The use of the term
“episodes” of surveys was confusing given that the traditional terminology is either “round” or “wave” depending
upon what is being referred to.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
REGIONAL PROGRAM TO HARMONIZE AND MODERN (P153702)




                                                                                Page 20 of 20
