     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024160

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P155186                                    UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                     Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58970,IDA-68000,TF-A2977,TF-           30-Jun-2021                                        177,859,629.42
 A6713

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Aug-2016                                30-Sep-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          110,000,000.00                                    55,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           180,000,000.00                                    54,901,154.95

 Actual                                       177,958,552.93                                    54,901,154.95




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz         Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




 P163691_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163691                                    UG-Improving Delivery Maternal Svcs AF ( P163691 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



 12-Sep-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                              0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 11) and the Grant Agreement (page 2), the project
   objectives were as follows:

           To improve utilization of essential health services with a focus on reproductive, maternal,
            newborn, child and adolescent health services in target districts;
           To scale up birth and death registration services.

   At the time of the second Additional Financing (AF2, page 14), a third objective was added as follows:

           To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.

   Targets for several key outcome indicators were revised during the project period but a split ratings approach
   is not applied. This is because in all cases of revised targets, either the targets were increased due to the
   extended project period (with both original and revised outcome targets having been achieved) or the
   definition of the indicators were made more precise but did not represent a reduction in ambition.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  02-Nov-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



  Component 1: Results-Based Financing for Primary Health Care Services (Appraisal: US$ 68.0 million;
  Actual: US$ 69.5 million): This component aimed to scale-up and institutionalize results-based financing
  (RBF) with a focus on essential reproductive, maternal, neonatal, child, and adolescent (RMNCAH) health
  services. The package of essential services included: (i) ante-natal care; (ii) safe delivery; (iii)
  comprehensive emergency obstetric care; (iv) essential newborn and postnatal care services; (v) post-
  abortal care; (vi) family planning; and (vii) community-based RMNCAH services including nutrition,
  prevention and treatment of common childhood diseases and provision of adolescent health
  services. Performance-based payments to health centers (Levels I-IV) were to be a function of quantity and
  quality of services, along with an equity coefficient which takes into account district remoteness and level of
  development. In addition to the performance payments, activities included: assessment, selection and
  strengthening capacity of RBF health providers; RBF supervision and mentorship; and external verification.

  Component 2: Strengthen Health Systems to Deliver RMNCAH Services (Appraisal: US$ 54.5 million;
  Actual: US$ 71.0 million): This component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity to deliver maternal and
  child health services, particularly by addressing critical health systems bottlenecks. Activities included:
  provision of essential medicines, equipment, and supplies; strengthening of supply chain management;
  management of the health workforce; training of health workers; construction of primary health care
  facilities, including maternity wards; and implementation of quality assurance measures.

  Component 3: Strengthen Capacity to Scale-up Delivery of Births and Deaths Registration Services
  (Appraisal: US$ 10.0 million; Actual: US$ 10.5 million): This component aimed to strengthen institutional
  capacity of the Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) agency to scale up birth and death registration
  (BDR) services. Activities included: development of a CRVS strategy; development of BDR protocols;
  CRVS monitoring and evaluation plan; BDR mobile outreach; scale up of electronic vital records system;
  and training on BDR and perinatal/maternal death audits.

  Component 4: Enhance Institutional Capacity to Manage Project Supported Activities (Appraisal: US$ 7.5
  million; Actual: US$ 8.4 million): This component aimed to enhance institutional capacity for project
  management, including in the areas of fiduciary management, environmental and social safeguards; and
  monitoring and evaluation.

  Under the first Additional Financing, the following revisions were made:

        Component 1: Scale-up of RBF from 60 to 71 districts.
        Component 2: Provide additional commodities; expand healthcare workforce mentoring program;
         and scale up quality assurance program.
        Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component: (Appraisal: US$ 0; Actual: US$ 20.6
         million): Provide rapid reallocation of funds following a public health emergency.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The project cost at appraisal was US$ 140.0 million. With two additional financings totaling US$
         40.0 million, the revised estimated project cost was US$ 180.0 million. The actual project cost at
         completion was US$ 178.0 million.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



         During the project period, there were fluctuations in the SDR/US$ currency exchange rate which led
           to a shortage of available funds in the amount of US$ 2.0 million.

   Financing

         The project was initially financed by an IDA Credit of US$ 110.0 million and a Global Financing
           Facility grant of US$ 30.0 million.
         Additional Financing (P163691) in the form of a US$ 25.0 million grant from a SIDA Trust was
          approved in September 2018 to scale up services and to add a new contingency component to
          ensure access to emergency funding.
         Additional Financing (P174163) in the form of a US$ 15.0 million IDA Credit was approved in
          December 2020, from the Crisis Response Window (Fast Track COVID 19 Facility), to replenish the
          amount re-allocated from Components 1 and 2 during Ebola and COVID outbreaks, as part of the
          contingency component. The first contingency activity was activated on December 19, 2019 to
          prevent an outbreak of Ebola in the country while the second contingency activity was activated on
          March 30, 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         August 4, 2016: Project approval.
         May 26, 2017: Project effectiveness.
         September 18, 2018: Additional Financing in the amount of US$ 25.0 million was approved to scale
           up activities.
         October 9, 2019: Mid-Term Review.
         December 2, 2020: Additional Financing in the amount of US$ 15.0 million was approved to
          replenish funds used to respond to disease outbreaks. A third project objective was added, along
          with revisions to the results framework. The project closing date was extended from June 30, 2021
          to December 31, 2022.
         December 19, 2022: The project closing date was extended from December 31, 2022 to September
          30, 2023 to allow for completion of civil works and roll-out of the Birth, Death and Adoption Order
          Registration.
         September 30, 2023: Project closing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



               Uganda's economy has steadily grown in recent years and although headcount poverty has declined,
               inequality remains significant, with high poverty in rural areas, and much of the population remains highly
               vulnerable and at risk of poverty. The high total fertility rate (5.8 children per woman, 2014 census) is
               fueling significant population growth, which places a high demand on social services. In the health sector,
               while Infant mortality and child mortality rates have improved, malaria prevalence, maternal mortality,
               neonatal mortality, pneumonia occurrence, and malnutrition remain significant challenges. Low coverage of
               priority maternal and child health interventions (such as emergency obstetric care, family planning, and
               treatment of childhood infections) has been identified as a major constraint. In addition, capacity for civil
               registration and vital statistics is limited across the country, with only 60% of children under five years of
               age registered, and the majority of these children without birth certificates.

               The country's National Development Plan II (2015/16 - 2019/20) aimed to achieve middle-income country
               status, with enhanced human capital development and strengthened service delivery as two of the four
               primary development objectives. The government revised the 2016-2020 RMNCAH Sharpened Plan, with
               the aim to
               improve alignment in priorities among donors and stakeholders. The plan identified five strategic shifts for
               RMNCAH: (i) emphasizing evidence-based high-impact solutions; (ii) increasing access for high-burden
               populations; (iii) geographical focusing/sequencing; (iv) addressing the broader context- education,
               empowerment, economy and environment within a multisectoral approach, with a particular focus on
               adolescents; and (v) strengthening mutual accountability for ending preventable deaths.

               The project objectives are strongly aligned with the Bank's Country Partnership Framework for 2016-2021,
               which identified improving service delivery including in the health sector, as a key objective and skilled birth
               attendance rate as a key objective indicator.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve utilization of essential health services with a focus on reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and
                             adolescent health services in target districts

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (as illustrated in the ICR, page 11) focused on supporting central level agencies to
                             address key systems bottlenecks to RMNCAH services delivery and incentivizing service providers
                             through RBF to enhance delivery and utilization of RMNCAH services. However, the theory of change as
                             presented is somewhat generic, for example the output of "Patients receiving quality and cost-effective



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



RMNCAH services from RBF providers" leading to the immediate outcome of "Improved quantity and quality
of RMNCAH services:.

Outputs (quality and quantity) were to be verified at health facilities on a monthly basis by the Expanded
District Health Management Team, with funds paid directly to health facilities to support autonomy over the
use of funds. Direct support by way of provision of essential medicines, equipment, and supplies; training of
health workers; construction of primary health care facilities, including maternity wards; and implementation of
quality assurance measures were also likely to contribute to the intended outcome of increased utilization of
services.

The project targeted districts with high RMNCAH disease burden and low RMNCAH service coverage and
utilization. The selection of health facilities in the designated districts was then based on an RBF readiness
assessment. The RBF scheme was implemented in 131 of the 135 district health offices (covering 1,426
health facilities), covering 92% of the total population.

Outputs

      Implementation of results-based financing, such that performance-based payments were made
         directly to health facilities for delivery of priority interventions. As noted in the ICR (page 19), the RBF
         program enhanced managerial and financial autonomy in the health sector, especially at the lower
         levels of the health system. On the supply side, the RBF performance grants were used to address
         gaps in service delivery including the procurement of medicines, basic medical equipment (weighing
         scales, thermometers, blood pressure machines, etc.), delivery beds, motor bikes and bicycles, solar
         systems, water pumps and tanks, and for rehabilitation and/or extension of buildings.
        Construction and/or renovation of 76 health facilities (target: 81).
        Equipping of 545 health facilities (target: 646), including provision of essential drugs and medical
         supplies.
        Training of 1,606 health workers (in the areas of emergency medicine, critical care nursing, imaging,
         anesthesiology, cold chain management, and biomedical engineering) (original target: 400; revised
         target: 1,159) and in-service training and mentoring of 4,600 health workers.
        Development of guidelines and protocols for emergency and referral services
        Capacity development in quantifying drug needs, reporting on drug availability, and upgrading the
         warehousing system in National Medical Stores.
        Capacity development in supervising district health teams, including roll-out of the health facility
         quality of care assessment program.

Outcomes

RMNCAH outcomes

      The total number of people who received essential health services increased from 5,176,639 in 2015
         to 10,335,595 in 2023, surpassing the original target of 9,329,451 and the revised target of 8.652.902.
      The percentage of births (deliveries) attended by skilled health personnel increased from 50.0% in
       2015 to 91.0% in 2023, surpassing the original target of 65.0% and the revised target of 71.0%.
      The percentage of pregnant women who receive intermittent preventive therapy, second dose (IPT2),
       increased from 53.0% in 2015 to 78.2% in 2023, falling slightly short of the target of 80.0%.


                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)




      The total number of couple years of protection provided by the project increased from 2,196,713 in
         2015 to 5,188, 908 in 2023, achieving the original target of 4,500,00 and the revised target of
         5,100,000.
        Children under one year immunized with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, third dose (PCV3),
         increased from 79.0% in 2015 to 92.6% in 2022, achieving the original target of 90.0% and the revised
         target of 92.0%.
        The percentage of pregnant women receiving antenatal care during the first trimester increased from
         19.1% in 2017 to 35.0% in 2023, achieving the original target of 32.0% but falling slightly short of the
         revised target of 37.0%.
        The percentage of HC IVs offering caesarian section increased from 50.0% in 2015 to 86.0% in 2023,
         surpassing the original target of 75.0% and the revised target of 84.0%.
        There were no results reported in the ICR on malnutrition. According to the project team, the number
         of women and children who have received basic nutrition services (nutrition education, Vitamin A
         supplements for under 5 children, and iron and folic acid supplements for pregnant mothers)
         increased from 1.67 million to 7.5 million by project closing. This surpassed the target of 5.7 million.

Quality of facility outcomes

      The percentage of health facilities that have 95% of the basket of essential commodities in the
         previous three months decreased from 52.0% in 2016 to 15.0% in 2023. The project activities were
         intended to increase the percentage of facilities adequately stocked with essential commodities, with
         targets of 55.0% (original) and 78.0% (revised).
        The percentage of health facilities with placed orders that are fulfilled by National Medical Stores
         increased from 72.0% in 2015 to 92.0% in 2023, surpassing the original target of 85.0% and the
         revised target of 86.0%.
        The percentage of approved posts in public facilities filled by qualified health workers increased from
         65.0% in 2015 to 75.0% in 2023, achieving the target of 75.0%.
        The percentage of RBF health facilities with functional management committees with citizen
         representation increased from 45.0% in 2015 to 84.3% in 2023, falling short of the target of 100.0%.
        The percentage of clients expressing satisfaction with health services increased from 25.0% in 2019
         to 31.0% in 2023, falling short of the original target of 35.0% and the revised target of 33.0%.

In addition,

      The ICR (page 19) cited a study conducted by Thinkwell, a global think tank supporting the Ministry of
       Health, that showed that RBF had a statistically significant impact on utilization of the following
       essential services; first ANC visit during the first trimester, fourth ANC visit, uptake of modern long-
       term contraceptive method, uptake of modern short-term contraceptive method, second dose of
       intermittent preventive therapy, outpatients visit for children aged 0-59 months, and postnatal care. In
       addition, RBF increased the level of non-wage recurrent financing to health facilities with some
       facilities receiving more than two times what they used to get per year reversing years of decline in
       funding. No specific data are provided in the ICR.
      The preliminary results of the 7th Uganda Demographic and Health Survey (2022) showed
       improvements in the coverage of key RMNCAH outcomes. Since the previous DHS in 2016, deliveries
       in health facilities had increased from 73.0% to 91.0%; visits to antenatal clinics (4 or more visits)
       increased from 60.0% to 72.0%; childhood mortality declined from 64 to 52 (per 1000 live births);

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



         infant mortality decreased from 43 to 36 (per 1000 live births); and neonatal mortality decreased 27 to
         22 (per 1000 live births). The project team subsequently provided the final results (validated after
         completion of the ICR) which showed that deliveries in health facilities had increased from 73.0% to
         86.0% (not 91.0%) and visits to antenatal clinics increased from 60.0% to 68.0% (not 72.0%).

Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of improved RMNCAH outcomes, including achieving of
targets for key project indicators, but with achievement weaknesses in some of the outcomes noted above, as
well as some shortcomings in the quality of facility indicators.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To scale up birth and death registration services.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. Activities to improve the capacity of National Identification and Registration
Authority (NIRA) and other key institutions to carry out BDR services were likely to lead to the intended
outcome to scale up services and improve production of critical data for decision-making. While the NIRA has
the mandate to register births and deaths, other sectors such as health and education, were to be involved in
facilitating the registrations.

Outputs

      Development of national CRVS policy, strategy, and communication strategy (with technical support
         from UNICEF).
        Development of BDR protocols and manuals, including developing a death registration module.
        Training of health facility and community-based registration personnel on BDR and training of clinical
         staff and Maternal/Perinatal Death Audit Committees on cause-of-death reporting according to
         International Classification of Diseases guidelines.
        Conducting of BDR mobile outreach services and scaling up of the electronic vital records system for
         birth registration to cover 117 districts. Birth registration services were made available in 218 HC IVs
         and 1,300 HC IIIs.
        Improvement of CRVS M&E system to enable use of data for planning and accountability



Outcomes

      The proportion of HC IVs using the Mobile Vital Records System for birth and death notification
         reached 86.0% by project closing, surpassing the target of 75.0%.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)




        The percentage of births registered among children under one year old increased from 13.0% in 2015
         to 57.5% in 2023, surpassing the target of 30.0%. (Note: The original indicator on children under five
         with birth registration was dropped at the time of project restructuring).
        The percentage of deaths occurring in a specific year that are registered in the same year increased
         from 1.0% in 2015 to 15.5% in 2023, surpassing the revised target of 10.0%. The original indicators of
         total number/percentage of deaths registered was dropped at the time of the project restructuring.
        The percentage of maternal deaths that are audited increased from 33.0% in 2015 to 89.1% in 2023,
         surpassing the original target of 65.0% and the revised target of 75.0%.
        The percentage of perinatal deaths that are reviewed increased from 3.8% in 2019 to 41.3% in 2023,
         surpassing the target of 32.0%.

Achievement is rated High due to evidence of improved utilization of BDR services, including surpassing of all
targets.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Due to the outbreak of several major diseases in recent years, and ongoing threats of further public health
emergencies, a contingency emergency response component (CERC) was approved for the project. The
theory of change was clear, as timely access to emergency funding would likely contribute to the intended
outcome to increase country preparedness for such events, including aspects of initial response, early
recovery, and bridging the gap to longer term recovery and reconstruction efforts.

The CERC component was first activated in December 2019 to respond to an Ebola Virus Disease
(EVD) outbreak in the neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo, and for a second time in March 2020 to
support the national response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The project also received an essential health
services grant from the Global Financing Facility in 2020 that contributed US$ 300,000 to support continuity of
essential services during COVID.

Outputs

        Support for leadership and coordination efforts for Ebola and COVID-19 response, including meetings,
         monitoring of implementation, and data management.
        Training of village health teams on community-based disease surveillance, and conducting of
         surveillance and active case-finding.
        Development of laboratory and case management capacity.
        Communication campaigns on risk and disease transmission.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)




                                   Infection prevention and control measures and mitigation measures, including supply of medical
                                    products and personal protective equipment and payment of risk allowances for frontline health
                                    workers.

                            Outcomes

                                   The proportion of suspected COVID-19 cases that underwent laboratory diagnosis with results
                                    provided within 72 hours of reporting increased from 25.0% in 2020 to 95.0% in 2022, surpassing the
                                    original target of 65.0% and achieving the revised target of 95.0%.
                                   The proportion of suspected Ebola virus disease cases that underwent laboratory diagnosis
                                    with results provided within 48 hours of reporting increased from 55.0% in 2019 to 100.0% in 2022,
                                    surpassing the original target of 75.0% and achieving the revised target of 100.0%.
                                   The percentage of designated Points-of-Entry that were actively screening travels for COVID-19 and
                                    viral hemorrhagic fevers reached 95.0% by project closing, achieving the original target of 90.0% and
                                    the revised target of 95.0%.
                                   3.4 million COVID tests were conducted, surpassing the original target of 750,000 and the revised
                                    target of 3.3 million.

                            Achievement is rated Substantial due to evidence of increased capacity to respond to health emergencies,
                            including achieving of targets for key project indicators. It is also understood that the full assessment of the
                            PDO achievement extends beyond the project selected indicators.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first and third objectives
                            (utilization; effective response to a crisis) and High achievement of the second objective (registration of births
                            and deaths).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At project preparation (PAD, Annex 5), the economic analysis discussed the economic benefits that were
   expected to be realized from project implementation, mainly arising from reduced maternal and child mortality

                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



and morbidity, lower incidence of disease, saved health care costs, and increased economic growth. A cost-
benefit analysis was also conducted for the combined set of project interventions (not for specific interventions
nor the specific targeted regions) with the expected benefit of reduced morbidity and mortality in the overall
population group of interest. The present value of the project’s benefits was calculated as US$2,515.0 million,
while the
present value of the cost was US$128.2 million. Therefore the net present benefit was estimated at US$2,386.8
million, with the benefit-cost ratio of 19.6.

At completion (ICR, Annex 4), the economic analysis was updated using actual data. At a 3.0% discount rate,
the net present value of costs and benefits were calculated at US$158.6 million and US$3.0 billion, respectively.
Therefore the benefit to cost ratio remained as appraised at 19.1. Additional analysis showed that a total of
3,685,580 Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) among women and children were averted during the six-year
project implementation period, with the cost per DALY averted at US$50 (which is only 5.0% of the GDP per
capita (US$964.40 in 2022). Results from the sensitivity analysis also showed that the investment would remain
viable even at higher discount rates of 5.0% and 10.0%.

Regarding implementation efficiency, the project utilized a supply-side RBF model, which helped to reduce
administrative costs. The RBF administrative costs (including training, roll-out, supervision, salaries for RBF
officers, and internal and external verification) were only 11.0% of the total RBF funds under the project, which
is significantly lower than other health RBF programs supported by the World Bank in other African countries
where verifications costs alone consume a significant share of the RBF resources (Nigeria (24%), Cameroon
(30%), Benin (50%). The overall cost of implementing RBF through the project was only US$0.4 per capita per
year, compared to the cost of implementing a decentralized (direct) facility financing program in Nigeria
(US$1.74 per capita per year).

The project was fully disbursed and achieved most project targets, however, implementation was longer than
planned. This was due to several factors particularly the two-year COVID-19 pandemic, delays in reaching
effectiveness, delays in key project activities of recruitment of project staff, implementation of civil works at
five out of the targeted 81 health centers, and procurement of a system for civil registration and vital statistics. In
addition, there was a significant change in the SDR/USD currency exchange rates which negatively affected the
resources available for the project to implement its activities, a loss of about US$2 million. This led to delayed
RBF payments to the districts, some of which had to close earlier than the rest of the project leaving many
invoices unpaid. However, as clarified by the project team, the reduced available funding and high absorption of
RBF funds, in the context of evident success of the RBF approach, led the government to mainstream RBF in
the local government system through the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers program.

Despite the minor shortcomings noted above, overall efficiency is considered Substantial.

Other indications of project implementation efficiency: The adoption of the Blue Square IT tool reduced delays in
processing of RBF reimbursement by 40-60 percent


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions, country health sector
strategy, and Bank country strategy. Efficacy is rated Substantial due to Substantial achievement of the first and
third objectives and High achievement of the second objective. Efficiency is rated Substantial due to favorable
benefit-cost ratios despite moderate implementation shortcomings.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Supportive policy and institutional arrangements are in place to continue the RBF approach, such as
a national RBF framework to harmonize all RBF interventions in the country, a dedicated RBF unit in the
planning department to oversee and coordinate RBF activities, and over 100 local trainers of trainees on
RBF. The project also institutionalized maternal and perinatal death surveillance and in-service mentorship.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project drew upon many years of partnership with the Ministry of Health in implementing health
  sector projects. This operation introduced some complexities which indicated a risk rating of Substantial,
  such as utilizing a brand-new implementing agency - the National Identification and Registration Authority
  (NIRA) - and decentralized approaches. However, the Bank drew on technical support from CRVS
  experts and UNICEF, accessed trust fund support for capacity building interventions specifically in the
  areas of RBF, CRVS, human resources for health, and civil works, aligned the financing model with
  existing fiduciary systems, and applied lessons from experience from prior pilot programs. The task team
  also ensured the participation of key counterpart officials, which helped to resolve subsequent
  implementation challenges such as procurement, contract management, and staffing. The results chain

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



  and the M&E arrangements were clear, enabling effective data collection and monitoring of project
  achievements.

  There were some shortcomings in preparation, which subsequently led to implementation delays. A
  detailed feasibility study of the sites where the health facilities were to be constructed/rehabilitated by the
  project was not done during project preparation, due to the fact that the exact location of the sites for
  construction/rehabilitation had not been agreed upon yet. Also, in-country capacity for civil works had
  already been identified as a challenge in prior operations but was not adequately addressed in the project
  design.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided strong supervision support throughout the project period, particularly in
 addressing implementation challenges as they arose. For example, the Bank team increased technical
 missions, to complement routine implementation support missions, and engaged senior Bank management
 and counterpart officials to help address implementation bottlenecks. The Bank team also effectively
 utilized multiple project restructurings including two additional financings and revisions to the project
 objectives and indicators, to ensure project impact. This was especially the case in responding to two
 disease outbreaks during the project period.

 The ICR did not report any significant problems in fiduciary performance. The overall safeguards
 performance rating is recorded as Moderately Unsatisfactory at project closing, due to the shortcomings in
 the environmental and safeguards compliance by one of the contractors (BMK Ltd.) which persisted
 despite Bank and client supervision support.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization


a. M&E Design



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



 The results framework had clearly defined project objectives, key outcome indicators, and baseline and
 target figures. Data collection arrangements were also clear, relying on readily available information from
 the existing data collection system for the health sector.

 There was one significant shortcoming in measurement metrics due to the change in legal definition of birth
 and death registration, following the adoption of the Registration of Persons Act. IEG notes that this Act
 was passed in 2015, which was prior to completion of project appraisal. In the earlier years, notification was
 deemed adequate for the issuance a registration certificate. In addition, birth registration was originally for
 under-fives which would have required surveys. It was changed to infants which is more amendable to the
 routine information system. During project restructurings, the two related CRVS indicator targets were
 subsequently revised.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Ministry of Health and the NIRA systematically collected and analyzed M&E data from various
  information sources, including routine data from the Health Management Information System, NIRA, and
  project data including the RBF data. Project-generated data for the purpose of RBF payments were also
  routinely collected by the M&E system and verified every six months by an Independent Verification
  Agency. The ICR (page 31) noted one initial challenge of M&E implementation, which was the slow
  verification of RBF invoices due to the use of a paper-based information system. However, this was
  subsequently addressed through the Blue Square IT system which almost halved the invoice verification
  delays. The results framework continued to be refined to improve measurability, consistency of data
  sources, and to align with adjustments to the project scope.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were critical to the process of approving RBF payments to health facilities. Also, as reported
  in the ICR (page 31), the top management in the Ministry of Health utilized the M&E data in their
  discussions on areas for improvement in the health system, targeting support supervision, and
  mainstreaming of RBF into the government’s own PHC grant system.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project, due to anticipated civil works and
   handling of medical waste. The safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
   4.12) were triggered. An environmental and social management framework (ESMF) was prepared,
   which included screening procedures and checklists for activities, environmental and social management
   plans, health care waste management guidelines, a chance finds procedure, environmental and social

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



  reporting formats, a stakeholder and community engagement plan, HIV/AIDS management plans, a child
  protection and a gender responsive plan, and grievance redress mechanism.

  Sub-projects required site-specific environmental and social impact assessments. The ICR (page 32)
  reported the project team routinely monitored and reported on contractors' compliance with environmental
  and social management plans and conditions of permits and certificates. The project also undertook
  environmental and social audits for the infrastructure works. The main challenges faced during
  implementation included delays in obtaining the National Environment Authority (NEMA) approval
  certificates which led to delay in the commencement of the civil works, continued non-compliances on the
  infrastructure sub-projects in the Northern and West Nile regions, and delayed reporting of incidents. The
  project registered two workplace injuries (one severe), and in response, Root Cause Analyses were
  conducted, and safeguards corrective action plans (SCAP) prepared and implemented to prevent
  recurrence of similar incidents.

  The project’s geographical coverage included districts traditionally occupied by indigenous people (IPs),
  specifically the Ik in Kaabong District and the Batwa in western Uganda. An Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP)
  and an Indigenous People’s Policy Framework (IPPF) were prepared for the Ik and Batwa, respectively.
  According to the ICR (page 32), free, prior, and informed consultations with these communities were carried
  out, districts employed staff in the health facilities who spoke the local dialects, and subprojects
  were compliant with local sociocultural interaction norms and belief systems of the IPs.

  The ICR did not report on any incidents related to the safeguard policies on Physical Cultural Resources or
  Involuntary Resettlement. The project team subsequently clarified that the following incident occurred:
  Graves at several civil works sites were found, with one grave relocated (the relocation process was
  satisfactorily undertaken guided by the chance finds procedure guideline included in the ESMF).

  The overall safeguards rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory at project closing, and in 2023, as recorded in
  the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: Financial management (FM) assessments were conducted at appraisal for the
  main implementing agencies as well as for a sample of districts and health facilities. According to the ICR
  (page 33), the project’s FM arrangements were adequate, with timely planning, budgeting, financial
  reporting, and auditing. No qualified audit reports were recorded for the project. The funds flow
  arrangements worked well overall, except for delays in processing RBF documentation by the health
  facilities due to low FM capacity and the verification process by the Ministry of Health.

  Procurement: According to the ICR (page 33), the capacity assessment of the Ministry of Health identified
  the procurement risk as High, which would be reduced to Substantial upon application of acceptable
  mitigation measures. During project implementation, there were no mis-procurements for the project,
  although two contracts were determined as ‘challenge-contracts’ (slow to complete) namely, the NIRA
  BDAR Solution and civil works lot under the aforementioned weak contractor.




                                                                                                 Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                    There were shortcomings in
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory   project preparation and Quality-
                                                                                    at-Entry.
                                                                                    There were shortcomings in the
Quality of M&E                    High                    Substantial               measurement metrics for birth
                                                                                    and death registration.
Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 35-37): adapted by IEG:

        Multi-sectoral involvement of other relevant agencies can facilitate vital statistics
         registration. In the case of this project, while NIRA had the mandate to register births and
         deaths, other sectoral agencies were tapped to facilitate the collection of registrations. The
         health sector, where most births and many deaths take place, played a role in developing
         tools for death certification and training of vital statistics staff; the education sector was a
         focal point for mobile vital statistics registration.
        Nationwide scale-up of the RBF program can be effectively carried out with strong supportive
         actions. In the case of this project, development of a harmonized national RBF framework
         helped to communicate clear standards and expectations (as well as facilitated monitoring
         and evaluation) and training of trainers in RBF helped to ensure readiness to launch.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Improving Delivery of Maternal Svcs (P155186)



The ICR was internally consistent, albeit somewhat lengthy (main text is 37 pages). The quality of the evidence
for utilization and registration services was high, drawing on solid monitoring and evaluation arrangements and
data collected throughout the project period. The ICR was strongly results-oriented, given the use of results-
based financing for nearly half of the project activities. Lessons were informative for future RBF operations. The
ICR was overall consistent with guidelines, although it did not report on the Moderately Unsatisfactory
ratings for the overall safeguards rating documented in 2023 and at project closing. Also, there is a discrepancy
in the Outcome and Bank Performance ratings reported in the ICR.main text (pages 24 and 34) vs. the Data
Sheet (ICR, page 3).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
