     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024168

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P167260                                    The Gambia Social Safety Net Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Gambia, The                                Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4740                                  29-Mar-2024                                         29,785,162.97

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-May-2019                                15-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         29,785,162.97                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Disha Zaidi                 Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement dated November 6, 2019, Schedule 1, the objective of the project was
   “to improve the coordination of social assistance activities and increase inclusion of the extreme poor in the
   Nafa program.” The Nafa program is an unconditional cash transfer program for three years, which was
   initially to be implemented in the poorest 20 districts in The Gambia, targeted at the extreme poor households
   selected through a poverty test and community validation (Project Appraisal Document/ PAD, The Gambia
   Social Safety Net Project, April 2019, p.15).


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



   A restructuring on June 9, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic revised the PDO as follows: “to improve the
   coordination of social assistance activities, promote temporary social assistance support to rural households
   in the wake of COVID-19, and increase the inclusion of the extreme poor in the Nafa program”. This
   temporary expansion was called “Nafa Quick” (Restructuring Paper, June 9, 2020, p.6; Amendment to the
   Financing Agreement dated June 24, 2020, p.1).

   An additional project development indicator was introduced to track the "number of households benefitting
   from the “Nafa Quick" intervention. The overall target for individuals supported by the Gambia Social Safety
   Net (GSSN) Project was increased from 170,000 extreme poor individuals to 654,000 individuals to include all
   recipients of temporary support, of which the extreme poor were a subset. (Restructuring Paper, June 9,
   2020, p.7-8).

   Although development objectives were revised, the project scope increased and there were no reductions in
   associated outcome targets. Therefore, this ICR Review does not apply a split rating, and the project is
   assessed based on the revised objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Jun-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Development of coordination mechanisms for the social assistance sector (US$6
   million allocated; US$5.9 million disbursed).

   This component aimed to enhance coordination of social assistance activities by strengthening the National
   Social Protection Policy (NSPP) leadership, coordination, and implementation mechanisms. It supported the
   establishment of the Social Protection Secretariat (SPS) to lead and coordinate social protection efforts in
   The Gambia (component 1A) and develop a National M&E Framework for aggregating program results.
   Additionally, it included the creation of a Social Registry (component 1B) to provide comprehensive data on
   household characteristics, aid in assessing and determining eligibility for social assistance programs and
   reduce fragmentation among programs.

   Component 2: Cash Transfers to eligible households and Social and Behavioral Change
   Communication (US$21 million allocated; US$20.9 million). This component comprised developing the
   Nafa Program, which included cash transfers and Social and Behavior Change Communication (SBCC)
   initiatives. It aimed to directly support NSPP Implementation Area 2 by expanding social protection
   coverage and aligning with NSPP objectives.


                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



  As part of the June 2020 restructuring, the name of this component was revised ‘to improve the coordination
  of social assistance activities, promote temporary social assistance support to rural households in the wake
  of COVID-19, and increase the inclusion of the extreme poor in the Nafa program”. This temporary
  expansion was called the “Nafa Quick” program. Following the implementation of the "Nafa Quick"
  intervention, the project would continue to support the regular Nafa Program for about 15,606 extremely
  poor households, but for a shorter period of 18 months due to the financing gap created by "Nafa Quick."

  To track the "number of households benefitting from the Nafa Quick" intervention an additional project
  development indicator was introduced, and the target revised and increased from 170,000 extreme poor
  individuals to 654,000 individuals to include all recipients of temporary support, with the extreme poor as a
  subset. The implementing arrangements, financing categories and amounts remained unchanged.

  Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (US$3 million; allocated US$2.9 million)

  This component was to finance costs associated with management and capacity building activities of the
  project. The project provided a management fee to the National Nutrition Agency (NaNA), which was also
  the implementing agency for the project to cover additional costs like additional staff, operating expenses,
  performance contracts with implementing partners (Department of Community Development/DCD,

  Department of Social Welfare/DSW, Gambia Bureau of Statistics/GBoS), as well as costs for fiduciary
  functions, monitoring and evaluation activities, and for setting up project Steering Committee meetings. The
  management fee would not cover costs related to developing a management information system,
  contracting a payment service provider, audit of contracts, impact evaluations, vehicles, and direct costs for
  SBC delivery (printing, transport, etc.) Capacity building for project stakeholders involved in the project's
  implementation would also be funded under Component 3. This included covering costs for participation in
  learning events, such as courses, study tours, or other knowledge-exchange opportunities, as needed and
  selectively (PAD, p.17).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates

  The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) grant of US$30 million, and a
  non-World Bank Group counterpart funding of US$1 million with a total project cost of US$31 million (PAD,
  p.3). The Government of The Gambia (GoTG) funds were included as counterpart financing at the start of
  the project and were allocated for staffing, infrastructure, and administration (these categories that were not
  eligible for financing under the project). However, this commitment to support implementation, while fulfilled,
  could not be categorized as counterpart financing for project eligible activities. Eventually, the GoTG
  requested that the counterpart financing be removed from the project (ICR, p.11).

  At Appraisal, of the US$31 million, US$6 million was allocated for development of coordination mechanisms
  for the social assistance sector (Component 1), US$22 million (including US$1 million for counterpart
  funding) was for the Nafa Program of cash transfers to the eligible extreme poor, and Social and Behavioral
  Change Communication/ SBCC (Component 2), and US$3 million was allocated for Project Management
  and Capacity Building (Component 3) (PAD, p.3).




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



   The total estimated project cost at closing was US$29.8 million with US$ 5.9 million disbursed for
   Component 1, US$ 20.9 million disbursed for component 2, and US$ 2.9 million disbursed for component 3
   (ICR, p. 48).

   Dates. The project was approved on May 24, 2019, and became effective on September 9, 2019. The
   midterm review was held in February 2022. The project underwent five restructurings (two in June 2020,
   two in June 2023, and one in December 2023), and closed on December 15, 2023, three months before its
   original closing date of March 29, 2024.

   Restructurings (ICR, p.2):

       1. June 9, 2020: Upon a request from the Government of The Gambia, this restructuring aimed to
            support a larger number of households affected by the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic
            by providing cash transfers through the project's resources for a limited period through the Nafa
            Quick program. To fill the financing gap created by “Nafa Quick”, it was decided that the project
            would support the targeted 15,606 extreme poor households with the Nafa program for a shorter
            initial period – 18 months instead of three years.
       2.   June 30, 2020: This restructuring arose as a result of changes in disbursement arrangements for
            cash transfers related to the June 9, 2020 restructuring.
       3.   June 15, 2023: Through the restructuring, the counterpart financing clause was removed. This
            counterpart financing of US$1 million was included during project design to support Nafa cash
            transfers program as part of Component 2. No disbursement category changes were made when
            this was removed.
       4.   June 21, 2023: This restructuring fixed an error (related to a change made in the wrong component
            of the PAD) in the June 15, 2023 version that was realized after clearance, with the only way to fix
            this being another restructuring. Hence as confirmed by the TTL, the June 21, 2023, restructuring
            supersedes the June 15, 2023 restructuring.
       5.   December 2023: The project closing date was moved forward by three months for an early closing
            from March 2024 to December 2023 (and no other changes were proposed by the GoTG). The
            project was considered to have met its objectives and completed all activities, and depleted its
            funding by October 31, 2023. Other project activities related to accounting, procurement, and other
            fiduciary activities were to be officially closed and completed by December 15, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Rationale

The objectives were highly relevant to the country's context and aligned with both the government’s and the
Bank’s strategic priorities.

Country Context: Gambia is one of the poorest countries in the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS). According to the 2015-16 poverty survey, approximately 47-48 percent of the national
population lived in poverty between 2010 and 2015, with the number of poor individuals increased from
790,000 to 930,000 due to population growth. During this timeframe, urban poverty decreased slightly from

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



               33.4 percent to 31.6 percent, while rural poverty increased significantly from 64.2 percent to 69.5 percent.
               Extreme poverty also rose by 17 percent, from 350,000 to 400,000 households. (CEN, The Gambia, FY18-
               FY21, p.9).

               At the time of project appraisal, The Gambia’s social safety net was small, fragmented, and heavily reliant
               on donor funding. The government implemented various donor-financed social protection programs, such
               as school feeding and cash transfers for the first 1,000 days of life in food-insecure areas, but there was
               minimal domestic funding. The country also lacked a comprehensive national safety net and a platform for
               coordinating or harmonizing social protection efforts, resulting in duplicated efforts and gaps. The
               Government had identified clear priorities in its National Social Protection Policy and Plan, including
               developing a sustainable financing strategy, expanding cash transfer programs, and enhancing government
               capacity for planning, delivering, and monitoring social protection programs (Country Engagement Note/
               CEN, The Gambia, FY18-FY21, p.19).

               A lack of funding, low capacity, and lack of coordination in the social protection sector provided a strong
               rationale for a World Bank intervention. (ICR, p.6).

               Alignment with Strategy: The project also aligned well with national strategies and priorities, as well as
               Bank strategy. It was designed to directly support the Government of The Gambia's high-level objectives by
               contributing to human capital development, as outlined in two policy documents: the National Development
               Plan (NDP) and the National Social Protection Policy (NSPP) through the establishment of a National
               Social Protection Secretariat (NSPS) to coordinate interventions across sectors and agencies, supported by
               a Social registry that could identify potential and actual beneficiaries to support a delivery system for social
               protection (SP) programs.

               Additionally, the project was consistent with the World Bank's Country Engagement Note (CEN), FY18-
               FY21 objective of investing in human capital and enhancing assets and resilience of the poor. The CEN
               comprised of two objectives that consisted of six focus areas, including one focus area on ‘strengthening
               service delivery in social protection’. This included the support to new projects to build a national social
               safety net since most SP programs were limited in coverage, project-based, and financed by donors, with
               limited or no contribution from the Government (CEN, p.36). Hence the CEN suggests that the government
               establish a national SP program to provide protection to the extreme poor and offer a pathway out of
               poverty. The Systematic Country Diagnostic (May 2020) also presented a comprehensive reform agenda
               with a “Build Human Capital” pathway and identifies a policy area on “Expand Coverage of National Social
               Assistance Program” that directly corresponds to the goals of GSSN project. Furthermore, the project’s
               restructuring to address the COVID-19 pandemic was consistent with Pillar 2 of the World Bank’s crisis
               response framework, which focuses on "Protecting the Poor and Vulnerable."


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Improve coordination of social assistance activities

Rationale
The theory of change underpinning the first objective included activities like the creation of a Social Protection
Secretariat, the establishment of a social registry, and developing an effective National M&E Framework for
social assistance interventions that would lead to improved coordination of social protection activities at the
national level. Eventually improved coordination would also contribute to increased inclusion of the extreme
poor).

Outputs and intermediate results

The project helped establish the National Social Protection Secretariat (NSPS) (Intermediate Result/ IR 1.5),
which provided leadership and coordination of all social protection efforts in the country including overseeing
the establishment of the Gambia Social registry (GamSR) (IR 1.1) and the National M&E Framework (IR1.4).
The NSPS built on the results of the GamSR and the M&E framework to produce an annual report on key
indicators across the sector (IR 1.6).

The social registry (Gam SR) achieved its target of completing data collection in selected districts covering 40
of the 43 districts in the Gambia (IR1.2) thereby covering 85 percent of the country's population for social
assistance programs and exceeding the target of reaching 51,000 households through the registry by actually
reaching 203,022 beneficiary households (IR 1.3).

The Steering Committee meetings indicator achieved its target of four ‘effective’ (quarterly) meetings per
year. The ICR reported that at the last ISR, only three meetings had taken place that calendar year, but the
last one was already scheduled and the team eventually confirmed that the last meeting was held in
November 2023 (ICR, footnote 15).

Outcomes

The project established and created institutions that provided building blocks of a national social protection
system, ensuring coordination of social protection activities across the sector.

The number of programs using the GamSR exceeded the target of 3 programs since 6 programs used the
GamSR (OI 1.2). The registry helps with better coordination among various SP actors and programs, limits
duplication, and allows for use of socio-economic data from the social registry to improve targeting.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Promote temporary social assistance support to rural households in the wake of COVID-19.

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)




Rationale
This objective did not have a direct reference in the theory of change since it was added as part of the June
2020 restructuring. Through the restructuring, this objective included a newer Nafa Quick program designed
for households to cope better during COVID-19 and lean season shocks by providing two cash transfers to
rural households.

The assessment of PDO 2’s efficacy examined the outcome and intermediate results indicators that were
introduced through the first restructuring of the project. These indicators were added to measure the impact
and success of the temporary support provided to rural households during the pandemic (ICR, p. 14).

Outputs and intermediate results

To provide a timely response to help households cope with COVID-19 and lean season shocks, all Nafa
Quick payments were made before the end of the lean season, thereby exceeding the target at 100 percent
compared to the set target of 70 percent (IR 2.1).

The ICR did not provide information on how the Nafa Quick program was implemented on the ground
including a lack of information on how beneficiaries were 'actually' reached, whether digital or in-person
payments were made to beneficiaries, was staff trained, and how records were maintained for Nafa Quick
payments.

Outcomes

Nafa Quick delivered two cash transfers of GMD 3,000 each to 78,359 rural households, surpassing the
target of 60,000 households (OI 2.1). These transfers were carried out over four months during COVID-19
restrictions, which also coincided with the lean season. All payments from Nafa Quick were completed before
the end of the lean season (IR 2.1), offering timely help for households to manage impacts of both the
COVID-19 pandemic and the lean season.

The rating for this objective is rated as Substantial, since the Nafa Quick program exceeded targets on the
percentage of payments made before end of season and on the target number of household beneficiaries.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Increase the inclusion of the extreme poor in the Nafa Program

Rationale
The theory of change underlying the third objective held that the establishment of a Nafa program on cash
transfers, and an accompanying behavioral change program would increase inclusion of extreme poor in cash
transfer programs.


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



                            Outputs and intermediate results

                            The project helped establish a cash transfer program for the extreme poor (IR 3.1), a Management
                            Information System/ MIS (IR 3.6), a Grievance Redress Mechanism/ GRM (IR 3.7), and a Social and
                            Behavioral Change Communication/ SBCC program (IR 3.10). The GRM reported effectively managing
                            targets as it helped to classify and channel grievances through agreed resolution methods (IR 3.8), and also
                            helped resolve grievances through the GRM system (IR 3.9).

                            As part of the SBCC program, 8,549 trainers were trained exceeding the target of training 2,000 trainers (IR
                            3.11). The number of beneficiary households attending the behavioral change sessions also exceeded
                            targets with 15,099 beneficiaries compared to an initial target of 11,705 (IR 3.12).

                            Targets were also exceeded for beneficiary households receiving the right amount of cash on time, by
                            reaching 84 percent beneficiary households at project closing compared to 80 percent (IR 3.2). Targets were
                            also exceeded with 97 percent of beneficiary households selecting a female household member as cash
                            transfer recipient even though the initial target was 75 percent (IR 3.3). Beneficiary households that have
                            either adequate or good food consumption scores (IR 3.4) also exceeded targets with 98 percent households
                            compared to an initial target of 80 percent (ICR, p.16).

                            Outcomes

                            Outcome indicators associated with this objective were achieved with a total beneficiary count of social safety
                            net programs at 1,039,043 compared to a target of 170,000 at Appraisal and 654,000 after the first
                            restructuring.

                            It is important to note that at Appraisal, the target for social safety net beneficiaries (OI 3.1) was set at
                            170,000, and after the first restructuring (June 2020), the target for social safety net beneficiaries was set at
                            654,000 which was the Nafa Quick program target with the thinking to avoid any double counting. But the
                            project did not track the poverty status of Nafa Quick beneficiaries and therefore was not able to assess
                            a potential overlap between the two programs. The final beneficiary count at project closing was 1,039,043,
                            which is the sum of Nafa and Nafa Quick beneficiaries.,. However, IEG received additional information from
                            the project team, and has taken into consideration the two scenarios laid out by the Region with assumptions
                            of complete overlap between the two programs (Nafa and Nafa Quick), and no overlap between these two
                            programs, and the fact that the number of beneficiaries were exceeded in both scenarios. With this additional
                            information, and the good performance on exceeding targets for other indicators, the rating for this objective
                            is rated as High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



  The project helped establish institutions that would help with a coordinated national social safety net system
  and implemented a cash transfer program targeted at the extreme poor, with the project adapting to COVID-
  19 needs through the rollout of temporary social assistance to rural households in the Nafa Quick
  program. Two project objectives were rated Substantial, with the third objective rated High, leading to overall
  efficacy rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD (pp. 25-27) as part of its ‘Economic Analysis’ explains growing international evidence of cash transfers
and how they cushion the poor from destitution by citing a meta-review (Ralston, Andrews, and Hsiao, 2017,
World Bank) on the impacts of safety nets in Africa. This meta-review shows a range of benefits from cash
transfer programs like breaking intergenerational cycles of poverty, positive effects on usage of health services
and diet consumption, rise in school attendance and enrollment, and asset accumulation mainly through
livestock ownership and ownership of household and business durables. The study also notes that generally,
cash is spent first on more and better food, second on education and health expenses, and third on productive
assets. Further, the ICR (pp.17-20) explained the rationale for investing in and benefits of cash transfers and
SBCC activities and provided evidence related to efficiency of the project.

The ICR attributes the project's cost-effectiveness in improving coordination of social assistance activities
through reduction in duplication and overlap of mandates across the social protection sector (ICR, p.18). This
was done by institutionalizing structures like the Social Protection Secretariat (SPS) and the Social Registry, as
well as coordination mechanisms such as the National M&E Framework and the MIS, which allowed for better
alignment and integration of various social assistance programs. The ICR also noted non-monetary benefits by
relying both on program results and results from programs in similar settings, indicating that the cash transfer
program showed higher levels of acceptable food consumption for 97.9 percent of program beneficiaries, and
also noted that 54.3 percent of beneficiaries started a new business, and 38.2 percent increased savings (ICR,
p.17). The ICR also considered SBCC effective since 57 percent of beneficiaries had increased knowledge of
SBCC compared to the baseline, and 82 percent of beneficiaries had increased their knowledge of early
childhood development (ICR, p.17).

The ICR also assessed cost-effectiveness of the program by comparing evidence from similar programs in the
region on poverty and human capital. For example, the benefit provided under both the Nafa and Nafa Quick
was considered in line with international practices, and the monthly payment was 2.5 times higher than that of
the Building Resilience Through Social Transfers initiative. Results from the Nafa program in The Gambia were
also in line with those from Senegal and Mali’s cash transfer programs (ICR, p. 17).

There were shortcomings in the efficiency of implementation. Funding disruptions to the NSPS resulted in a 5-
month hiatus for Component 1 of the project from March to August 2021. During this period, no steering
committee meetings were held, and progress on the Social Registry was stalled. Additionally, the funding
disparity between NaNA and NSPS created tensions, eventually leading to an audit of NSPS expenses which
led to the suspension of funds during the audit, preventing NSPS from operating. Consequently, NaNA

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



experienced delays in receiving the GamSR beneficiary lists from NSPS, which in turn delayed the Nafa
program. The issues were ultimately resolved through high-level interventions at the Office of the Vice President
(OVP), and by August 2021, the project resumed implementation. Despite these setbacks, all objectives were
achieved ahead of the initial closing date, allowing the project to close three months early (December 2023
restructuring). (ICR, p.25).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project objectives were highly relevant to the country context and well aligned with the country strategy. The
project was also aligned with one of the six focus areas in the World Bank's Country Engagement Note (CEN,
FY18-FY21), including the one on ‘strengthening service delivery in social protection’. Relevance is hence rated
High.

Overall efficacy is rated Substantial, with two objectives substantially achieved, and the third objective rated as
High. Efficiency is rated Substantial in view of cost effectiveness aspects of project activities, but with
implementation issues that moderately reduced efficiency. These findings are consistent with a satisfactory
outcome rating


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk of not maintaining development outcomes upon project completion remained low. This was due to
several factors: strong government commitment reflected in both institutionalization of the social protection
sector by establishment of the National Social Protection Secretariat (NSPS) as a coordinating body; support


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



for the sustainability of GSSN’s gains; and the GamSR enhancing coordination and providing essential data
for social sector decisions.

Further strengthening of development outcomes was seen in a sustainability plan for GamSR which included
a plan for future expansion through a study on urban targeting options with an eventual rollout of the Gam
SR to urban areas (ICR, p. 24), and a continuation and expansion of the Nafa program to support the
extreme poor under the upcoming Gambia RISE project, which also got high-level endorsement in the
President’s 2023 State of the Nation Address (ICR, p.30).

The ICR did not address other external risks to the project, but it is important to recognize the significant
external challenges faced by The Gambia at the time of the project’s appraisal in 2019. As one of the poorest
and most fragile countries in Africa, The Gambia struggled with weak institutions, political instability, and a
high vulnerability to external shocks. The country had become increasingly fragile over the previous decade,
ranking in the bottom 20th percentile of the Fragile States Index (2017). Additionally, poverty levels were
high, with rural poverty rising from 64.2 percent in 2010 to 69.5 percent in 2015 (ICR, p.5). In 2017, The
Gambia had experienced its first democratic transfer of power in 22 years, ending a period of autocratic rule.
The macroeconomic environment was marked by extremely high debt, significant fiscal deficits, and
negligible international reserves. The new government initiated economic reforms with support from
international donors. Nonetheless, the fragility, poverty, and weak institutions remain a consistent risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project drew support from analytical work (like the gender and intra-household
  allocation study which indicated majority preference for the husband to receive the cash transfer) and
  lessons provided by the World Bank’s past projects (like The Gambia’s past Maternal and Child Nutrition
  and Health Results-Based Project). Capacity building began during preparation, including diagnostics
  and design support for the NSPS, in collaboration with UNICEF and the EU.

  Project implementation arrangements supported strengthening the National Social Protection
  Implementation Plan (NSPIP) of the Government of the Gambia (GoTG) with the project providing
  leadership, coordination and implementation mechanisms through establishing a Social Protection
  Secretariat (Component 1A), and a Social Registry (Component 1B). Even though the ICR suggests that
  the results framework provided a good roadmap to achieve PDOs, there were indicators like ‘more
  effective steering committee meetings’ that may not have captured the outcome on ‘improved
  coordination of social assistance activities’. The ICR also notes that ‘sustainability was embedded in the
  project’s design’ since there was a strong emphasis on institutional development for a social safety net
  system. The Nafa Program on case transfers to eligible extremely poor households and the SBCC piece
  (Component 2) were also designed to directly support NSPIP implementation by increasing coverage of
  SP policies and programs.

  Social safeguards risks related to the inclusion of women in the program. To address potential risks to
  women, a gender and intra-household allocation study informed the project design during the preparation
  phase. Additionally, extensive outreach efforts, particularly through radio, were made to encourage the


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



  selection of women as beneficiaries (ICR, p.28). The Bank also responded to needs related to the
  COVID-19 pandemic as part of the first restructuring by introducing the Nafa Quick program.

  The Bank drawing lessons from previous projects, conducting studies during the design phase (like the
  one on gender issues), program implementation focused on building SP institutions and SP
  programs, and restructuring through the Nafa Quick program to respond to COVID-19 needs for social
  assistance, all contributed to a Satisfactory Quality-at-Entry rating for the Bank.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank effectively monitored the project, offering regular support and mobilizing resources and
 partners for technical assistance. Collaborations with the EU, WFP, and UNICEF enhanced efficiency and
 efficacy. Supervision missions occurred every six months, with virtual meetings during COVID-19
 supplemented by bi-weekly updates. Nine Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) were produced, providing
 detailed progress updates. The change of the Task Team Leader (TTL) at Midterm Review was managed
 smoothly with sufficient overlap, and the new TTL’s base in the region allowed for close in-person
 supervision. Continued World Bank engagement resolved a five-month funding disruption to NSPS, and
 ongoing guidance ensured quality monitoring and evaluation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original and revised PDO were clearly stated. While the majority of PDO level indicators were
 well defined in the results framework through a combination of qualitative and quantitative indicators, there
 were weaknesses in the design of a few indicators. For example, the PDO indicator on ‘more effective
 steering committee meetings’(OI 1.1) is not technically an outcome indicator, and more of an output. There
 was also a risk of double counting Nafa and Nafa Quick beneficiaries through the PDO indicator on
 ‘beneficiaries of social safety net programs’ (OI 3.1). The ICR notes that this was a significant issue since
 eventually the number of Nafa program beneficiaries included both Nafa Quick and Nafa beneficiaries
 (ICR, p.15). The project did not track the poverty status of Nafa Quick beneficiaries and therefore was not
 able to assess the extent of overlap between the two programs.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



 The ICR also identified a shortcomings in the results framework related to a typo in the Project Appraisal
 Document (PAD) IRI 1.3, which inaccurately stated the target number of households in the Social registry
 as 15,000 instead of the intended 51,000.. Despite this discrepancy, the project was understood by the
 World Bank team and counterparts to target 51,000 households, with the error not impacting
 implementation or outcomes.

 However, the project did have M&E design and arrangements that were well embedded institutionally. The
 Nafa Program was to go through four levels of monitoring and evaluation: process evaluation, post-
 distribution analysis, panel analysis and impact evaluation (PAD, p.19). This was further verified by the ICR
 which reported on how these approaches were applied for the Nafa program including: (i) routine
 monitoring of payments, grievances and SBCC through the MIS; (ii) beneficiary satisfaction surveys; (iii)
 post-distribution monitoring surveys; (iv) panel analysis; (v) an impact evaluation (ICR p.26).



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation for the GSSN project went well and included several pieces like:

  (a) The National M& E Framework which helped consolidate data from various social assistance
  schemes in The Gambia, including those by the GoTG, NGOs, and development partners. These reports
  detailed each program’s activities and coverage, serving as a crucial tool for coordination and
  cooperation across the sector (ICR, p.26);

  (b) M&E for GamSR implementation focused on ensuring high data quality with data collection handled
  by the GBoS;

  (c) Several checks and balances were in place through an M&E strategy for the Nafa program including
  beneficiary satisfaction surveys and post-distribution surveys (ICR, p.26). Additionally, an impact
  evaluation was designed to rigorously assess the effects of the Nafa program on the extreme poor.
  Baseline data for the impact evaluation was collected in September 2021 but endline data will be
  collected as part of the Gambia RISE project in July 2024;

  (d) MIS and mobile technology were effective and facilitated timely routine monitoring. The MIS tracked
  payments by generating and submitting beneficiary households lists to payment service providers, and
  also included a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) module with an online dashboard for GRM focal
  points and an SBCC module that allowed the SBCC team to record the number of people trained and
  session attendance for beneficiary households (ICR, p.27);

  (e) The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was an important element of the project. Under the Nafa
  program, beneficiaries could report grievances via a toll-free line or community committees, with issues
  escalated to higher levels if needed. (ICR, p.27).



c. M&E Utilization
  The project used M&E data to inform decision making, and to make changes in implementation. For
  example, low beneficiary awareness of GRM access points led to the establishment of grievance desks
  at payment sites for the Nafa Quick program. Other instances of changes made due to M&E data


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



  include shifts in topic selection for some SBCC themes after surveys showed a limited understanding of
  these themes by beneficiaries.

  The ICR suggests that utilization of M&E findings informed subsequent policies and interventions. For
  example, key elements developed under the project like the nationwide M&E framework, MIS, and GRM
  were embedded in the national development strategies through the Social Protection Bill, which is
  awaiting enactment at the National Assembly. The proposed bill institutionalizes GamSR as the
  database to be used for identification of potential beneficiaries for all social protection interventions.

  The ICR highlights how the institutions established by the project are influencing the next phase of social
  protection in The Gambia. This is seen in the “Gambia First Boosting Resilience and Unlocking
  Productive Potential DPF with Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option/ Cat DDO” (P177748), which
  aligns with a focus on adaptive social protection. The Government of The Gambia (GoTG) has issued
  the National Disaster Management Prevention Regulations 2023, which define roles and responsibilities
  of stakeholders and establish coordination mechanisms for responding to climate shocks with these
  regulations designating the NSPS and GamSR as key institutions for shock response (ICR, p.30).

  In addition, the development of a National M&E and associated annual reports under Component 1
  contribute to building sustainable social protection systems in The Gambia.

  M& E was generally sufficient to assess the achievement of objectives and to test the links in the results
  chain, but with moderate weaknesses, and is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C for environmental safeguards since it was unlikely to have any
   adverse environmental impacts (PAD, p.30), and did not trigger any World Bank safeguards policies (ICR,
   p. 28), as it involved no physical infrastructure or component activities with a physical footprint (PAD, p.30).

   But there were social safeguards concerns with main risks related to women's inclusion in the program. To
   address this, a Gender and Intra-household allocation study (Badiju M. et al, 2019) showed the high level of
   patriarchy in The Gambia (PAD, p.30) and informed project design, after which media outreach especially
   through radio, encouraged women to participate as beneficiaries (ICR, p. 28). Throughout the project, M&E
   data were gender-disaggregated, and feedback channels were adapted during COVID-19.

   The Midterm review noted a potential cultural or gender-related barrier to reporting serious grievances,
   leading to a study by a local NGO which identified a lack of young women in GRM committees as a
   constraint. This resulted in efforts to include more women in these committees. Staff received training on
   safe and ethical GBV reporting channels for the GRM. Additionally, a Safeguards Incident Response Toolkit
   (SIRT) was issued after a road traffic accident that led to two fatalities of former Nafa Quick beneficiaries in
   November 2020, though the investigation found no project link and the SIRT was closed.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



  The ICR (p. 28) reported that overall compliance with environmental and social safeguards was
  Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: There were no significant challenges reported on project financial management
  (FM).

  Overall FM performance of the implementing agency NaNA was seen as satisfactory, with accurate books
  of accounts and supporting documents been maintained for all expenditures, and the agency being familiar
  with World Bank FM requirements at appraisal further helped (PAD, p.28). FM also met the World Bank’s
  minimum requirements as outlined in the Bank Policy and Directive on Investment Project Financing
  effective in 2017 (PAD, p.28).

  Throughout implementation, financial management (FM) was reported mostly satisfactory, with strong
  procedures, internal controls, and staffing in place. The existing accounting software was customized for
  the project, and both internal and external auditors were engaged. Bookkeeping was current, transactions
  were well-documented, and bank reconciliations were timely. Audit reports were certified without
  reservations, and interim financial reports (IFRs) were submitted on time and of satisfactory quality. Minor
  issues, such as delays in internal audits and updates to accounting registries, were promptly addressed
  with support from the World Bank FM team. By project closing, FM risk was rated moderate, and FM
  performance was rated Satisfactory (ICR, p.28).

  On procurement, the risk was considered Moderate, and procurement performance rated Highly
  Satisfactory at project closing (ICR, p.28). Even though five entities, namely Office of the Vice
  President/OVP, GBoS, NaNA, DSW, and DCD were involved in the project, NaNA managed the overall
  procurement process, utilizing its prior experience with World Bank projects. Several measures were taken
  to implement a smooth procurement process including a procurement officer being recruited for the project
  to offset the higher workload of the NaNA procurement specialist, and additional procurement training
  provided to staff from departments lacking experience with World Bank regulations (ICR, p.28).

  The Procurement Plan was regularly updated throughout implementation. Yearly Procurement Post
  Reviews identified some issues with the accuracy and timeliness of information reported, which were
  addressed eventually. The team made significant improvements in contract management and the use of
  the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system over the course of the project.
  Hence the project did not face any major procurement related shortcomings.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR reports on ‘likely’ positive spillover effects to non-beneficiary households in the community
  through an expansion of consumption and production due to cash transfers and transmission of messages
  on changing SBCC behaviors to their neighbors. However, the evidence for these spillover effects relies on



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



   studies in other African countries (ICR, p.22. footnote 33) and hence cannot be cited as conclusive
   evidence.

   It is notable that the evaluation of documents related to the playful parenting pilot shows positive spillovers
   on non-beneficiaries from the intervention.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Moderate shortcomings in
                                                                                  efficacy aspects and significant
                                                                                  implementation disruptions
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory
                                                                                  halting core project activities for
                                                                                  five months, moderately
                                                                                  affecting efficiency.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  Moderate shortcomings largely
Quality of M&E                  High                   Substantial                related to implemenation of the
                                                                                  Nafa Quick program.
Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons re-stated by the
IEG Review.

      An emphasis on foundational elements of a national social protection system leads to
       significant short-term, and long -term gains. The project’s success in laying the
       foundation of national social protection systems through a dedicated component on
       institutional building (in this case the establishment of the Social Protection Secretariat/ SPS
       in Component 1), allowed for both the creation of new systems including a coordinating
       institution, social registry, national M&E framework, and MIS in the short-term, and also
       helped these elements to ensure their inter-operability and integration into national
       institutions for the longer-term. The success of the project is also reflected in how these
       social protection building blocks are now being institutionalized through policies, bills, and
       regulations, supported by strong government ownership.
      An effective use and integration of technology helps with both targeting and
       expansion of the program. Specifically, the project’s MIS and Social registry Information
       System helped integrate the various subcomponents, including data collection for GamSR,


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       The Gambia Social Safety Net Project (P167260)



         its utilization, and M&E activities. Barcodes and QR codes facilitated easy beneficiary
         identification. The MIS also supported efficient grievance resolution through the GRM.
        Recognizing and building on existing capacity of agencies, and partnerships leads to
         efficiencies in design and implementation: Working with National Nutrition Agency
         (NaNA) as the implementing agency, helped draw on the institution’s expertise, and prior
         collaboration with the World Bank. Department of Community Development (DCD) had a
         large network of local development officers, and Department of Social Welfare (DSW) had
         expertise on gender-related topics. Eventually this led to improved efficiency, fostered
         synergies, and strengthened sustainability of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a clear and candid overview of the project experience, aligning well with the stated
objectives. It effectively documented the evolution of the social protection program through the three
components including changes made through a restructuring during the course of the project due to COVID-19.
The analysis was systematic, the evidence was adequate overall, and gaps were appropriately explained.
Lessons were derived from project experience. The ICR was concise and followed established guidelines. It
was internally consistent. The overall quality of the ICR was substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                               Page 17 of 17
