     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024166

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P149049                                   Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr.

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of             Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0924,TF-A5550                         31-Jul-2022                                            6,617,461.84

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 08-Apr-2016                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            7,800,000.00                                     7,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             7,800,000.00                                     6,617,461.84

 Actual                                         6,617,461.84                                     6,617,461.84




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Azada Hussaini             Chikako Miwa                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO) as written in the Strategic Climate Fund Forest Investment Program
   Grant Agreement (page 6) dated April 26, 2016 was “to strengthen the capacity of targeted Indigenous People
   and Local Communities (IPLC) in the Member Country's selected territories and at the national level
   to participate in REDD+ oriented land and forest management activities.” The PDO statement in the Project
   Appraisal Document (page 13) was almost identical to that in the Grant Agreement, just omitting the words
   “the Member Country.”


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



   This ICR Review will assess the achievement of the following PDOs:

        1. To strengthen the capacity of targeted IPLC in selected territories and at the national level.
        2. To increase participation of IPLC in REDD+ oriented land and forest management activities.

   In the context of this project, the term 'Indigenous Peoples' (IP) is specifically applied to the Pygmy
   population, recognizing their unique cultural heritage and ancestral ties to the region. Conversely, the term
   'Local Communities' (LC) refers to those groups residing in areas adjacent to the IPs. While these
   communities share certain cultural aspects with the IPs, they do not qualify as IP due to distinct differences in
   historical and social attributes. The project supported both groups to promote conflict resolution and enhanced
   resource governance.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had three main components:

        1. Reinforce the Participation of IPLC in Forest and Land Management Processes Related to
           REDD+ (appraised cost: US$1.5 million, actual cost: US$1.59 million). The component focused on
           building national-level capacities to strengthen IPLC voices on land and forest policies. Activities
           included supporting advocacy and lobbying for stronger recognition of IPLC rights, enhancing
           participation in land tenure policy reform, and operationalizing formal recognition of traditional IPLC
           rights. These efforts aimed to improve IPLC consideration in the forest sector, increase legitimate
           participation in policy reform, and formally recognize IPLC traditional rights in specific forested
           areas.
        2. Support Community-based Sustainable Forest and Land Management (appraised cost: US$2.6
           million, actual cost: US$3.32 million). The component aimed to empower IPLC through formal
           recognition of their traditional user rights and financing natural resource management activities. This
           component promoted sustainable forest and land management through alternative livelihood
           activities and cultural promotion. It provided micro-grants for IPLC to engage in or improve
           sustainable livelihoods and explored innovative ways to secure IPLC forest management
           activities. The expected results included enhanced climate change adaptation, improved rural
           livelihoods, and the promotion of IPLC cultural and traditional values, along with securing user rights
           for IPLC.
        3. Increase the Capacity to Implement Development Activities for IPLC and Consolidate
           Feedback (appraised cost: US$1.9 million, actual cost: US$2.89 million). This component focused
           on project coordination, implementation, and fiduciary management. It aimed to coordinate feedback
           channels at local and national levels and creating a national network of IPLC representatives for
           continuous monitoring and reporting.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$6 million. On April 8, 2021, a second grant
   from the Central African Forest Initiative was added to the project in the amount of US$ 1.8 million, bringing
   the total project cost up to US$ 7.8 million. Total disbursement at the time of project completion was US$
   6.6 million. The project team informed IEG (on August 13, 2024) that the remaining funds were transferred
   back to the Central African Forest Initiative and redistributed to other projects.

   Financing: The Strategic Climate Fund signed a grant agreement in the amount of US$6 million on April
   26, 2016. The budget was increased by US$1.8 million to accommodate additional financing from the
   Central African Forest Initiative.

   Borrower Contribution: There were no contributions from the borrower.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 8, 2016, and became effective in June 2016 as scheduled. It
   underwent a mid-term review in October 2019. The closing date was extended twice due to governance
   issues, challenges in developing community-based micro-projects, and delays exacerbated by COVID-19
   lockdown measures. The first extension, following the mid-term review, moved the original closing date from
   July 31, 2021, to July 31, 2022. A second extension of 11 months, approved in June 2022, further adjusted
   the closing date to June 30, 2023. The project closed 23 months after the original closing date on June 30,
   2023.

   The project received a grant financing of US$1.8 from the Central African Forest Initiative which extended
   the closing date from July 31, 2021, to July 31, 2022. This funding was allocated across all components with
   US$ 90,000 in Component 1, an increase of US$715,000 in Component 2, and US$995,000 in Component
   3.

   Following the mid-term review, several targets were increased, including: 1) the aggregated score on
   community-based land and forest governance in four pilot sites raised from 60 to 100; 2) direct project
   beneficiaries increased from 20,000 to 25,000; 3) IPLC representative organizations receiving capacity-
   building support increased from 50 to 60; and 4) people in forest and adjacent communities benefiting
   monetarily or non-monetarily from the forest increased from 15,000 to 19,000.

   A project restructuring was completed on June 15, 2022. The restructuring involved extending the closing
   date by eleven months to June 30, 2023, and reallocating disbursement categories to increase project
   management costs by $150,000. The extension was completed to address delays in
   project implementation, particularly in executing micro-projects and establishing community forest
   concessions. The restructuring did not entail any changes to the results framework, PDO, and project
   activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: With 155 million hectares of rainforest, the DRC has the world’s second-largest
rainforest, and harbors half of all African rainforests. It stores the equivalent of 85 billion tons of carbon
dioxide, which roughly equals three years of global energy-related Carbon Dioxide emissions. Despite this,

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



DRC was among the top ten countries in the world in terms of forest cover loss in absolute terms, losing
more than 350,000 hectares of forest annually between 2000 and 2010. This was primarily due to
subsistence agriculture and timber harvesting. Indigenous people, numbering around 600,000, played a
major role in biodiversity conservation and sustainable forest management. However, they were
marginalized, lacked land rights, and had limited access to basic services, which hindered their full
participation in development and conservation efforts. IPs' traditional knowledge and sustainable practices
were crucial for the DRC's forest management and overall environmental health.

PDO alignment to Country priorities: Recognizing the significant threat to its forests, the DRC adopted a
National Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+) in 2012,
aiming to stabilize forest cover on two-thirds of its land area by 2030. Following this, the government
approved the National REDD+ Investment Plan in 2015, providing a framework for implementing the
REDD+ strategy. The project was introduced as part of these programs. At the sub-national level, 16
territories were covered by the project given their high concentration of forest areas and IPLC. The project
team clarified to IEG (November 19, 2024) that the choice of investment areas was determined through the
Forest Investment Program’s Strategy which targets deforestation "hotspots" near cities like Kinshasa,
Kananga, Mbuji-Mayi, and Kisangani The IPLC then selected the territories near these areas.

Bank experience in the sector: The World Bank has had prior engagements in the forest management
sector in DRC. In July 2011, the Climate Investment Fund (hosted by the World Bank) introduced the Forest
Investment Program funded a World Bank project focused on supporting alternative livelihoods to
communities in the Kinshasa basin. The fund also supported two other similar projects implemented by the
African Development Bank covering two other basins—the projects aimed to improve sustainable forest
management while improving the livelihood of rural communities.

To engage Indigenous People, the World Bank introduced a Development Strategy for Indigenous Peoples
in the DRC in 2009, which was initiated following a 2005 Inspection Panel investigation. The strategy aimed
to systematically integrate indigenous people into Bank-funded activities. The Forest Dependent
Communities Support project was the first World Bank standalone operation with an explicit focus on
indigenous people and their role in land governance and sustainable forest management. Building on
previous projects that promoted sustainable livelihoods among communities, this project advanced further
by specifically targeting IPLC in land governance to improve their participation in decision-making
processes related to forest management and resource use.

PDO alignment to World Bank Strategies: The project was aligned with the World Bank Group Country
Assistance Strategy for DRC (CAS FY13-16), which emphasized good governance and sustainable
development, and addressed climate change as a cross-cutting issue. It also complemented the
Bank’s Africa Strategy, which prioritized local benefits from natural resource management and forest
conservation. The project remains relevant to the current World Bank Group Country Partnership
Framework (FY22-26) which aims to scale up efforts to strengthen the resilience of landscapes and
communities in all provinces surrounding the country’s forest, including the use of DPFs to improve forest
governance.

PDO Level: The PDO was pitched at the intermediate outcome level and addressed key development
challenges. Capacity building and inclusion of IPLC in forest management processes was expected to
improve forest management, enhance the sustainability of forest-based value chains, and ultimately
conserve DRC’s biodiversity. The PDO covered both national and local level outcomes, which proved to be
challenging for the project to achieve given the low capacities of counterpart agencies at national and local


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



               levels, the multidimensional and complex nature of the interventions required to make progress, and the
               difficulties in capturing outcomes during the project implementation cycle. Strengthening the capacity of
               targeted IPLC at both territorial and national levels assumed a uniform readiness and willingness among
               diverse communities, which may not have been the case. Increasing IPLC participation in REDD+ oriented
               land and forest management activities was crucial but faced substantial barriers, including existing power
               dynamics, land tenure complexities, and conflicts of interest. The success of the PDO hinged on addressing
               these underlying issues.

               Overall, the project was responsive to the country’s national priorities and the World Bank country
               objectives. It also aligned well with global knowledge on the role of IPLC in forest and biodiversity
               conservation. The project’s relevance is rated as "High".


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the capacity of targeted IPLC in selected territories and at the national level.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC)

                             Project activities included information dissemination about REDD+, introduction of initiatives to bundle IPLC
                             interests, information sharing about international and national laws, capacity building trainings to IPLC
                             organizations, grants for alternative livelihood activities, facilitation of partnerships between local NGOs and
                             IPLC to deliver micro-projects, preparation of operational documents to formally set up community-managed
                             areas, national-level events to sensitize decision makers about traditional populations, support for IPLC
                             leaders’ participation in the land tenure policy reform process, operationalization of formal recognition
                             of traditional rights of IPLC, facilitation of inclusion of IPLC leaders in working groups and meetings related to
                             land tenure policy reform, initiating the official recognition of land use rights and traditional governance in four
                             areas, curating existing documentation on IPLC culture and livelihoods, creating additional knowledge on
                             IPLC, and supporting the potential commercial development of natural resources.

                             The activities were expected to lead to the following outputs: awareness workshops and knowledge exchange
                             events conducted, operational documents produced, IPLC interest groups and networks established, IPLC
                             organizations trained, alternative livelihood grants provided, IPLC demonstrate the capacity to execute micro-
                             projects, IPLC culture promoted, micro-projects that reduce deforestation implemented, governance
                             framework feasibility studies completed to design management framework around traditional governance
                             systems.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



In the medium term, the project aimed to achieve outcomes such as national programs that reflect the specific
needs of traditional populations, a land tenure policy reform process that includes the engagement of IPLC,
improved capacity of IPLC organizations, strengthened collaboration between IPLC and local NGOs, and
increased adoption of alternative livelihood practices. These outcomes were intended to foster greater IPLC
involvement in forest management, enhance legal awareness, reduce deforestation, and support the
development of resilient and sustainable community-based initiatives. Ultimately, these efforts were expected
to contribute to long-term goals including biodiversity conservation, strengthened community self-governance,
and increased participation of IPLC in the forest product value chain.

The theory of change was logical and relied on a few assumptions. However, it overlooked barriers like
resource constraints and socio-political dynamics that IPLC may face. It also presumed effective collaboration
and proper grant utilization without addressing potential challenges like differing priorities.

Outputs

      50 IPLC representative organizations were provided with capacity-building support aimed at
         increasing their participation in land use management, meeting the original target of 50 and nearly
         achieving the revised target of 60.
        75% of the sub-projects were successfully completed and have achieved their objectives, meeting the
         target of 75%.
        250,000 people directly benefited from the project, far exceeding both the original target of 20,000 and
         revised target of 25,000. This included 30% female beneficiaries.
        62% of the targeted beneficiaries were satisfied with project interventions, meeting the original target
         of 62% while falling short of the revised target of 75%.
        75% of beneficiaries indicated they were satisfied with learnings from the land rights securing
         activities. This indicator was added in the ICR but was not part of the results framework in the
         approved PAD and it was not included during the project restructuring.
        85% of grievances that were registered during project implementation were addressed, meeting the
         original target of 85% and exceeding the revised target of 80%.

Outcomes

      28,880 people in forest and adjacent community with monetary/non-monetary benefits from forest,
         exceeding both the original target of 15,000 and revised target of 16,000. This included 7,996 women,
         and 16,337 ethnic minorities and indigenous people. This indicator was defined as the extent to which
         local people saw improved livelihoods due to the intervention, covering both monetary income and
         non-monetary benefits like easier access to fuelwood and cultural and spiritual services. The indicator
         captured a one-time perception of selected beneficiaries and which with already broad parameters.
         Even though the project did not provide an objective assessment of the extent to which production or
         income levels improved, the following additional results were noted.

Beyond the results framework, the project achieved the following results related to capacity building of IPLC:

      IPLC utilized and managed 558 hectares of agroecological agroforestry systems, cultivating fruit trees
       like avocado, safou, mango, orange, and cocoa.
      The project facilitated agricultural production: 336 tons of rice, 6 tons of vegetables, 48 tons of
       cassava, 167 tons of potatoes, and 7 tons of peanuts.

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)




      840 beehives were installed to initiate honey production.
      The project rehabilitated 29 kilometers of agricultural tracks through Labor-Intensive Public Works
         (LIPW).
        Five storage depots and two water sources were constructed.
        Ten units for processing agricultural products were set up.
        Fifteen classrooms underwent rehabilitation.
        6,852 individuals, including 1,583 women, participated in training on forest conservation, financial
         management, community forestry, land governance, and environmental and social safeguards.
        Specific training was provided on technical skills like GPS use, map production, and participatory
         mapping.
        4,488 individuals, including 3,035 women, were trained in literacy and basic math skills in 76
         temporary functional literacy centers.
        Training improved participants' abilities to read, write, manage personal savings, and use digital tools.
        75% of micro-projects were successfully completed and achieved their objectives, demonstrating the
         effectiveness of the training and support provided.

Despite the absence of specific results indicators for micro-project outcomes, the ICR highlighted significant
achievements in fruit, vegetable, and dried fruit production, along with community efforts in school and road
rehabilitation. The report also detailed the number of training beneficiaries and training modules. The project
supported the organization of village savings and loan associations (VSLA). The exact nature of the support
was not detailed, and not mentioned in the appraisal document.

Overall, the project achieved or exceeded most indicators. Although there were gaps in evidence towards the
objective in the results framework, the ICR provided results on the nature of interventions and projects
implemented to demonstrate capacity building. The successful implementation and completion of micro-
projects under the project and the satisfaction rate of the beneficiaries serve as tangible evidence of the
enhanced capacities acquired by the IPLC. Therefore, the outcome is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase participation of IPLC in REDD+ oriented land and forest management activities.

Rationale
The project’s theory of change which combines objectives 1 and 2 is presented as a single theory of change
under Objective 1 in Section 4.

Outputs

      50% of Dedicated Grant Mechanism stakeholders perceived the DGM governance and processes as
         transparent and Inclusive, meeting the 50% target.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)




      78% of IPLC who were invited to the National REDD+ Coordination and National Council for Land
       Reform were satisfied regarding IPLC representativeness in these platforms, exceeding the target of
       70%. This indicator relied on inputs from selected IPLC represented who were directly or indirectly
       endorsed by local organizations from the targeted territories.
      78% of target territories scored three or more on IPLC representation in local land and forest
       management, exceeding the target of 70%. This composite indicator measured multiple dimensions:
       the legitimacy and recognition of the representative by the communities (1 point), their designation
       and replacement through a participatory process (3 points), and their consultation in land use
       management discussions (1 point).

Outcomes

      Aggregated score of 100 achieved on community-based land and forest governance in six pilot sites,
       exceeding the original target of 60 in four pilot sites, and the revised target of 90 in four pilot sites. This
       composite indicator scores pilot sites on their progress in official processes, Free and Prior Informed
       Consent (FPIC) completion, area delimitation, local support, governance arrangements, relevant
       studies, and drafting of official documents. The scale of this outcome is unclear as it is unclear what
       share of the total project territories the pilot sites reflect. Furthermore, the indicator captures
       preparatory steps toward operationalizing community-based land and forest governance systems and
       does not indicate to what extent these were implemented.

Beyond the results framework, the project achieved the following results:

      A law to protect and promote Indigenous Peoples' rights was enacted in 2022.
      A national territorial planning policy was validated by the Council of Ministers in May 2021.
      Recognition of Indigenous Peoples' land rights in the National Land Policy was validated in January
       2022.
      A sustainable agriculture policy targeting Indigenous Peoples for agricultural participation,
       employment, land access, and capacity building was validated in November 2022.
      Provincial Decree-Laws to promote and protect Indigenous Peoples' rights were adopted in Sankuru,
       Maï-Ndombe, and Tshopo.
      Position notes on land, spatial planning, agriculture, and wood energy were developed by IPLC.
      A legally binding Local Community Forest Concession covering 252,202 hectares was established in
       two territories, and frameworks were prepared in three additional territories. The project’s contribution
       is unclear as it was not included in the original project design with specific baseline and target values.
       Nonetheless, this is the highest level of outcome reported in the ICR.

The project made good use of composite indicators to capture multiple dimensions of IPLC participation in the
six pilot sites and in the two convening platforms (the National REDD+ Coordination and National Council for
Land Reform). However, there were a variety of activities to support IPLC, the results framework included few
robust indicators to measure results. For instance, the 78% satisfaction rate among IPLC did not clarify the
level, frequency, or effectiveness of their participation and representation. Despite lack of indicators to
capture institutional development milestones, the ICR reported some results on legal and policy reform on
land administration and recognition of IPLC role including formal recognition of community land rights in two
out of 16 target territories. Without clear initial benchmarks, it is difficult to determine how much of the



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



                            observed changes outside the results framework can be directly linked to the project interventions versus
                            other external factors.

                            Overall, the project achieved key targets including stakeholder satisfaction with transparency and high scores
                            in community-based governance at pilot sites. The ICR also demonstrated key milestone achieved on
                            institutional development and legal recognition of IPLC ownership and role in forest management.
                            This outcome is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project demonstrated substantial progress toward its objectives of building IPLC capacity at national and
                            local levels and improving IPLC participation in land and forest management activities. The overall efficacy is
                            rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency

   The project carried out a cost-benefit analysis using used a "with" and "without" project scenario to estimate
   incremental benefits at appraisal and completion stages, with a focus on component 2. This was appropriate
   given the challenges of a quantitative analysis of economic rate of return and net present value in the absence
   of adequate data. The project’s assumption around “without” project scenario was not entirely plausible, as IPLC
   could improve their income over time due to increasing external support, improved access to information, and
   rising market demand for sustainable products, and ongoing legal reforms in the DRC. Nonetheless, the
   assessment indicated expected increases in household income levels and in non-timber production (i.e. rice,
   cassava, maize, vegetables, potatoes, and peanuts). Beyond this, the project contributed to carbon
   sequestration through agroecological forestry system and by planting around 400,000 productive tree species
   across 400 hectares.

   The completion-stage assessment complemented the appraisal-stage analysis and presented a more
   comprehensive assessment with different scenarios using discount rates of 4%, 12%, and 20% and levels of
   income increases and market conditions. The assessment referred to WBG’s estimation of non-timber wealth in


                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



DRC at US$589 per capita, which is relatively lower than other countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and indicates a
more challenging environment to promote the production of non-timber crops.

Administrative Efficiency

With a budget increase of US$ 1.8 million, the project increased a few targets for project beneficiaries (from
20,000 to 25,000), IPLC organizations that received capacity building support (from 50 to 60), and number of
people with benefits from forests (from 15,000 to 19,000).

There were delays in micro-project implementation due to governance issues and weak implementation
capacity, which led to cost overruns, necessitating a second extension and an additional US$150,000 in
management fees. With this cost increase and two years of extension, the project completed its activities and
met all its original targets and most of the revised targets. The extension was partly due to scaling up of
activities and partly due to implementation delays. The overall actual project cost (US$ 6.6 million) was higher
than the initial appraised cost though less than the revised allocation (US$7.8 million).

Overall, the project efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was informed by a sound analysis of the role of IPLC in forest and land management and the
sustainability of resources in DRC. It was highly relevant to the country's context. It achieved
Substantial progress toward its two objectives with some minor shortcomings. The project managed to achieve
its targets with substantial efficiency, although with two additional years of implementation, due to a scaling up
of activities and some implementation delays. The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government Ownership Risk: The project was entirely funded by international trust funds and implemented
by non-governmental agencies, as were other related projects discussed in the PAD (page 4). Meaningful
participation of IPs in REDD+ oriented land and forest management activities depends upon a cohesive and
stable partnership between government and civil society to ensure the broadest coverage of needs and
community mobilization. The government of DRC has started piloting large-scale agro parks to expand and
modernize production of agricultural commodities and was responsive to the project’s initiatives to introduce
IPLC representatives to national land governance platforms and committees. However, continued support
and more targeted investment in this area would compete with other priorities that might have higher returns
in the short run.

Resource Conflict Risks: The PAD discusses a history of local conflict over land in the DRC, particularly
affecting indigenous communities (page 95). Land tenure rights are complex, involving various historical
concepts, including customary land tenure managed by "Chefs de Terre," which often push IPs deeper into
forests. Notably, the government has undertaken land rights reforms, and the project has supported these
efforts. Nonetheless, there remains a risk of elite capture, and conflicts arising due to overlapping claims.
The project’s grievance mechanism is expected to continue operating under the Network of Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities for Sustainable Forest Ecosystem Management. However, as noted in
paragraph 39 of the ICR, the system needs to be strengthened.

Financial Risk: Funding for the project came entirely from external sources with no borrower contribution,
indicating potential financing challenges for continued engagement. As discussed in paragraph 86 of the
ICR, the project faced weak financial management systems, as evidenced by undocumented expenses and
irregularities in payments for micro-project contracts. Continued support through the non-government sector
would require further strengthening financial management practices and oversight.

Environmental Risk: The DRC faces significant environmental risks that threaten agriculture and forest-
based livelihood activities. Climate change exacerbates these challenges, with extreme weather events
disrupting agricultural cycles and diminishing crop yields (PAD, page 31). These factors can jeopardize the
alternative livelihood activities promoted through the project and require a sustainable transition to non-
timber livelihoods, requiring continued technical and financial support to the IPLC.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This was the first WBG project to focus on the IPLC’ role in forest and land governance. The team
  leveraged the WBG’s forest sector experience and coordinated closely with regional initiatives like the
  National Parks Network Rehabilitation Project, the Forest Investment Program, and the Forest Carbon
  Partnership Facility. The PAD included relevant lessons including the need for strong due diligence of
  civil society organizations given their lack of legitimacy in DRC. During the preparation phase, the project
  engaged a broad range of stakeholders using a participatory approach.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



  The implementation arrangements were complex, involving a non-profit organization (NGO) as the
  implementing agency that subcontracted several other NGOs across territories. The use of subgrantees
  allowed for closer community engagement and a decentralized approach but lacked a clear definition of
  roles (as discussed in ICR para 60).

  The M&E design used composite indicators to capture IPLC' participation in governance and included
  citizen engagement indicators to track beneficiary satisfaction and grievances, aligning with corporate
  requirements at the time. Third-party monitoring was limited to one indicator: DGM stakeholders'
  increased role in REDD+ processes. There were some shortcomings in the M&E design (refer section
  9a). Environmental and social assessments for initial sites were prepared on time, and the project was
  correctly rated for environmental and social risks, as it did not involve critical habitats or significant
  resettlement.

  Overall, the project's quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank's performance during the project's implementation demonstrated adaptability and
 commitment to overcoming challenges but also revealed areas for improvement. The Bank provided
 support, particularly in addressing delays and introducing innovative solutions. For example, the micro-
 project structure was revised in response to higher-than-expected costs to increase the size of the grants
 and reduce the total number of microprojects. The Bank offered trainings in procurement, financial
 management, and environmental risk management. Consistent supervision, supported by low TTL turnover
 and strong in-country presence, enabled effective communication and timely issue resolution.

 The project team followed up on environmental and social safeguards issues as reflected in aide
 memoires. The team used project ratings, the mid-term review, and restructurings to address some of the
 implementation issues for example by extending the project duration by two years, increasing the cost
 allocation to management fees, and reducing the performance ratings for financial management.

 In response to non-compliance with financial management requirements and issues with contract
 finalization and documentation in the STEP system, the Bank team took proactive measures, for example
 through issuing warnings and probation periods as well as additional capacity building for the implementing
 partner’s procurement team. Additional steps such as developing action plans and facilitating resource
 allocation during crises helped maintain project momentum.

 The Bank's performance during supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was set at an appropriate level, targeting key development challenges. Capacity building and
 IPLC’ inclusion in forest management aimed to improve sustainability and biodiversity conservation in DRC.
 The objectives were appropriately ambitious covering both national and local outcomes.

 Some of the indicators had shortcomings. While composite indicators captured dimensions of IPLC’
 participation in pilot sites, the 78% satisfaction rate did not clarify the effectiveness of their participation.
 Additionally, there are attribution issues with some of the reported results in the absence of clear
 benchmarking. For example, several legal and policy reforms were made related to land administration and
 IPLC’ roles, but attributing these outcomes directly to the project was challenging without initial baselines
 and targets. The ICR also noted instances where the reporting of results remained at the process level,
 overlooking induced changes and short-term impacts. For example, while the number of beehives was
 recorded, the reporting failed to capture meaningful metrics such as the quantity of honey harvested and its
 subsequent commercialization or household consumption.

 On M&E institutional arrangements, data was mostly collected through implementing agencies, with third-
 party verification used for only one indicator. The M&E capacities of partner NGOs were not assessed at
 the time of preparation.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project faced challenges in implementing effective M&E measures due to logistical challenges and
  limited capacity at the local level. Beneficiaries had limited involvement in defining target indicators and
  assessing their achievements, which contributed to some of the challenges in M&E implementation.
  While local communities were engaged to some extent through the establishment of Local Monitoring
  Committees (LMCs), which played a role in monitoring project activities although in some areas, they
  faced conflicting roles with pre-existing structures. The sustainability of M&E functions and processes
  after project closure appears uncertain, primarily due to the challenges in capacity and the reliance on
  external support during the project. The lack of robust institutional frameworks and ongoing capacity
  issues suggest that without continued external assistance, the sustainability of these M&E processes
  may be at risk.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project prepared and disclosed implementation progress reports regularly. Consultations were
  carried out at project preparation stage. Additional consultations were not carried out at the time of
  restructuring or during implementation to garner beneficiary inputs.



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



  The mid-term review informed a few changes in the M&E design as some indicator targets were
  increased as discussed in section 2 of this report. The project made adaptations in response to
  emerging challenges identified through its M&E systems. For example, it adjusted procurement
  processes and addressed safeguard compliance issues. However, the extent of systematic learning and
  adjustment based on M&E findings is not fully detailed. The organizations implementing micro-projects
  did not have a clear communication and results tracking system. Therefore, timely information flow to
  inform decision making was lacking.

  Overall, the project's M&E quality is rated Modest due to shortcomings in design and implementation.
  Even though the project M&E is rated as Modest, the ICR provided sufficient additional evidence beyond
  the results framework to substantiate the satisfactory achievement of outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as Category B and triggered six operational safeguards policies, namely: OP 4.01
   Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04 Natural Habitats; OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples; OP 4.11 Physical
   Cultural Resources; OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 4.36 Forests.

   OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The project completed an environmental social assessment and
   given the lack of clarity on the nature and scope of sub-projects, it prepared an environmental and social
   management framework to guide decision-making at the sub-projects level.

   OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. This policy was applied because the project primarily targeted indigenous
   people, but due to limited expected impact, no specific instruments (i.e. indigenous people’s policy
   framework or management plan) were prepared. IPs were engaged and informed through consultations.

   OP 4.04 Natural Habitats and OP4.36 Forests. The two policies were triggered because the project’s
   activities on land and forest management legal framework could have potentially affected natural habitats
   and forests. The project documents (PAD and ICR) do not discuss any specific issues related to these
   policies.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). This policy was triggered because, although the project did not
   intend to cause resettlement, there was potential for land use changes that could indirectly impact land
   access and use rights. The PAD noted that project activities related to securing land use rights of IPLC
   could lead to restricted access for some IPLC to certain natural resources in the intervention zones,
   negatively impacting the livelihoods of the affected individuals. However, it is unclear what the scope of this
   was and how many individuals or households were impacted by restricted access to natural resources.

   Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). A GRM was established. Complaints about land issues, micro-
   project identification and allocation, as well as micro-project management, were duly received and
   addressed through an established grievance redress mechanism. The implementation of the complaints


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



   management mechanism, once established, was functional. The project team clarified (on November 9,
   2024) that there were 84 grievances received through the GRM which related to land issues, micro project
   identification and allocation, and micro-project management. The project addressed all grievances before
   closure.

   OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. No specific update was discussed on this policy in the ICR.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. At the time of appraisal, the legal covenants required an operational team of
   qualified experts, updating of accounting software for project-specific reports, and hiring independent
   auditors with World Bank-approved qualifications. The ICR does not report whether any of these were
   achieved but the TTL confirmed to IEG (on August 10, 2024) that these actions have been completed. The
   project's audits identified significant weaknesses, including undocumented expenses, non-compliance with
   payment terms for 19 out of 22 micro-projects, and inadequate evidence to support reported expenditures.
   Substantial advances held by operators further delayed progress. These issues, coupled with pending
   amendments to the external audit contract indicate lack of transparency.

   Procurement: The PAD indicated (page 27) that the Bank’s procurement rules applied to the project. A
   review of the Project Procurement Monitoring (PPM) revealed that of the 86 contracts registered in the
   STEP system, only 20 were finalized, while the remaining 66 were either still in process or not initiated.
   Many of these contracts had been executed but were not updated in STEP, which created discrepancies in
   procurement records.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                                                              Moderate shortcomings in
Bank Performance               Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                              Quality at entry
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial

                                                                                                Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)




12. Lessons

In addition to the lessons highlighted in the ICR, this review has drawn three lessons based on the
information in the ICR:

Adequate fiduciary capacity of implementing agencies is critical for continuation of
community development and capacity development efforts. The project’s experience highlights
that a lack of financial management and procurement capacity can significantly undermine
transparency and stakeholder confidence. As a pioneering effort in DRC engaging IPLC in land and
forest management governance, the project addressed a key development challenge. However, it
underestimated the challenges associated with fiduciary and financial management capacity, which
could impede the sustainability of such initiatives in the future.

Digital monitoring platforms and third-party monitoring can overcome both capacity and
accessibility challenges for project teams. The ICR mentioned that community groups indicated
the need for digital tracking tools to facilitate their monitoring efforts. The use of third-party
monitoring, particularly for conducting social audits, could have provided an additional layer of
oversight and accountability. This approach might be especially beneficial in contexts where local
capacity is still developing and where independent verification of project outcomes is necessary.

Extended preparation time and project preparation grants can support smoother
implementation with partners that are newly engaged. Engaging new partners with low capacity
requires longer preparation times to establish effective communication and implementation
protocols. The project would have benefited from project preparation grants, which could have
facilitated the necessary groundwork, including capacity building and the establishment of clear
operational frameworks among partners. This preparation could have mitigated the capacity
challenges encountered during implementation and ensured a smoother execution of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project's implementation and outcomes, with a generally
clear narrative and logical flow. The reconstructed theory of change on page 8 provides a comprehensive
picture of the activities and expected results.

However, there are a few inconsistencies. The ICR mentions that the project achieved an "Aggregate score of
86 on community-based land and forest governance in four pilot sites", while the results framework notes a
score of 100. The same indicator defines four pilot sites while the ICR paragraph 14 mentions six pilot sites.
Annex 3 does not reflect the additional financing, and the revised component costs differ from those reported in
the financial data sheet. On procurement, the ICR discusses discrepancies in the recorded status of


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Forest Dependent Communities Support Pr. (P149049)



procurement packages but does not confirm if all 86 registered contracts had been fully executed at the time of
completion. Also, following the Environmental Social Policy for investment operations, the ICR should confirm if
the project used mitigation measures for each of the environmental and social policies that were considered
relevant at the time of appraisal.

The project task team leader provided IEG with useful information to complement the ICR on August 19, 2024.
The information clarified the status of financial management audits, cancellation of unused project funds, and
provided relevant documentation.

Overall, the ICR provides valuable insights into the project’s implementation challenges and successes and
effectively covers the key aspects of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
