     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024234

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P160377                                   TG-Energy Sector Support

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Togo                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61680                                 30-Nov-2022                                          33,998,600.38

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2017                               31-Aug-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           35,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            34,858,696.53                                               0.00

 Actual                                        33,998,600.38                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Joel J. Maweni             Dileep M. Wagle              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project’s development objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement and Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD) dated December 21, 2017 and November 29, 2017, respectively was “... to improve the
   operational performance of the power sector and increase access to electricity in the capital city, Lomé.

   For this ICRR the PDO is analyzed in two parts as follows: (i) to improve the operational performance of the
   power sector; and (ii) to increase access to electricity in the capital city, Lomé.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Power Distribution Improvement and Expansion (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$27
   million of which International Development Association (IDA) financing – US$26 million and Government of
   Togo (GoT) financing – US$1 million, Actual cost was IDA – US$26 million and GoT US$0 million).

   The objective of the component was to finance priority rehabilitation and reinforcement of the medium
   voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV) distribution network in Lomé and extension of the LV network to connect
   new consumers. The component had three subcomponents as follows:

        a. Sub-component 1.1 comprised: (i) rehabilitation of Lomé A, Lomé B, and Lomé Siege substations,
           71 kilometers (kms) of underground MV cables, and 41 MV/LV transformer stations; and (ii)
           construction of 10 MT/BT transformer stations.
        b. Subcomponent 1.2 consisted of the reinforcement of the MV network in Lomé by constructing 39
           kms of underground and 49 kms of overground MV cables, 9 MVar capacitor banks and two
           switching stations. These reinforcements were to enable the network to sustain future growth in
           demand and to reduce technical losses.
        c. Subcomponent 1.3 financed construction of 225 kms of LV lines and 5 MV/LV transformer stations
           on the outskirts of Lomé to connect an additional 20,000 new consumers.

   Component 2: Power Sector Reform (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$6 million of which IDA financing –
   US$6 million and GoT financing – US$0 million, Actual cost was IDA – US$6.4 million and GoT US$0
   million). The design of this component was organized around the following four activity areas:

        a. A reform of the Campagnie Energie Electrique du Togo (CEET, the state-owned utility responsible
           for power distribution in Togo) and its relationship with the GoT to be supported by developing and
           implementing a Management Improvement Plan (MIP, an assessment and enhancement of the
           2016 revenue protection program (RPP) targeted at large customers and payment of GoT electricity
           bills).
        b. Development of a least-cost generation and transmission plan and an electricity supply master plan
           and strengthening of planning capacity at Togo’s key sector institutions, including Ministry of Mines
           and Energy (MME) and CEET.
        c. A financial viability assessment and financial model to underpin a 5-year financial viability plan.
        d. Legal and regulatory review, including changes needed in the Electricity law to facilitate
           development of renewables, increased access, operation of the National Authority for the Regulation
           of the Electricity Sector (ARSE) as well as a review of the Togo-Benin electricity code and
           a diagnostic review of the Communaute Electrique du Benin (CEB – a power generation and
           transmission company jointly owned by Togo and Benin).



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



   Component 3: Project Management and Capacity Building (Estimated cost at appraisal – US$2.4 million
   of which IDA financing – US$2.4 million and GoT financing – US$0 million, Actual cost was IDA – US$2.4
   million and GoT US$0 million). The design of this component was organized around the following three
   activity areas: (a) engineering consulting services to provide technical, procurement and contract
   management support to CEET – the project implementing agency (IA); (b) financing of project management
   operating costs, external audits and costs of safeguards oversight activities by the IA; and (c) capacity
   building activities, including training related to utility and project management, especially in the areas of
   procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation.

   Revised Project Components

   There were no revisions to the project components.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Total project cost at completion was US$34.86 million (Implementation Completion and Results Report
   (ICR), p. 10 and Annex 3) compared to US$36 million estimated at appraisal (PAD, p. 18). The estimated
   and actual financing plan presented in the ICR does not include the Borrower’s contribution which was
   estimated at US$1 million at appraisal. There is also a discrepancy of US$87,000 due to exchange rate
   variations between the total cost of US$34.86 million and the amount of US$33.99 million shown as
   disbursed by IDA in the ICR data sheet.

   Dates. The project was approved on December 20, 2017, and became effective on March 12, 2018. A mid-
   term review was conducted on November 9, 2020, and the project was restructured once on September 16,
   2022, to extend the closing date from November 30, 2022, to August 31, 2023, and to amend the results
   framework and the implementation schedule. The closing date was extended to allow enough time for
   completion of power sector activities (especially, installation of smart meters for CEET’s RPP, and
   geographic information system (GIS) mapping of CEET’s power distribution infrastructure) whose
   implementation had been delayed by procurement and supply chain problems arising from the impacts of
   the Covid-19 pandemic and the Russia-Ukraine war. The results framework was amended to revise the
   baseline values and project-end targets for the PDO indicator– “Distribution system loss for the areas
   affected by the Lomé A, Lomé B and Lomé Siege substations” as well as to remove the sub-indicators for
   technical and non-technical losses for which CEET had no data measurement system in operation at the
   time of project appraisal. The targeted reduction in distribution system loss within Lomé areas shifted from
   an initial 20 percent to a more ambitious 15.6 percent. Finally, the restructuring included a revision of the
   implementation schedule to the new closing date of August 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Alignment with country and sector context

The Project was designed to support country and sector strategies to which it remained aligned throughout
the implementation period up to closure. Between 1991 and 2006 Togo experienced a prolonged period of

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



political tension that was accompanied by a suspension or curtailment of financial support by most donors
because of concerns about the country’s governance. In 2002, the Bank also suspended financial support
after Togo had fallen into debt service arrears. These developments increased the country’s difficulties in
delivering public investments and services. In 2006, the Government reached a Global Political Accord
(GPA) with the opposition and legislative elections were held in 2007. With a resumption of donors’ support
Togo entered a new period of growth. However, unresolved political issues and difficulties in advancing
some of the GPA reforms meant that perceptions of country risk remained and tempered the appetite of
private sector investors, including in electricity generation.

At Project Appraisal in 2016, the Project Objectives were relevant to the country conditions because they
were aimed at addressing the key issues facing the sector and the project design was aligned with the
PDOs. The electricity sector faced the following key issues: (i) limited access to electricity services; (ii)
inadequate security and reliability of supply; and (iii) low efficiency of the power system.

Access to electricity was about 29.2 percent compared to Ghana’s 76 percent, Cote d’Ivoire’s 59 percent,
and the Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) regional average of 37 percent. A huge disparity also existed between
the urban electrification rate of 56.5 percent and the rural electrification rate of 5.5 percent (the latter
compared to an average of about 15 percent for the SSA region). Security of supply was low due to
unreliable imports and lack of adequate domestic sources which contributed to rampant power cuts.
Installed generation capacity was only 205 MW in 2015, of which about 50 percent was privately-owned
and electricity imported form the West Africa Power Pool countries accounted for about 90 percent of
electricity consumed in the country. Inadequate investment in the distribution system and in its maintenance
resulted in power interruptions and voltage drops (reliability) and high technical losses (efficiency). Total
distribution system losses were high – at Appraisal, the losses were estimated at 24 percent which was
incorrect as subsequently discovered in 2017 and revised to 15.6 percent. The average cost of electricity
services was estimated at US$0.29/kWh and debt service accounted for 25 percent of revenues. The power
cuts, system inefficiencies and high cost of debt contributed to serious financial imbalances for the sector.

The Project was designed to address some of the sector’s key issues by: (i) rehabilitating MV/LV
distribution lines and transformer stations; (ii) constructing MV/LV lines, MV/LV transformer stations,
switching stations and capacity banks stations, to reduce power outages and technical losses; (iii)
extending distribution lines to the outskirts of Lomé to connect 20,000 households and increase access; (iv)
preparation of a least-cost power development plan for an Electricity Supply Master Plan, and strengthening
of capacity for planning in key Togolese institutions to improve power system planning and provide a
favorable environment for private sector participation in power generation; and (v) extending the existing
revenue protection program (RPP) to additional large consumers to increase revenue collection through
use of smart metering technology and to reduce non-technical losses.

At Project closure on August 31, 2023, the project remained aligned with the GoT’s objective of achieving
universal access by 2030 and the roadmap 2025. The latter designates “continuation of electrification policy
for all and “Increase in electricity production, transmission and distribution capacity” as the key instruments
for achieving the Government’s sector objectives. The Project was relevant to the roadmap by supporting
the roadmap through the implementation of measures to address sector issues as summarized above.

Alignment with the World Bank’s Strategy

The Project remained closely aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Strategy for Togo for
FY2017-2020. The Project was consistent with objective 1.3 – “to strengthen energy, ICT and logistics


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



               services” under Focus Area 1 on “private sector performance and job creation”. The energy sector
               continued to be supported by the FY 2025-2029 (Report No. dated P185419-TG, May 23, 2024) CPF’s
               High Level Outcome1 on “Increasing Quality Employment in the Private Sector,” Objective 3 - “Increase
               access to reliable and sustainable energy.” Objective 3 aims at “...closing the current access gap and
               opening the pathway to achieving universal affordable access through private sector participation…”. In
               addition, this current CPF includes a proposed follow-up project – “Inclusive Development through
               Electricity (IDEA, P176769)” to advance progress towards universal sustainable energy for all. Hence the
               Project is rated High for relevance of the PDO.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             "..to improve the operational efficiency of the power sector."

                             Rationale


                             The ICR (pp. 7 and 8) presents a theory of change (TOC) based on the results matrix in the PAD. The ToC
                             describes the transformation cycle from activities to outputs/intermediate outcome indicators, and
                             the expected outcomes of improved operational performance of the power sector at project completion as
                             measured by: PDO indicator #1 – “Distribution system loss reduction in areas of Lomé A, Lomé B, and Lomé
                             Siege substations”; and (b) PDPO indicator #2 – “Increased collections from targeted high-consuming
                             customers.”

                             The distribution system loss indicator comprised technical and non-technical losses and was to be supported
                             :(a) for technical losses by construction and rehabilitation of 159 kms of MV distribution lines and 51
                             transformers stations in the Lomé project areas; and (b) for non-technical losses by implementation of the
                             MIP, of which the most relevant aspect for the PDO indicator was the RPP, including installation of smart
                             meters for large MV consumers.The indicator had two parts for technical and non-technical losses on the
                             assumption that it would be possible to disaggregate and track these two components separately. However,
                             there was no reliable baseline data on technical and non-technical losses, and a lack of modelling tools to
                             simulate the impact of planned investments on technical losses.

                             PDO indicator #2 was to be achieved by installing smart meters for large MV consumers under the RPP
                             (industrial customers).The indicator was intended to measure increased collections with collections defined as
                             revenues collected as a percentage of billed revenues. The challenge for this indicator was that improved
                             collections would also require increased customer awareness of the capabilities of the RPP for CEET to
                             implement service disconnections for delayed payments which would take time to achieve. The RPP was not

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



only intended to support increased revenue collections, but also to contribute to distribution loss reduction,
i.e., to contribute to PDO indicator #1.

The intermediate indicators and final outcomes are listed below together with the expected targets and actual
achievements at the intermediate and outcome stages of the transformation cycle.

Outputs/intermediate outcomes

      A least-cost power development plan was prepared and approved.
      An Electricity Supply Master Plan was prepared and approved.
      Planning capacity strengthening for the Ministry of Mines and Energy (MME) and for CEET
      A financial viability assessment and a financial model for the power sector were prepared and
       approved.
      An MIP for CEET was prepared and implemented.
      135 kms of MV cables were constructed or rehabilitated compared to the target of 159 kms (85
       percent achieved)
      68 transformer stations were constructed /rehabilitated compared with a target of 51 percent (133
       percent achieved)

Outcomes

      Distribution system losses for the areas affected by Lomé A, Lomé B and Lomé Siege substations
       were reduced from a revised baseline of 15.6 percent in 2017 to 14.79 percent in 2023 instead of the
       target of 13.60 percent.
      Electricity consumption from targeted high value consumers were increased by 4.72 percent
       compared to the target increase of 4.0 percent in revenues (118 percent).

PDO indicator #1 was substantially achieved with distribution system losses reduced from 15.6 percent to
14.79 instead of the target of 13.60 percent. The ICR attributes the lower-than-expected reduction in system
losses to: (a) the scope of the investment which is assessed to have been inadequate for a 4 percent
reduction in losses; (b) the considerable growth in customers between 2017 and 2021; (c) incorrect baseline
and the problem of desegregating technical and non-technical losses; (d) the aged condition of the
infrastructure; and (e) the lack of distribution modeling tools to simulate, amongst other variables, the impact
of investments on technical losses. Since the distribution system losses are defined as the sum of technical
and non-technical losses as a percentage of net generation injected into the distribution system the failure to
fully achieve the revised target reflects shortfalls on both technical and non-technical losses.

As defined in the results framework PDO indicator #2 was intended to measure increases in revenue
collection because of implementation of the RPP for large MV customers. Since the RPP was not fully
implemented at Project closure the assessment of its impact was based on increased consumption (not
revenue) by the customers covered by the RPP to date. The consumption increases of 4.72 percent
compared to a target of 4.0 percent also suggests a potential contribution to non-technical system loss
reduction by the RPP. Thus, PDO indicator #2 is assessed in the ICR by measuring increased consumption
instead of revenues. This is the most practical proxy for this PDO indicator given that increased revenues will
only be assessable after completion of the RPP.



                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



Considering the substantial achievement of both PDO indicators the efficacy rating for PDO#1 is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
to “…increase access to electricity in the capital city, Lomé.”

Rationale
The ToC for PDO # 2 describes the transformation cycle from the implementation of Component 1 activities
(Power Distribution Improvement and Expansion) to physical outputs/intermediate outcome indicators, and
the expected outcome of increased access in the capital city, Lomé. The causal relationships are measurable,
straightforward, and so is the PDO indicator #3 – the number of people provided with access to electricity (of
which 40,000 were estimated to be female).

The construction of 225 kms of LV distribution lines and 5 substation transformers, and the installation of
prepaid meters for connection of 20,000 households were expected to result in increased access to electricity
in the capital, Lomé. It is noteworthy that the Power Distribution Improvement and Expansion
Component's rehabilitation and construction activities also contributed to PDO#2 because efficiency gains
through reduction of technical and non-technical losses enabled more electricity to be available given the
existing generation constraints.

The intermediate and final outcomes are listed below together with the expected targets and actual
achievements at the intermediate and final outcome stages of the transformation cycle.

Outputs/intermediate outcomes

      135 kms of MV cables were constructed or rehabilitated compared to the target of 159 kms (85
       percent achieved)
      210 kms of LV lines were constructed to the outskirts of Lome compared with a target of 225kms (93
       percent achieved)
      73 transformer stations were constructed /rehabilitated compared with a target of 56 (130 percent
       achieved)
      20,000 household grid connections compared to a target of 20,000 (100 percent achieved)

Outcomes

      80,000 people were provided with access to electricity under the Project by household connections
       (grid or off-grid) compared to a target of 80,000. The sub-indicator of the number of female
       beneficiaries was achieved (40,000, p.15, ICR).




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 16
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



                            PDO # 2 is rated Substantial for efficacy because the target number of people provided with electricity (PDO
                            indicator #3) under the Project by household connections was fully achieved although there were some
                            moderate shortfalls in the physical output/intermediate outcome targets.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Project is rated Substantial for efficacy based on substantial ratings for both PDO #1 and PDO #2 as
                            described above. PDO#1 was rated Substantial because both PDO indicators for distribution losses and
                            increased collections from large customers were achieved with moderate shortcomings. PDO #2 is rated
                            Substantial for efficacy because the target number of people (80,000) provided with electricity (PDO
                            indicator #3) by household connections under the Project was fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, an economic and financial analysis was conducted to assess the Project’s efficiency. At
   completion, an analysis of the Project’s administrative/implementation efficiency was carried out in addition to
   the ex-post economic and financial analysis.

    Economic analysis. The economic analysis was conducted using a cost benefit approach at both appraisal
   and at completion and was done for the Power Distribution Improvement and Expansion component – the only
   one that involved physical investments. Project benefits were assumed to be derived from the consumption of
   electricity by new users, growth in demand due to expansion of the network and reductions in technical and non-
   technical losses due to the Project. The value of consumption was based on the average electricity tariff or a
   willingness to pay figure of US$0.25/kWh. The costs included the cost of distribution network expansion,
   connection, and prepayment meters fees, and distribution system operation and maintenance costs.

   At appraisal, the economic analysis was handicapped by the lack of data such as the absence of household
   energy expenditure surveys. Therefore, at ICR stage the economic analysis as at appraisal was revised. The
   updated results showed an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 1.8 percent and a net present value (NPV)
   of US$ -9.8 million, compared to original estimates of 24.1 percent and US$145.9 million for the EIRR and NPV
   respectively, before environmental benefits.



                                                                                                                           Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



Ex-post analysis at Project closure showed an EIRR of 3.9 percent and a NPV of US$ -3.9 million before
environmental benefits. Based on data available from the economic analysis of the Inclusive Development
through Electricity Access Project (IDEA, 176769, approved in May 2023), the NPV after incorporating
environmental benefits was estimated at US$9.2 million and US$22.3 million for the low carbon and high carbon
price, respectively.

The rating for economic efficiency is Substantial because the economic returns before environmental benefits
are higher than those at appraisal (3.9 percent for the EIRR and a negative NPV of US$3.9).

Administrative & Operational Efficiency. Implementation of the Project faced some significant hurdles,
including the impact of Covid-19 and the Russia-Ukraine war on procurement activities and lengthening of
supply chains. In addition, since this was the first project in the sector since the 1990s there was limited
institutional and staffing capacity for implementation of World Bank financed projects, especially in the areas of
procurement and financial management. In addition, there were significant data constraints, especially regarding
system losses as described previously. Despite these challenges, with a strong commitment to the Project and
the Bank’s support, the client was able complete the project within 68 months, just nine months (one closing
date extension) more than the original implementation schedule of 59 months from Board approval and within
budget. Thus, the Project is rated Substantial for administrative and operational efficiency.

Overall, the efficiency rating for the project is Substantial based on substantial ratings for both economic and
administrative efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     75.00
 Appraisal                                                 1.80
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     74.60
 ICR Estimate                                              3.90
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated High as described above. Efficacy is rated Substantial because: (a) PDO #1
– “to improve the operational performance of the power sector“ was rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings; and (b) PDO # 2 was fully achieved with 80, 000 people provided with new or improved electricity
service as targeted. The efficiency of the Project is rated Substantial because both economic efficiency and
administrative efficiency objectives were substantially achieved. The Project’s overall outcome rating based on a


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



High rating for relevance, Substantial for Efficacy and Substantial for Efficiency and in accordance with the
Bank’s Guidelines for ICRs is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The achievements of the Project included: (a) electricity access extension to an additional 80,000 persons;
(b) a reduction in total distribution losses of about 0.81 percent (from 15.60 in 2017 to about 14.79 percent at
Project closure); and (c) increase in electricity consumption of about 4.72 percent from large customers. In
addition to these PDO outcomes, other outcomes were completion and approval of several sector plans
(least-cost generation and transmission plan and an electricity supply master plan, financial viability
assessment and financial model, management improvement plan for CEET). Institutional and staff capacity
improvements were made at the MME and CEET. The risks for sustainability of these achievements are
availability of adequate financing for maintenance of the established network and for full utilization of the
strengthened distribution network to further expand access expansion by connecting more customers. This
risk will be managed by continued implementation of the operational, financial, MIP, tariff, and planning
measures to improve the sector's efficiency and financial viability. In addition, implementation of the least-
cost and power master plans will make the sector more attractive for private sector investment in generation,
thus increasing the availability and cost efficiency of energy supply. Continued collaboration with the
Bank and donors, such as that under the ongoing Inclusive Development Through Electricity Access Project
(P 176769), will enable Togo to continue mobilizing resources for efficient distribution sector expansion.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Preparation of the Power Distribution Improvement and Expansion Component was based on a sound
  technical basis – an EU-financed technical study of the whole Lomé distribution network, which identified
  a list of projects for a total cost of US$75 million. The Project represented a portion of the investment
  priorities identified in that study. The other half was to be financed by the AFD under a separate parallel
  project.

  The Power sector reform component was based on in-depth consultations with the GoT and other
  development partners on key constraints to the development of the electricity sector. These were
  identified as: lack of private sector investment in generation; operational and financial performance of
  CEET; limited institutional capacity for system planning at the main sector institutions; lack of least-cost
  generation and transmission plans; and absence of an electricity master plan. The power sector reform,
  therefore, aimed at supporting the GoT in addressing these constraints to sector development. In
  addition, the Project was complemented by the Fiscal Management and Infrastructure Reform Project,
  P159884 - a development policy operation (DPO) that was prepared in parallel with this project - with


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



  prior actions focused on the arrears-clearing between the Government, CEET and CEB and the
  establishment of a payment discipline of the public administration’s electricity bills.

  The PDOs were simple and clear. The transformation cycle from activities through outputs/intermediate
  indicators to outcomes represented credible, causal relationships, but an important shortcoming was the
  absence of verifiable baseline data on distribution losses and a system for measuring and disaggregating
  technical and non-technical losses. Despite this shortcoming, which was understandable given that there
  had been meagre donor support to the sector for many years, the overall quality at entry was
  Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Project supervision was strong, involving field-based staff at regular intervals, preparation of eleven
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), on average twice a year, field visits and a midterm
 review on November 9, 2020. The supervision missions enabled the Task Team to maintain close
 monitoring of the Project activities and to support the GoT’s requests for revisions to the results framework
 and extension of the Closing date by nine months to August 31, 2023. In addition, the Bank Team’s
 proactivity helped to facilitate communications between different institutions within the GoT, especially by
 encouraging CEET to improve planning for approvals of procurement activities by the DNCMP.

 One shortcoming was the delayed amendment of the PDO indicator for the reduction of distribution losses
 and its associated target which was done about two months before the original closing date and about 11
 months before the revised closing date. That was almost five years after approval of the financing during
 which period monitoring of the indicator should have triggered a restructuring of the Project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 CEET’s Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was responsible for M&E of the Project under the oversight of a
 Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by the Minister of MME. The PSC comprised representatives of
 CEET, MME, Ministry of Economy and Finance, and ARSE. The PSC was responsible for approving
 annual work plans and budgets; monitoring overall progress towards achievement of the project objectives;
 ensuring inter-ministerial coordination and helping to resolve any problems encountered during

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



 implementation. The M&E data was compiled in annual progress reports by the PIU with the support of
 CEET’s Engineer and inputs from MME, CEB and other participating agencies. The report covered the
 status of implementation of the various project activities, key issues and recommendations, and progress
 towards the achievement of the Project’s key results. The design of the M&E also required CEET
 to: (a) submit a quarterly Safeguards Report to the Bank and to integrate the safeguards findings in the
 annual progress report; and (b) conduct a survey of customer satisfaction and to publish the findings on its
 website.



b. M&E Implementation
  Annual progress reports were submitted to the Bank on a regular basis. The M&E was amended during
  the Project restructuring to incorporate changes in the distribution system loss indicator baseline and
  targets which had been estimated during appraisal without the benefits of accurate data as CEET had no
  accurate information systems for data collection. Thus, the distinction between technical and non-
  technical losses was removed, a baseline of 15.60 percent in 2017 replaced the original estimate of 24
  percent. An aggregate target of 13.6 percent replaced the original targets of 11 and 9 percent for
  technical and non-technical losses, respectively. Quarterly and annual progress reports were submitted
  to the Bank, although not always on a consistent basis. However, CEET did not conduct a customer
  survey as expected at appraisal.



c. M&E Utilization
  Both the Bank and the Borrower productively used the annual progress reports to track the Project’s
  implementation performance and progress towards achievement of the PDOs. The reports provided a
  basis for discussion of important issues during the Bank’s supervision mission and for the preparation of
  ISRs by the Bank team through which Bank management was kept informed of the Project’s progress.
  The progress report also informed the restructuring of the Project in 2022 which included an extension of
  the closing date and changes to the results framework. There were no significant issues surfaced by the
  quarterly safeguards reports which were not addressed.



  Overall, M&E is rated Substantial since the M&E design, implementation and utilization
  were credible with moderate shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was expected to have positive impacts through reductions of GHG emissions as power supply
   improved and customers switched from diesel-based generation to grid-based electricity. In addition, the

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



  increased availability and reliability of power was expected to positively affect the security situation in the
  served areas. Adverse impacts were expected to be minor, localized, and reversible.

  Three Safeguards policies were triggered as follows: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP/BP
  4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Given the minor E&S
  impacts the Project was classified as B for safeguards. An Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) was prepared outlining an environmental and social screening process and the
  institutional responsibilities for screening, review, and clearance and for implementation and monitoring of
  mitigation plans. The ESMF was consulted upon and disclosed in Togo and at the World Bank on October 5
  and 6 2017, respectively. The Financing Agreement contained a clause requiring the GoT to prepare all
  ESIAs and ESMPs required in accordance with the ESMF and to obtain approval of the documents prior to
  commencing any related works.

  The ESIAs and ESMPs were prepared in accordance with the provisions of the Financing Agreements.
  However, there were some delays in the preparation of the reports which caused moderate delays in the
  implementation of some activities. CEET engaged the local communities in consultations and
  communications regarding the Project and actively implemented the Project’s Grievance Redress
  Mechanism (GRM). The GRM received complaints on a wide spectrum of issues. The dominant ones were
  destruction of goods, claims for compensation, restriction of access to business premises, lack of
  information before the start-up of works, and delays in repairs. However, all the 52 complaints received
  during the implementation period were satisfactorily resolved. The GRM was integrated with CEET’s
  complaints handling system which will allow any grievances related to the project sites to be managed after
  the closure of the Project.

  All the work was completed without accidents. There were no significant outstanding issues regarding
  safeguards and, hence, the rating was Satisfactory in the last ISR prepared after closure (December
  2023).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  At project closure all procurement had been completed and all activities implemented. There were,
  however, several procurement and contract management issues which delayed implementation of some
  components, resulting in a Procurement rating of Moderately Satisfactory at Project closure. The ISRs
  indicate the following issues that arose: CEET’s delayed updating of information and documents in the
  Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement System (STEPS); delayed approvals of contract
  amendments by the Direction Nacionale de Controle Marche Public (DNCMP); lack of adequate monitoring
  of contracts execution by CEET; and delayed GOT decision on financing of the GIS and the long time
  taken to complete the bid evaluation. In addition, the failure of the highest-ranked contractor to provide
  smart meters had to be resolved by awarding the contract to the second ranked bidder, resulting in some
  delays for the RPP activities.

  Financial Management



                                                                                                      Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



   At appraisal, the financial management assessment revealed strengths and weaknesses at CEET. The
   strengths were the existence of well-qualified FM staff and a solid FM system. The weaknesses were:
   CEET’s lack of familiarity with the World Bank’s financial management policies and procedures, and an
   outdated accounting software and financial management manual. Recommendations for improvements
   included: (a) hiring of a short-term qualified FM specialist to support CEET; (b) dedication of one
   accountant to manage the Project’s accounting and disbursement needs; (c) comprehensive updating of
   CEET’s financial and accounting manual; (d) updating of the accounting software; (e) hiring of an external
   auditor; and (f) training of FM staff.

   The financial management system was updated successfully. The submission of audited statements was
   carried out regularly, except the 2021 reports, which were submitted after a delay of three months, leading
   to a downgrading of the FM rating to Moderately Satisfactory. At project closure there were no outstanding
   audit reports and FM rating was Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG has derived the following important lessons from the ICR, pertaining to the project’s preparation
and implementation experience:

A coordinated donor approach on resuming financing support in countries emerging from
difficult economic and social conditions is critical for sharing information and experiences to
improve the design of new projects. As Togo was emerging from a prolonged period of political
and economic crisis, the Bank had limited knowledge of the energy sector conditions and benefited
from collaboration with the European Union which had undertaken more recent analytical work in the


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



sector. This enabled the Bank to put together an important Project which provided the fundamentals
on which subsequent and more ambitious initiatives such as IDEA were built on.

Decisions to defer some aspects of project preparation to the implementation phase to
deliver benefits more speedily requires a high degree of commitment from the Borrower and
a continuous focus by the Bank on both preparation and implementation activities after
financing approvals. The preparation of ESIAs and ESMPs for individual subprojects during project
implementation was to be guided by the ESMF which was prepared, consulted, and disclosed prior
to project appraisal. There were delays, however, in the preparation of these instruments and
implementation of actions required prior to the start of implementation (such as compensation
payments) which in turn delayed implementation of the physical works.

Accountability for results of capacity building components (other than project
implementation technical assistance) is difficult to establish without requiring such
components to contribute to the results framework, at least at the output/intermediate
indicators level, at the minimum. While the ICR included “the number of trained staff in the energy
utility/PIU” in the ToC, there were no numbers provided in either the PAD results framework or the
ICR. Reporting on the nature and amount of training provided is important for tracking capacity
building efforts and for establishing accountability for these types of components.

For project contexts in which availability of data for M&E is a difficult challenge, constant
follow-up by the Bank Teams and the PIUs is crucial to improve data availability for tracking
results and enabling course correction. The Bank Team and the PIU’s commitment to the Project
facilitated the coordination of different institutions participating in the Project under difficult
conditions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, substantive, and consistent with the OPC Guidelines for preparing ICRs. It does a
good job of presenting the overall context of a country and sector emerging from a prolonged period of limited
engagement with donors, which impacted data availability and quality and the capacity of key sector
institutions. Further, the report is candid regarding the quality of data and notes that baseline losses at project
preparation and the impact of investments on losses throughout project implementation were based on best
estimates.

The ICR could, however, have benefited by avoiding generalizations and being specific in several areas. For
example, procurement impact on project implementation could have been explained by using examples of
specific contracts whose award was delayed and the specific stages at which they were delayed. The
participation of other donors in distribution is not clear, especially that of the AFD, which was supposed to
implement the balance of the activities listed in the EU study.


                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TG-Energy Sector Support (P160377)



The ICR did not report on the implementation of OP/BP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement which was shown as
triggered (PAD p.6 and 30).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                             Page 16 of 16
