     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024146

1. Program Information



 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Dominica                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                        Approved Operations
 0                                         0

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P174927                                   Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC




 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-68440                               31-Dec-2021                                         25,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2021                             31-Dec-2021
                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                        25,000,000.00                                            0.00




P175847_TBL
 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 Dominica                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P175847                                  Dominica Second COVID-19 Response and Re ( P175847 )




                                                                                               Page 1 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-68440,IDA-71310                       31-Mar-2023                                            30000000.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  03-Jun-2022                               31-Mar-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Revised Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Actual                                        30,000,000.00                                                  0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Vandana Chandra             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey         Donna Kaidou Jeffrey            IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Commonwealth of Dominica COVID-19 Response and
Recovery Programmatic Development Policy Credit (DPC) was originally defined as, “(i) saving lives, protecting
livelihoods and preserving jobs; and (ii) strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt
transparency for a resilient recovery,” PD (p. 2, 18) and ICR (para. 5).

The PDO is not stated in either of the financing agreements (FAs) although both list the prior actions (PAs)
(Schedule 1).

No changes were made to the PDO.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs of the series are taken to be:

      PDO1: saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs.
      PDO2: strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a climate-
       resilient recovery.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPC series had two mutually reinforcing pillars/policy areas:



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



      Pillar 1: saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs.
      Pillar 2: strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management, and debt transparency for a climate
       resilient recovery.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total program cost for the two-credit DPC series was US$55,000,000. DPO1 comprised of an IDA credit of
US$25,000,000 while DPO2 comprised an IDA credit of US$30,000,000. Both credits were fully disbursed as
scheduled.

DPO1 was approved on March 18, 2021, became effective on May 5, 2021, and closed as scheduled on
December 31, 2021. DPO2 was approved on June 3, 2022, became effective on June 23, 2022, and closed as
scheduled on March 23, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Dominica, a small island developing state (SIDS) with a population of approximately 72,000 and GDP per
 capita of US$8,414, was still rebuilding after the 2017 Hurricane Maria damage when the COVID-19
 pandemic occurred. By immediately halting tourism, the pandemic dealt an immediate blow to Dominica’s
 slow economic recovery. The economic losses due to Hurricane Maria alone were estimated at 226 percent
 of GDP. This DPC series, the first of its kind for Dominica, sought to support the Government of the
 Commonwealth of Dominica (GoCD) in two ways: responding to the COVID-19 related crisis including the
 protection of lives, livelihoods and jobs, and laying the foundations for a broader economic recovery and
 social response that would enable Dominica to become more resilient to natural disasters. Given the
 Commonwealth of Dominica’s fragile fiscal and debt situation in the aftermath of natural disasters, the first
 operation (DPC1) of the DPC supported fiscal and debt resilience to facilitate a resilient recovery. The second
 operation in the series (DPC2) would build on and deepen the fiscal and public financial management (PFM)
 reforms supported under DPC1.

 Dominica’s response to the pandemic was rapid in limiting community transmission. From the onset of the
 pandemic, the GoCD was effective in responding with appropriate measures to promptly test, treat, and
 isolate COVID-19 patients to prevent contagion. It imposed strict controls at the borders when the pandemic
 erupted, and closed them completely when the pandemic intensified, imposing a mandatory 14-day
 quarantine of nationals arriving from high-risk nations. As of May 2022, a cumulative total of twelve thousand
 positive confirmed cases and 63 deaths had been reported, while approximately 46 percent of the population
 had been vaccinated once and 42 percent was fully vaccinated. Economic support and stimulus measures
 were taken to protect vulnerable households and businesses, but the pandemic revealed important gaps in
 the social assistance system. The COVID-19 pandemic underscored the necessity of increasing Dominica’s
 preparedness to simultaneously cope with disease outbreaks and other natural disasters. This DPC sought to
 address this need by strengthening social safety nets to support vulnerable groups, operationalize a disaster
 contingencies fund, and institute green procurement approaches.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Dominica’s economy was severely disrupted through multiple channels including the total collapse in
international tourism that is a critical source of income and employment, drop in workers remittances and
foreign direct investments as global growth slowed, and falling Citizenship by Investment (CBI) revenues.
Compared to a pre-COVID-19 forecast of 4.9 percent, the decline in economic growth was estimated at 10.0
percent in 2020 at the time of appraisal of this DPC. The actual drop in GDP was 16.6 percent in 2020.

The DPC played a critical role in supporting the GoCD by meeting Dominica’s financing needs created by the
fiscal response to recent natural disasters and the pandemic. The pre-COVID 2019 fiscal deficit was 9.9
percent of GDP largely due to Hurricane Maria, but in 2020, it was expected to improve to 1.9 percent of
GDP. Instead, GoCD’s fiscal response to the COVID-19 pandemic led to a spike in the fiscal deficit that was
projected to rise to 10.2 percent of GDP, resulting in a significant financing gap. As a middle-income country,
Dominica had limited room to benefit from a significant increase in grant financing. At most, the latter was
expected to increase from 1.9 percent to 3.0 percent of GDP, falling substantially short of closing the
financing gap. Given the highly concessional nature of Dominica’s credit portfolio, debt relief through the Debt
Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) would provide only minimal relief. The provision of budget support
through this DPC series was therefore important in filling the financing gap.

The DPC was fully aligned with Dominica’s own strategy towards climate resilience. The GoCD’s
development vision and strategy was outlined in the National Resilience Development Strategy 2030 (NRDS)
and the Dominica Climate Resilience and Recovery Plan (CRRP) 2020 - 2030. In March 2018, the
government launched the Climate Resilience Execution Agency for Dominica (CREAD) to coordinate all
recovery actions and projects aimed at building national climate resilience, as well as coordinating the
implementation of the NRDS and the CRRP. At the time of appraisal of DPC1, GoCD was committed to the
CRRP to rebuild Dominica as the “world’s first fully climate resilient nation.”, and “boosting Dominica’s overall
socioeconomic development trajectory.” These GoCD objectives are reflected in the PDOs and pillars of this
DPC. In line with CRRP targets, the government had begun to implement measures aimed at building-back-
better following Hurricane Maria. Measures included more robust public infrastructure, improved housing,
strengthening of health systems, climate resilient agriculture, geothermal power investment, and a fiscal
consolidation of 6 percent of GDP over 6 years. This agenda, though challenging, was a clear step toward
improving fiscal and climate resilience in a high-risk environment.

The DPC series was guided by the WBG Regional Partnership Strategy (RPS) for the OECS for FY15 -19
which was extended FY20, as well as the Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the RPS. The
objective of the RPS was to help lay the foundations for sustainable inclusive growth through two areas of
engagement: (i) fostering conditions for growth and competitiveness, and (ii) enhancing resilience. This DPC
series addressed the priorities noted in the RPS and the increased focus on macro-fiscal issues and
resilience stated in the PLR. It was specifically designed to build on complementarities between
strengthening resilience to climate change and natural disasters, and the fiscal aspects that arise from such
recurrent climatic events, such as increased macroeconomic instability and rising debt levels. Reforms
supported under this operation would contribute to the WBG’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and
promoting shared prosperity.

This DPC was set within a broader international response to the COVID-19 pandemic crisis in Dominica. In
addition to this operation, the WBG provided COVID-19 Fast Track Facility financing of US$2.5 million and
activated Contingent Emergency Response Components (CERCs) of ongoing projects in the amount of
US$11.8 million for immediate COVID-19 response to save lives and livelihoods. In early April 2020, the
CERCs of two ongoing projects — the OECS Regional Health Project (P168539) and the Emergency
Agricultural Livelihoods and Climate Resilience Project (P166328) — were activated to provide

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



US$6.6 million for urgent health-related needs and to assist farmers and strengthen food security.
Subsequently, US$5.2 million was also activated from the CERC of the Housing Recovery Project (P166537)
to finance social assistance for the vulnerable and those most affected by the crisis.

The first DPC in the series included policy reforms related to an effective economic and social response to
the COVID-19 crisis, including the protection of jobs, livelihoods, and household consumption, as well as
reforms laying the foundation for a robust recovery in support of Dominica’s goal of becoming the first
climate-resilient nation and commitment to significantly increase the share of renewables in electricity
generation. This second operation in the series built on and deepened the fiscal and PFM reforms supported
under DPC1. The second operation, DPC2, was amended to include reforms in support of fiscal
consolidation, which is critical for investment in climate adaption and building buffers to deal with recurrent
climatic events. DPC2 was complemented by a CAT-DDO (P177807) which sought to support: (a) the efforts
of the Government of the GoCD to mobilize resources in the aftermath of a disaster triggered by climate-
related or geophysical hazards, as well as public health-related events; and (b) the country’s reform program
to build comprehensive resilience to disaster and climate risks.

Both PDOs were highly relevant for Dominica’s response to the pandemic and rested on firm analytic
foundations.

PDO1 was directly relevant to Dominica’s COVID-19 pandemic needs as it helped to save lives through
testing, vaccinations and medical facilities, as well as protected livelihoods and jobs at a time when the
financing gap of GoCD’s budget exceeded 9 percent of GDP. PDO1 resonated the recommendations of the
WBG’s COVID-19 Crisis Response Approach Paper: “Saving Lives, Scaling-up Impact and Getting Back on
Track.” The PAs supporting PDO1 were aligned with Pillars 1 and 2 on “Savings Lives” and “Protecting the
Poor and Vulnerable” in strengthening the health sector response to COVID-19, ensuring appropriate health
protocols, implementing a COVID-19 Immunization Plan, and expanding cash and in-kind safety nets to help
the poor in coping with the economic fallout of the pandemic. The PAs were also aligned with Pillar 3 of the
Approach Paper on “Ensuring Sustainable Business Growth and Job Creation,” which addressed the need for
short-term liquidity to enterprises to preserve employment and economic linkages, reduce borrowing costs,
and maintain trade flows.

PDO2 was relevant as it addressed fiscal management with the objective of laying the fiscal foundations for a
climate resilient economy by focusing on fiscal policy, PFM and debt transparency. This was critical as
Dominica is one of the most disaster-vulnerable economies in the world and the need for building a more
climate resilient economy is paramount. The PAs supporting PDO2 on strengthening fiscal policies for a
climate-resilient recovery were informed by the World Bank’s 2019 Dominica Post-Disaster Public Financial
Management Review. The PA on the adoption of the Fiscal Responsibility Framework (FRF) that placed
public debt on a downward track and safeguarded debt sustainability was further supported by WBG
Technical Assistance (TA) and reflected best practice in formulating and implementing FRFs in small states
as noted in the publication “Fiscal Rules and Economic Size in Latin America and the Caribbean” (World
Bank, 2020).

This was the first World Bank-financed DPC for Dominica. Given the GoCD’s lack of experience with DPCs
and the limited technical capacity due to the country’s small size, a programmatic approach was believed to
allow for a sustained reform engagement over time and greater support for the implementation of necessary
follow-up actions to deepen and reinforce the reform effort. The Bank would support ongoing policy dialogue
through the existing program and provide substantive TA, together with Dominica’s other



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



development partners, for key reforms. This programmatic approach would help facilitate capacity building,
policy dialogue, and TA in support of Dominica’s reforms.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Objectives, Prior Actions (PAs) and Indicative Triggers (IT) for Dominica COVID-19 Response
and Recovery DPO series

   PAs and ITs under DPC1                            PAs under DPC2

   PDO1: Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs

   PA1 (DPC1 PA1): The Recipient, through its
   Cabinet, has approved standardized protocols
   to ensure adequate COVID-19 testing through
   the Protocols for Entry into the Commonwealth
   of Dominica and the Action Plan for Entry into
   the Commonwealth of Dominica.
   PA2 (DPC1 PA2): The Recipient, through its
   Cabinet, has approved General Guidelines for
   the Managed Experience to limit the risk of
   COVID-19 transmission.

   PA3 (DPC1 PA3): The Recipient, through its
   Cabinet, has supported liquidity and continuity
   of businesses affected by COVID-19, by
   establishing the corporate income tax at a rate
   of 17 percent for companies that have retained
   or have agreed to retain at least 80 percent of
   their staff employed in January 2020.

   IT1: To ensure adequate capacity to deploy
   COVID-19 Vaccines, the Recipient has
   approved a COVID-19 Immunization Plan
   following directives from the World Health
   Organization (WHO).

   This trigger was dropped as vaccination plans
   were well developed, well implemented and
   hence the prior action was redundant.

                                                     PA4 (DPC2 PA1): The Recipient has issued a Cabinet
                                                     decision to strengthen social programming and
                                                     efficiency, by approving the establishment of a

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 29
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



                                              beneficiary registry and management information
                                              system for social programs, including a digital
                                              registration process and payment reconciliation
                                              mechanism.




PDO2: Strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a
climate-resilient recovery.




                                                                                           Page 7 of 29
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)




PA5 (DPC1 PA4): The Recipient, through its
Cabinet, has explicitly approved the
development of a Fiscal Rules and
Responsibility Framework that includes: (i)
fiscal targets for public debt, (ii) the fiscal
balance, (iii) wage bill ceilings, (iv) public
expenditure growth limits with oversight
provided by an independent fiscal council, and
(v) temporary deviations to the rules to be
                                                   PA6 (DPC2 PA2): The Recipient: (a) through its
allowed in specific situations such as natural
                                                   Parliament, has adopted the Fiscal Responsibility
disasters and unanticipated economic shocks.
                                                   Framework, 2021 to create fiscal space for a climate-
                                                   resilient recovery by: (i) outlining fiscal responsibility
IT2: The Recipient, through its Parliament, has
                                                   principles; and (ii) establishing measurable quantitative
adopted a Fiscal Rules and Responsibility
                                                   targets for fiscal balances and public debt levels; and
Framework that: (i) outlines fiscal responsibility
                                                   (b) through its Cabinet, has approved a new policy for
principles; (ii) establishes measurable
                                                   the Tertiary Education Financial Aid Programme to
quantitative targets for spending, fiscal
                                                   reinforce the achievement of Fiscal Responsibility
balances, wage bill ceilings and public debt
                                                   Framework targets, improve spending efficiency, and
levels; (iii) includes remedial mechanisms for
                                                   strengthen the composition of public expenditure by
ensuring adherence to stated target; and (iv)
                                                   revising the application and eligibility criteria, reducing
establishes a Fiscal Council and outlines its
                                                   the amounts received by program participants, and
responsibilities for oversight and reporting.
                                                   instituting caps on total allowable amounts per
                                                   applicant.
IT3: The Recipient has created the Fiscal
Council and nominated and appointed its
members. (DROPPED)

IT4: The Recipient has revised its Financial
Administration Act to require, among other
measures, formulation and publication of a
Medium Term Economic and Fiscal Framework
to strengthen the legal framework for budget
planning, preparation and Public Financial
Management. (DROPPED)


PA7 (DPC1 PA5): The Recipient, has funded its PA8 (DPC2 PA3): The Recipient, through the Minister
Vulnerability, Risk, and Resilience Fund, by  of Finance, has issued operating regulations for the
opening a dedicated account at the ECCB, and Vulnerability, Risk, and Resilience Fund to ensure its
depositing EC$500,000 (US$185,000) into said adequate capitalization and effective operation.
fund.




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 29
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



IT5: The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved guidelines for the operation and
management of the disaster contingencies fund.




PA9 (DPC1 PA6): The Recipient has
strengthened revenue mobilization, by: (i)
reducing the percentage of the duty paid on
vehicle imports authorized to be refunded to 50
percent; and (ii) increased the cooperation
between its Comptroller of Customs and its
Comptroller of Inland Revenue in the
exchanging of data through the mutual
operation, administration and implementation of
an information technology system with the
objective of ensuring increased taxpayer
compliance.


PA10 (DPC1 PA7): The Recipient, through its
                                                   PA11 (DPC2 PA4): The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
Cabinet, has taken measures to improve
                                                   has taken measures to strengthen debt transparency
coverage and timeliness of the 2019 Debt
                                                   by requiring: (a) the preparation of DPRs on an annual
Portfolio Review (DPR), by: (i) including loan
                                                   basis; (b) the inclusion of all state-owned enterprise
guarantees in the 2019 DPR; (ii) submitting the
                                                   and statutory body debt in the annual DPRs; and (c)
DPR to Parliament; and (iii) publicly disclosing
                                                   the disclosure of DPRs by September 30th each year.
the DPRs on the Ministry of Finance website.


                                                   PA12 (DPC2 PA5): The Recipient, through its Cabinet,
                                                   has approved initiatives for enhanced capital
                                                   investment planning, appraisal and monitoring
                                                   mechanisms, including explicit incorporation of
                                                   objectives for increasing environmental resilience and
                                                   reducing environmental and climatic vulnerability, to
                                                   strengthen budget allocations, public investment
                                                   planning, prioritization, and reporting.

PA13 (DPC1 PA8): The Recipient, through its PA14 (DPC2 PA6): The Recipient: (a) through its
Cabinet, has approved and disseminated for      Parliament, has enacted the Public Procurement and
public consultation, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Property Act; and (b) through its


                                                                                                Page 9 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



  Disposal of Public Property Bill 2020 which      Minister of Finance, has issued Public Procurement
  strengthens public procurement practices,        and Disposal of Public Property Regulations 2022, to
  including defining parameters for emergency      strengthen the effectiveness, efficiency and
  public procurement, introducing considerations   transparency of public procurement and to incorporate
  for e-procurement and others to promote          climate-resilient and sustainable procurement into the
  environmentally, socially and economically       public procurement process.
  sustainable procurement.




                                                   PA15 (DPC2 PA7): The Recipient has: (a) through its
                                                   Cabinet, approved the National Energy Policy; and (b)
                                                   published the Energy Management Guidelines aligned
                                                   with the Government's declared target of 100 percent
                                                   renewable energy by 2030 to transition to more
                                                   affordable, resilient and low-carbon energy systems
                                                   and services.


Relevance of PAs

PDO1: Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving
jobs

PA1 (DPC1 PA1) and PA2 (DPC1 PA2), and IT1: PA1 and PA2 directly supported PDO1 through a rapid
GoCD response to limit the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and save lives. PA1 allowed the GoCD to
apply standardized WHO protocols, testing, and an Action Plan for travelers entering Dominica at all ports of
entry, thus containing the risk of transmission. Overall, the GoCD strengthened its health sector response. At
the time of DPC1, the COVID-19 testing procedures and technologies were in their infancy. As the
understanding of COVID-19 rapidly evolved, direct health and safety measures considered by the GoCD and
supported by this DPC also evolved and several ITs that would have led to new PAs were dropped. PA2
supported the Health and Safety Protocols for the Tourism and Hospitality industry, applied them to
accommodation, transportation, vending and tour operators, and enforced them. The Environmental Health
Department (EHD) of the Ministry of Health, Wellness and New Health Investment and the Quality Assurance
Unit of Discover Dominica Authority (DDA) would undertake assessments to ensure adherence to the
minimum requirements. In addition, EHD issued a Certificate of Approval to tourism facilities that met the
minimum requirements. IT1 in DPC1 was originally intended as a PA in DPC2 but was dropped. It would
ensure adequate capacity to deploy COVID-19 Vaccines but since the GoCD approved a COVID-19
Immunization Plan following directives from the World Health Organization (WHO), and the vaccination plans
were well developed, and well implemented, it was redundant. Relevance of PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).
Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3 (DPC1 PA3): By reducing the corporate income tax rate from 25 percent to 17 percent for companies
that had retained or agreed to retain at least 80 percent of their staff employed in January 2020, PA3
supported liquidity and continuity of businesses that were directly and negatively affected by economic

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Businesses were most affected in the tourism sector (20
percent of GDP), though not exclusively. The containment measures to control the spread of COVID-19
brought a near halt to tourism activities that affected the livelihoods of a substantive proportion of the
population directly engaged in the sector, particularly women. In addition, industries and activities, such as
agriculture, fisheries, arts, crafts, and cultural events and sites that support tourism also experienced a loss in
income and earning potential. PA3 supported PDO1 by helping to preserve livelihoods and jobs in
businesses that committed to retain employees despite the economic downturn. Relevance of PA3: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PA4 (DPC2 PA1): Dominica’s social protection programs had major management and targeting-related
weaknesses that rendered them ineffective in times of disasters when they were most needed (The
Dominica: Assessment of Social Protection, World Bank, 2017). Due to the lack of automated processes,
beneficiaries and benefits were difficult to track and led to duplications and inefficiencies in social spending,
resulting in delays in the provision of assistance to affected households in the aftermath of climate shocks.
Given that the duration of the economic crisis caused by the pandemic was unknown, there was a strong
case for integrating the information bases to deliver an effective social protection response for the pandemic-
related need but also during future climate-related disasters. An integrated system would allow for better
targeting, focusing spending on lower income beneficiaries, reducing inclusion errors and improving the
allocation of resources to those most in need, as measured by the indicator tracking the percentage of
beneficiaries in the Public Assistance Programme (PAP) in the first two income level quintiles. PA4 helped to
strengthen social programming and efficiency by approving the establishment of a Single Beneficiary registry
and management information system (MIS) for social programs, including a digital registration process and
payment reconciliation mechanism. The Single Beneficiary registry would improve the continuity of social
protection services during climate shocks given that it would be digital, and not dependent on paper or
inaccessible records. It would also increase climate-relevant data in Dominica through its interoperability with
disaster risk management systems and tracking of relevant socioeconomic indicators, such as age, gender,
location, disability status, and poverty status. PA4 contributed directly to protecting livelihoods and efficient
fiscal spending. Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2: Strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a
climate-resilient recovery.

As the pandemic subsided, DPC2 increasingly focused on PDO2/Pillar 2 in supporting a more climate-
resilient recovery. The programmatic nature of the operational series allowed the flexibility to adapt to a
changing environment and better support for the GoCD. This is appropriate in jurisdictions with limited
capacity, as a programmatic approach can ensure more effective implementation and necessary additional
support as required. The change to the objectives and the actions were intended to: (i) better align the pillar
and its objectives with the supported PAs and the modest changes to triggers; (ii) better reflect the results
indicators (RIs) and their contribution to stated PDOs; (iii) further enhance the focus on climate resilience in
line with the Government’s CRRP goals; and (iv) reflect recent lessons learnt from the implementation of
similar reforms in other small island developing states. In contributing to maintaining fiscal and
macroeconomic stability and reducing debt, PDO2 supported critical reforms to build a more robust fiscal
framework that could generate savings, reduce debt loads, and create fiscal space to provide increased
flexibility when natural disasters, pandemics and or other shocks materialized.

PA5 (DPC1 PA4) and PA6 (DPC2 PA2), and IT2, IT3, IT4: PA5 and PA6 were informed by the Dominica
Post-Disaster Public Financial Management Review (World Bank, 2019) that identified existing PFM
weaknesses in basic budget processes, including budget preparation and execution, and in developing and

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



clarifying emergency-related PFM procedures. Public debt sustainability was especially emphasized. These
PAs and ITs sought to establish fiscal discipline and rules to create fiscal space for a climate-resilient
recovery. PA5 under DPC1 triggered the development of a Fiscal Rules and Responsibility Framework
(FRRF) and PA6 under DPC2 legislated the FRRF that included annual fiscal targets for reducing fiscal
deficits and the public debt to GDP ratio and limiting public expenditure growth. Given the challenging
timeframe and difficulties posed by the COVID-19 conditions, the fiscal targets were to be set for the following
year when the economic trends would become clearer. As such, while PA5 and PA6 would make a significant
contribution to PDO2, it was difficult to expect meaningful progress in achieving the annual fiscal targets
during the duration of the DPC given the huge fiscal challenges posed by the pandemic. PA6 excluded the
spending and wage bill targets under the FRRF (set by IT2 and dropped by IT4) due to unanticipated
resistance from public sector unions and the opposition as they viewed them as potentially limiting public
sector wage growth and imposing legislative restrictions on wage negotiations. In addition, PA6 supported a
new policy for the Tertiary Education Financial Aid Program to reinforce the achievement of FRRF
targets, improve spending efficiency, and strengthen the composition of public expenditure. While PA5 and
PA6 could potentially make significant contributions towards PDO2, it would be difficult to measure their
contribution precisely. While the annual fiscal targets seemed beyond reach during the duration of the DPC,
PA5 and PA6 set in motion the shift towards greater fiscal discipline that was urgently needed to prepare
Dominica’s fiscal system for climate-resilience. Of the three ITs (IT2, IT3 and IT4), IT2 overlapped with PA6,
while IT3 and IT4 were dropped. The dropping of IT3 led to the exclusion of the fiscal council clause in PA5
due to time and capacity constraints although the concept remained in the plans. The monitoring and
reporting function of the council would have fostered fiscal transparency. The dropping of IT4 led to the
exclusion of the annual fiscal targets for the wage bill and fiscal spending. However, the risk of fiscal excess
and dilution of PA5 and PA6 caused by the dropping of IT4 was offset partially by the retention of the annual
targets for the fiscal surplus and public debt. The dropping of IT4 also led to the exclusion of the formulation
and publication of a Medium Term Economic and Fiscal Framework (MTEFF) that would have strengthened
the legal framework for budget planning, preparation and PFM but which could not be completed due to the
paucity of time. The revision of the MTEFF depended on the revision of the GoCD’s Financial Administration
Act which was a time-consuming process. Relevance of PA5: Satisfactory (S). Relevance of PA6:
Satisfactory (S).

PA7 (DPC1 PA5) and PA8, and IT5: The PAs contributed to PDO2 by strengthening fiscal policy that
reflected good practice pursued by efficient governments that need to respond to frequent natural disasters
and climate shocks. As external shocks can negatively and significantly impact economic growth and
vulnerable households, a rapid and adequate response is necessary to minimize their effects. In the absence
of readily available resources such as a contingency fund like the VRRF, governments can lose valuable time
in procuring resources by reallocating them from other priorities, thus compromising the speed and
effectiveness of their response. PA7 supported the creation and resourcing of the contingency fund VRRF,
while PA8 supported the issuance of operating regulations for the VRRF to ensure its adequate
capitalization, management, and effective operation. WBG TA helped the GoCD to adopt best practice
management guidelines for the VRRF. In 2020, deposits were expected to total EC$6 million annually
(US$2.2 million), or about 0.4 percent of GDP per annum (PD, para 52). VRRF’s existence and operation
were expected to reduce fiscal and liquidity risks arising primarily from climate-related events, thus
strengthening fiscal policy, improving PFM and supporting PDO2. IT5 was the same as PA8. Relevance of
PA7: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA8: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA9 (DPC1 PA6): PA9 supported specific measures to reduce budgetary deficits through two forms of
revenue mobilization: It reduced the percentage of customs duty paid on vehicle imports authorized to be
refunded to 50 percent. Such discretionary expenditures were overly generous and a prominent feature of

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Dominica’s customs regime. The potential revenue that could be realized by reducing such exemptions was
estimated between 3.0 to 5.0 percent of GDP (PD, para 29). This action directly helped to strengthen the
fiscal policy objective of PDO2. PA9 also sought to increase cooperation between its Comptroller of Customs
and its Comptroller of Inland Revenue in the exchanging of data through the mutual operation, administration,
and implementation of an information technology system with the objective of ensuring increased taxpayer
compliance. A harmonized and integrated system would identify inconsistencies, raise red flags
automatically, and improve audit and oversight functions in both agencies. As the income tax base is highly
concentrated in Dominica, harmonizing and integrating the two systems could lead to important efficiencies in
tax administration, boost revenues and strengthen PFM in line with PDO2. Relevance of PA9: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PA10 (DPC1 PA7) and PA11(DPC2 PA4): These PAs focused on improving systematically Dominica’s
public debt transparency which was an important aspect of PDO2 and critical for a climate resilient recovery.
As a part of DPC1, GoCD undertook measures to improve the content and coverage of the 2019 Debt
Portfolio Review (DPR) by including loan guarantees which totaled about 14 percent of total public debt but
were not publicly disclosed (PD, para 59, and DEMPA 2018). Prior to the DPC, the DPR was irregularly
presented to Parliament and rarely to the public. PA10 required submission of the DPR to Parliament and
publicly disclosing the DPRs on the Ministry of Finance website. PA11 built on PA10 by improving coverage
and requiring all state-owned enterprise and statutory body debt to be included in the annual DPRs. PA11
also improved timeliness by mandating that the DPRs be prepared annually, and public disclosure be
completed by September 30th each year. Prior to these DPC policy reforms, Dominica’s DPRs did not
include all public and publicly guaranteed and SOE debt. PA10 and PA11 helped in raising the standard
of Dominica’s debt reporting and transparency close to best practice. The actions undertaken by the GoCD
were also an FY22 PPA under the Sustainable Development Finance Policy (SDFP). PA10 and PA11 were
expected to help lower Dominica’s public debt burden through parliamentary oversight and public scrutiny
and promote greater accountability and informed decision making on public debt issues, contributing to PDO2
directly, but would be difficult to attribute to these PAs. Relevance of PA10: Highly Satisfactory (HS).
Relevance of PA11: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA12 (DPC2 PA5): PA12 was a critical step in ensuring that new public investments were channeled into
building climate resilient, sustainable, and inclusive infrastructure through appropriate capital investment
planning, appraisal, and monitoring mechanisms. At the time of appraisal of DPC1, the total cost of
transforming Dominica into a disaster-resilient state over twenty years was estimated at US$2.8 billion (five
times Dominica’s GDP). To ensure the effective and efficient implementation of such an ambitious public
investment program, the GoCD approved a revised Public Sector Investment Program (PSIP) methodology
that would address weaknesses in the existing public investment management framework and strengthen the
resilience of the infrastructure portfolio. The revised PSIP supported the GoCD’s National Resilience
Development Strategy and was aligned with the Climate Resilience and Recovery Plan 2020—2030. The
PSIP methodology also includes the requirement for project proposals to demonstrate the impact of
investment projects on gender equality, a necessary foundation for a sustainable Dominica, though this
clause was unlikely to be achieved within the timeframe of the DPC. By initiating the revised PSIP, PA12
strengthened PFM by incorporating environmental and climate resilience considerations in public investment
planning and prioritization, taking a big step towards PDO2. Relevance of PA12: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA13 (DPC1 PA8) and PA14 (DPC2 PA6): by strengthening the effectiveness, efficiency, and transparency
of public procurement, these two PAs contributed to PDO2 by improved PFM in Dominica and facilitating its
effort to build a climate-resilient economy. A new and modern procurement framework was needed to
facilitate business continuity during external shocks and improve efficiency and transparency in the public

                                                                                                Page 13 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



 procurement process. Reforms favouring climate resilient and socially responsible “green” public
 procurement processes would support Dominica’s objective to be the first climate resilient economy. PA13
 led to the approval and public consultation of the 2020 Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Property
 Bill which would strengthen public procurement practices, including defining parameters for emergency public
 procurement, introducing considerations for e-procurement and others to promote environmentally, socially
 and economically sustainable procurement. PA14 led to the Parliamentary approval of the Public
 Procurement and Disposal of Public Property Act, and the issuance of Public Procurement and Disposal of
 Public Property Regulations 2022. The e-procurement system would enhance the efficiency and
 transparency and contribute to climate resilience during natural disasters by ensuring business continuity and
 access that was previously disrupted when physical access to the system was impossible. It would also
 ensure equal access to public procurement opportunities for female-owned businesses providing goods and
 services. These reforms would align Dominica’s public procurement system with international best practice
 and were supported by TA from the World Bank and the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB). Relevance of
 PA13: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA14: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

 PA15 (DPC2 PA7): PA15 is a new PA that was introduced in DPC2 to contribute to the PDO of a climate
 resilient economy in Dominica. It comprised the National Energy Policy (NEP) and the Energy Management
 Guidelines that were aligned with the Government's declared target of 100 percent renewable energy by
 2030 to transition to more affordable, resilient and low-carbon energy systems and services. As the transition
 to a more affordable, resilient, and low-carbon energy system requires phasing out of fossil fuels in power
 generation and transport, the NEP has a medium- to long-term perspective, until 2030, but is expected to be
 reviewed every 5 to 10 years. While PA15 did not have any immediate implications for fiscal policy,
 indirectly, it would contribute to fiscal sustainability in the medium term through multiple channels. Dominica
 imports 97 of the petroleum that it uses for its energy consumption. Volatility in international oil prices
 translates into volatile demand for foreign exchange needed to pay for the oil imports, putting pressure on
 Dominica’s fiscal position, especially in times of natural disasters when tourism export revenues collapse. By
 encouraging the transition to renewable energy sources, the NEP would help to lower the demand for
 imported oil and release the foreign exchange pressure on the fiscus; combat rising energy costs; and reduce
 Dominica’s greenhouse gas emissions in line with its plans to be a fully climate-resilient economy. Given the
 importance of energy services’ contribution to the development of a resilient, growing economy, each of these
 factors would contribute to fiscal sustainability in the medium term. Relevance of PA15: Moderately
 Satisfactory (MS).



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2: Results Indicators (RIs) for Dominica COVID-19 Response and Recovery DPO series

                      Associated                                                   Actual
                                 Relevance                                                Achievement
Results Indicator     Prior                     Baseline Target       Actual Value Change
                                 Rating                                                   Rating
                      Action                                                       in

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



                                                                                     Results
                                                                                     Indicator
                                                                                     Relative
                                                                                     to
                                                                                     Targeted
                                                                                     Change,
                                                                                     in
                                                                                     Percent
PDO1: Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs
RI1. Number of
                               Highly        0       12,000            7,447
persons tested for PA1                                                               62%         Substantial*
                              Satisfactory (2020) (June 2021)          (June 2021)
COVID-19
RI2. Number of
accommodation
facilities certified to        Highly        0       50                              Over
                        PA2                                            81 (2023)                 Substantial*
operate under the             Satisfactory (2020) (June 2021)                        100%
Health and Safety
Protocols
RI3. The number of
beneficiary entities
benefiting from the 8
                               Highly        0       25                              Over
percent tax             PA3                                            28 (2023)                 Substantial*
                              Satisfactory (2019) (2022)                             100%
reduction by
retaining 80 percent
of staff
RI4. Number of
social programs
integrated into the
                               Unsatisfactor 0       2
Beneficiary registry PA4                                               1 (2023)      50%         Negligible
                              y              (2019) (2023)
and Management
Information System
for Social Programs
                                                     5% higher

                                                        than the
RI5. Percentage of
                                                        baseline, of
beneficiaries in the
                                               Est.
Public Assistance                Unsatisfactor
                     PA4                       70%      which         Undetermined               Negligible
Program in the first            y
                                               (2019)   female
two income level
                                                        beneficiaries
quintiles
                                                         are 50%
                                                         (2023)
PDO2: Strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a climate-
resilient recovery
RI6. Expenditures PA5, PA6 MS                    30      18 (2023)  11 (2023)      Over      [High]
under the Tertiary                               (2021)                            100%

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Education Grant
Program reduced by
40 percent (EC$
million)
RI7. Cumulative
amount of funds
deposited into the
Vulnerability Risk
and Resilience Fund
to respond to
                                                                                   Over
climate-related and PA7, PA8   HS            0 (2019) 19.5 (2023) 19.8 (2023)                High
                                                                                   100%
other disasters
(recognizing that
deposits may be
suspended during
periods of disaster
events) (EC$ million)
RI8. Percentage
reduction in Cabinet
authorized                                   2.2
                      PA9      MU                     1.1 (2023)    8 (2023)       0%        Negligible
discretionary                                (2019)
exemptions (EC$
million)
RI9. Number of joint
                      PA9      U             0 (2019) 5 (2023)      0 (2023)       0%        Negligible
audits undertaken
RI10. Annual DPR
                      PA10,                  No       Yes (2020-
available on a                 MU                                Yes (2023)        100%      [High]
                      PA11                   (2019)   2023)
government website
RI11. Percentage of
new public
investment projects
funded in the 2023
annual budget,
appraised in line     PA12     U             0 (2019) 60 (2023)     Undetermined             Negligible
with the PSIP
methodology that
account for the
impact of natural
disasters
RI12. Percentage of PA12       U             0 (2019) 25 (2023)     Undetermined             Negligible
new public
investment projects
funded in the 2023
annual budget,
appraised in line
with the PSIP
methodology that

                                                                                                Page 16 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



account for gender-
differentiated
impacts to meet the
needs of women
RI13. Percentage of
goods contracts (by
                        PA13,                                                          Over
value) including                  MU             0 (2019) 25 (2023)    72 (2023)                [High]
                        PA14                                                           100%
sustainability/climate
considerations
RI14. Percentage of
awarded public
procurement
                        PA13,
contracts made                    U              0 (2019) 80 (2023)    0 (2023)        0%       Negligible
                        PA14
available on a
dedicated
Government website
RI15. Battery
storage for
distributed electricity
is increased by 5
MW by 2023 to
enable the electric
                        PA15      U              0 (2020) 5 (2023)     0 (2023)        0%       Negligible
system to integrate
new renewable
energy including
geothermal and
distributed
renewable energy.

Note: Achievement ratings in the table reflect the level of achievement based on actual change relative to the
targeted change of the RI. Where the achievement rating is shown in brackets, the RI is not deemed adequate
for assessing achievement, and the ratings have been adjusted (noted in the Efficacy section); * denotes rating
based on additional information; [..] denotes a further downgrade to be taken in calculating Overall Efficacy due
to Relevance of RI.

Relevance of Results Indicators

PDO1: Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs

RI1: PA1 introduced standardized protocols to ensure COVID-19 testing of individuals entering Dominica
through its various ports of entry and the Action Plan for Entry into Dominica. Individuals testing positive at the
port of entry were quarantined to prevent transmission to local citizens and community spread that would lead to
a largescale loss of lives, especially because of Dominica’s weak medical infrastructure and unpreparedness to
treat COVID-19 patients. RI1 measured the number of persons tested for COVID-19 and was highly relevant as
it helped to support PA1 by measuring progress in testing. According to the ICR, at the time of design of DPC1,
COVID-19 testing was deemed an important measure for containing the pandemic, as it would allow for those
who tested positive to avoid contact with other individuals. However, the shortage of adequate test kits led to
delays. When the test kits were readily available, testing using PCR and Rapid Antigen kits vastly exceeded

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



expectations. GoCD instituted quarantine protocols that limited population exposure to individuals that tested
positive and facilitated an eventual safe reopening of Dominica’s borders. RI1 was easy to measure and track
over the COVID-19 period, but its target was unrealistically set for June 2021 when the DPC became effective in
May 2021. Relevance of RI1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2: In July 2020 when Dominica was undergoing a phased reopening, the largest threat to community spread
was the tourism sector. PA2 instituted General Guidelines to limit transmission risk in the tourism industry, and
transmission from tourists to the local population by applying Health and Safety Protocols for the Tourism and
Hospitality industry to accommodation, transportation, vending and tour operators, and enforced them. EHD
issued a Certificate of Approval to tourism facilities that met the minimum requirements. RI2 measured and
tracked the number of accommodation facilities certified and helped minimize the risk of COVID-19 transmission
originating from overseas visitors, thus directly contributing to saving lives although the exact number saved is
not measurable. RI2 also protected livelihoods and preserved jobs by helping to maintain public confidence in
Dominica’s tourism sector by keeping tourist facilities open though the exact impact is also not measurable by
the RI. Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI3: PA3 supported preserving livelihoods and protecting jobs by facilitating liquidity and continuity in
businesses affected by COVID-19 through a reduction of 8 percent in the corporate income tax rate for
businesses that retained at least 80 of their staff employed in January 2020. RI3 measured the number of
businesses that achieved PA3. In DPC2, RI3 was maintained as it helped to track and support businesses
as they endured the longer than expected duration of the pandemic and economic downturn. Again, it is not
possible to quantify the number of jobs preserved. Relevance of RI3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI4 and RI5: PA4 supported the development of a Single Beneficiary registry that would integrate all social
programs into one digital database which would be tracked by a MIS. This was expected to enhance monitoring
and administration of social programs and benefits, increasing effectiveness and efficiency, thus contributing to
fiscal efficiency. RI4 would measure the number of social programs integrated into the Beneficiary registry and
help integrate about 20 social assistance programs, the PAP and the Over-70 years allowance. Although the
actual number of beneficiaries was not tracked by RI4, the operationalization of the system would provide this
information. RI4 would also protect livelihoods by enabling the GoCD to channel social protection financial
transfers to those households most affected by the COVID-19 induced downturn. RI5 measured the percentage
of beneficiaries in the PAP in the first two income level quintiles and provided GoCD the information it needed to
target beneficiaries in the lowest income quintiles. The Beneficiary database contained their social and
economic household profiles, including gender. Unfortunately, ministerial changes led to severe delays in the
development of the Registry and database because of which neither RI4 nor RI5 were measurable. Relevance
of RI4: Unsatisfactory (U). Relevance of RI5: Unsatisfactory (U).

PDO2: Strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a climate-
resilient recovery

RI6: PA5 and PA6 sought to establish fiscal discipline to create fiscal space for a climate-resilient recovery. The
main mechanism was the FRRF that included annual fiscal targets for reducing fiscal deficits, public debt to
GDP ratio and limiting public expenditure growth. Candidates for fiscal targets including increases in the wage
bill and fiscal expenditure ceiling targets that typically account for the bulk of the budget were later
excluded from the FRRF due to political pressure. PA6 added reforms requiring expenditure cuts in the Tertiary
Education Financial Aid Program to achieve the FRRF targets but financial aid expenses are only a small part of
the overall budget. Since RI6 could measure and track cuts in financial aid expenditures alone, it was clear that
it would not be an adequate indicator for tracking progress in PA5 and PA6 that applied to a much broader set of


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



fiscal variables covered by the FRRF. In addition, while chopping expenditures on student financial aid was
needed in Dominica, the longer-term implications of drastic cuts in human capital development in Dominica
facilitated by the Tertiary Education Financial Aid Program had not been studied. Relevance of RI6:
Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI7: PA7 and PA8 supported the establishment and funding of the contingency fund VRRF to enable GoCD to
respond to climate-related and other disasters. This financing source was set up to immediately address
damages and losses caused by frequent, but less severe hazard events. It is also to be used to address
emergency response expenditures to more severe events for which other sources of immediate liquidity are not
available. The VRRF was set up with TA support from the World Bank and ECCB and was based on
international best practice. RI7 measures and tracks the VRRF’s funding status which is key for reducing fiscal
and liquidity risks arising from climate-related events. It is a relevant measure of PA7 and PA8’s progress
towards PDO2 - strengthening fiscal sustainability for a climate-resilient recovery. Relevance of RI7: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

RI8 and RI9: Given Dominica’s discretionary exemptions on imported vehicles, PA9 reduced the tax exemptions
on imported vehicles by 50 percent with the goal of raising additional fiscal revenues relatively quickly. Vehicle
exemptions a relatively large exemption category and was under the direct and immediate control and discretion
of the authorities. RI8 was to measure the percentage reduction in Cabinet authorized discretionary exemptions.
It was a weak indicator as the impact of the adverse economic environment on households and
businesses substantially increased the demand for relief and exemptions, leading to an almost four-fold increase
in exemptions. Perhaps a simple flat tax that did not involve official discretion and was reasonable given the
adverse economic environment would have helped increase fiscal revenues instead of RI8 that was dependent
on discretionary control. PA9 also sought to increase cooperation between Customs and Inland Revenue in the
exchange of data with the objective of increased revenue mobilization when the databases of the agencies were
harmonized and integrated. RI9 measured the number of joint audits undertaken as a proxy for the increased
cooperation. It was a weak indicator as there was no evidence to suggest that the number of joint audits would
automatically translate into increased revenues. RI9 did not measure PA9’s contribution to PDO2. Moreover, it
was well known that the databases were difficult to harmonize, especially in the absence of any mutually
beneficial motive for the agencies to do so. Relevance of RI8: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). Relevance of
RI9: Unsatisfactory (U).

RI10: RI10 sought to improve debt transparency to support PDO2 by focusing on the coverage and timely
reporting of the DPR to the parliament and public. By verifying whether the Annual DPR was available on a
government website, RI10 measured only one aspect (public disclosure) of debt transparency. Undoubtedly,
publishing the annual debt report is an effective way to improve debt transparency and reduce debt
vulnerabilities, directly in line with DPO2. However, the other critical elements of PA10 and PA11 were not
measured at all, making it difficult to gauge whether the PAs were adequately supporting PDO2. RI10 ignored
the comprehensive coverage of public debt sought by the PAs and which was essential for meaningful reporting
to the Parliament and public. This included all loan guarantees, debt of SOEs and statutory body debt. Timely
publication is also important and RI10 ignored the September 30 reporting deadline required by the PAs.
Relevance of RI10: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI11 and RI12: By introducing the new PSIP methodology, PA12 sought to ensure that the new public
investments were channeled into building climate resilient, sustainable, and inclusive infrastructure through
appropriate capital investment planning. The PSIP methodology would ensure that investments in building
resilience against climate-related natural disasters were consistent with a stable macroeconomic framework. It
also required project proposals to demonstrate the impact on gender equality. Through the revised PSIP, PA12

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 29
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



  strengthened PFM by incorporating environmental and climate resilience considerations in public investment
  planning and prioritization. RI11 measured the percentage of new public investment projects funded in the 2023
  annual budget whose appraisal was consistent with the PSIP methodology and which also accounted for the
  impact of natural disasters. RI12 measured the percentage of new public investment projects funded in the 2023
  annual budget, appraised in line with the PSIP methodology that account for gender-differentiated impacts to
  meet the needs of women. Both RI11 and RI12 were ineffective indicators as they could not be measured
  without a system that implemented the PSIP methodology. The ICR notes (p.37, 38) that while the PSIP
  methodology was approved, implementation was planned for fiscal year (FY23/24) whereas the DPC closed in
  March 2023. Relevance of RI11: Unsatisfactory (U). Relevance of RI12: Unsatisfactory (U).

  RI13 and RI14: PA13 and PA14 strengthened the effectiveness, efficiency, and transparency of public
  procurement by introducing a modern procurement framework that was technology-driven and favored climate
  resilient and socially responsible “green” public procurement processes with defined parameters. They would
  improve transparency through e-procurement systems and contribute to climate resilience during natural
  disasters by ensuring business continuity and access. They would also ensure equal access to public
  procurement opportunities for female-owned businesses providing goods and services. RI13 measured the
  percentage of goods contracts (by value) including sustainability/climate considerations. Those without climate
  considerations were noted as involving basic goods purchases without any environmental, sustainability, or
  climate considerations. While RI13 was a useful indicator, it is unclear to what extent it rigorously applied the
  climate resilient and socially responsible “green” public procurement criteria since the government website
  was not set up. It is also unclear if the e-procurement system is fully functional. For this reason, RI13 is rated
  Moderately Satisfactory. RI14 measured the percentage of awarded public procurement contracts made
  available on a dedicated Government website. This RI was intended to demonstrate the implementation of the
  new procurement standards and processes. Increasing transparency in public procurement through the
  publication of procurement contracts is required under the new legislation. RI14 is rated Unsatisfactory as the
  new procurement website is not set up. Relevance of RI13: Moderately Satisfactory (MS). Relevance of
  RI14: Unsatisfactory (U).

  RI15: PA15 introduced the National Energy Policy (NEP) and Guidelines to support the Government's declared
  target of 100 percent renewable energy by 2030 by transitioning to more affordable, resilient and low-carbon
  energy systems and services, including in the tourism and hospitality sectors. The NEP prioritizes energy
  efficiency and renewable energy. RI15 measured the increase in the battery storage for distributed electricity by
  2023 to enable the electric system to integrate new renewable energy including geothermal and distributed
  renewable energy. The RI would indicate and measure progress toward renewable energy sources in pursuit of
  a more climate resilient recovery and economy, including the development of geothermal resources, wind and
  solar. Battery storage capacity is a key requirement for effective use of such renewable energy sources. RI15
  was another poor indicator as it was not measurable due to delays in the implementation of the battery
  installation unit. Relevance of RI15: Unsatisfactory (U).



  Rating

  Moderately Unsatisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs

Rationale
RI1: Number of persons tested for COVID-19 was only 7,447 (62 percent of the target of 12,000) in June
2021 as the GoCD did not have sufficient test kits due to the temporary global shortage. However,
considering the additional information that (i) testing picked up speed as soon as additional kits became
available; (ii) the total number of PCR and Triple Antigen tests conducted was 232,914 in October 2023; (iii)
the GoCD instituted an additional quarantine protocol to limit population exposure to individuals that tested
positive, the achievement is rated Substantial. The target was overly ambitious as the operation became
effective in May 2021 and the target was set for June 2021. The achievement of RI1 is assessed
substantial. Achievement Rating RI1: Substantial.

RI2: The number of accommodation facilities certified to operate under the Health and Safety Protocols
increased from zero in 2020 to 81 in 2023, falling short of the target of 50 in June 2021. However,
achievement is judged Substantial based on additional information which reflects an overall positive outcome:
as of May 2022, a total of 12,161 positive confirmed cases and 63 deaths had been reported, while
approximately 46 percent of the population had been vaccinated once and 42 percent was fully vaccinated.
The GoCD was effective in applying the Health and Safety Protocols for the Tourism and Hospitality industry
to tourism accommodations and enforcing EHD certification to minimize the risk of COVID-19 transmission
originating from overseas visitors and enable the safe reopening of the tourism sector. The achievement of
RI2 is assessed as substantial. Achievement Rating RI2: Substantial.

RI3: The number of beneficiary entities benefiting from the 8 percent tax reduction by retaining 80 percent of
staff hired in January 2020 was exceeded and considered so useful for protecting jobs and livelihoods that it
was retained throughout DPC2. RI3 is therefore rated as substantial. Achievement Rating RI3: Substantial.

RI4: The number of social programs integrated into the Beneficiary Registry and Management Information
System for Social Programs could not be measured as the registry was not established due to ministerial
changes and is rated negligible. Achievement Rating RI4: Negligible.

RI5: The percentage of beneficiaries in the Public Assistance Program in the first two income level quintiles
could not be measured as the Beneficiary Registry that was to facilitate the measurement was not
established. The achievement of RI5 is therefore rated negligible. Achievement Rating RI5: Negligible.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a climate-resilient
recovery

Rationale
RI6: The expenditures under the Tertiary Education Grant Program were reduced to EC$11 million from
EC$30 million, exceeding the target of EC$18 million by more than 100 percent leading to an achievement
rating of high. However, this achievement is downgraded to Substantial due to the MS relevant rating of the
RI. Achievement Rating RI6: Substantial.

RI7: The cumulative amount of funds deposited into the Vulnerability Risk and Resilience Fund to respond to
climate-related and other disasters (recognizing that deposits may be suspended during periods of disaster
events) reached EC$19.8 million, exceeding the target of EC$19.5 million. Therefore, the achievement of RI7
is assessed as high. Achievement Rating RI7: High.

RI8: The percentage reduction in Cabinet authorized discretionary exemptions in import taxes on imported
vehicles was ineffective as public pressure during the pandemic had the opposite effect and
increased exemption from the baseline of EC$2.2million in 2019 to EC$8 million in 2023. The achievement of
RI8 is therefore assessed as negligible. Achievement Rating RI8: Negligible.

RI9: The number of joint audits undertaken by the departments of Customs and Inland Revenue was 0
instead of the target of 5. The achievement of RI9 is therefore rated as negligible. Achievement Rating RI9:
Negligible.

RI10: Although the target of posting the Annual DPR on a government website was fully achieved and
qualifies for a rating of high, due to the relevance rating of moderately unsatisfactory, the achievement rating
for RI10 is downgraded to modest. Achievement Rating RI10: Modest.

RI11: The percentage of new public investment projects funded in the 2023 annual budget, appraised in line
with the PSIP methodology that account for the impact of natural disasters was indeterminate. Therefore, the
achievement of RI11 is rated negligible. Achievement Rating RI11: Negligible.

RI12: The percentage of new public investment projects funded in the 2023 annual budget, appraised in line
with the PSIP methodology that account for gender-differentiated impacts to meet the needs of women was
indeterminate. Therefore, the achievement of RI12 is rated negligible. Achievement Rating RI12:
Negligible.

RI13: The percentage of goods contracts (by value) including sustainability/climate considerations was 72
percent and exceeded the target of 25 percent, earning an achievement rating of high. However, due to
RI13’s relevance rating of moderately unsatisfactory, the achievement rating of RI13 is downgraded to
modest. Achievement Rating RI13: Modest.

RI14: The percentage of awarded public procurement contracts on a dedicated Government website was
zero as the website was not established, leading to a negligible achievement rating. Achievement Rating
RI14: Negligible.

RI15: Instead of an increase of 5 MW in the battery storage for distributed electricity by 2023 to enable the
electric system to integrate new renewable energy including geothermal and distributed renewable energy,


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 29
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



                  the actual increase was zero, leading to an achievement rating of negligible. Achievement Rating RI15:
                  Negligible.



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement of both objectives is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. Under PDO1, the PAs that focused on
saving lives and preserving livelihoods and jobs were rated as Substantial. Despite delays, Dominica was
remarkably efficient in containing COVID-19 infections, community spread and the death toll. The PAs related
with the establishment of a technology-driven social protection system that would have integrated all social
protection databases, facilitated better targeting of vulnerable quintiles, and paved the path toward a fiscal
system that was more climate resilient was not established, and pulled down the rating of PDO1 to Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

Under PDO2, the efficacy of the individual RIs related with scaling back fiscal expenditures on a Tertiary
Education Grants Program and establishing a contingency fund to respond better to natural disasters is rated
High. However, efficacy ratings are Negligible for most fiscal measures related with revenue mobilization, other
expenditure reduction programs, procurement, renewable energy and other reforms focused on climate-resilient
public investment spending, leading to an overall Moderately Unsatisfactory rating for PDO2.

Given that the efficacy of both PDO1 and PDO2 is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the overall efficacy rating for
the DPC is also Moderately Unsatisfactory.

In summary, the first-ever DPC for Dominica appropriately identified COVID-19 and outstanding macroeconomic
challenges following climate disasters as its key policy pillars. However, the policy reforms sought by the 15 PAs
spanning revenue mobilization, expenditure cuts, debt transparency and wide-ranging social protection, public
investment and procurement reforms were too many and too ambitious in scope for the GoCD’s limited capacity
and archaic systems. As a result, with its resources spread too thin, achievement was relatively impressive in
containing the losses from COVID-19 that was and should have been the priority but slipped or failed in most
fiscal areas. From the progress reported to date, it seems that GoCD is still interested in most of the reforms, but
implementation remains slow.



Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                               Page 23 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of the PAs rated Highly Satisfactory but Efficacy rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, the Overall
Outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

With the pandemic winding down, or at least under relative control, the risk that a COVID resurgence will
jeopardize achievements to date is minimal. Therefore, there is little risk to PDO1 focused on saving lives,
protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs. Moreover, Dominica now has systems in place to effectively handle
such a resurgence, both in terms of addressing the health implications of a pandemic and programs to support
livelihoods and business continuity.

There are, however, several risks to PDO2 focused on strengthening fiscal policies, public financial
management and debt transparency for a climate resilient recovery. As the ICR correctly notes, the risks to
achieving a climate resilient recovery relate to factors beyond the Bank and Dominica´s control. The most
prominent risk is natural disasters, especially frequent weather events, that seem to be intensifying with ongoing
climate change. These could exacerbate Dominica’s fiscal and public debt challenges in the near term.

Global events and trends could also worsen Dominica’s fiscal challenges. Weak global demand could trigger a
drop in tourism receipts as well as workers’ remittances. High oil prices caused by the ongoing wars or new
ones could also lead to larger fiscal deficits and shocks to household incomes. Given Dominica’s dependence
on Citizenship-by-Investment revenues, risks related to global geo-political developments, both upside and
downside, can be significant.

While the benefits of improved public financial management and debt transparency are likely to continue, at
least for a while, related risks cannot be ruled out.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale



                                                                                                   Page 24 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



The Bank provided effective and timely support to Dominica, especially as the COVID-19 pandemic followed on
the heels of Hurricane Maria. The Bank drew upon an impressive array of analytical work to inform the design of
the first DPC for Dominica. For example, the Dominica Social Protection Assessment (World Bank, 2017) clearly
identified areas where social spending could improve in terms of efficiency and effectiveness and contributed to
the design of the Single Beneficiary Registry and Management Information System (MIS). The report on Fiscal
Rules and Economic Size in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2020), and Review of Fiscal Rule
Frameworks in place in Grenada, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Bahamas informed the design of the
FRRF in Dominica. These studies were also useful inputs in the decision to drop the inclusion of the Fiscal
Council that was originally included in the FRRF to provide oversight and monitoring. Moreover, the Post-
Disaster Public Financial Management (PD-PFM) Review provided recommendations in the areas of the PSIP
methodology for the assessment of capital investment projects, the need for fiscal transparency, and
management of disaster risk financing. The establishment of the contingency fund, the VRRF, was based on
Catastrophe Risk Financing in Developing Countries (World Bank, 2009) which identified steps on how to
mitigate the economic and fiscal impacts of disasters including the importance of contingency funds. The E-
Government Procurement (e-GP) Readiness Assessment Report of St. Lucia, Grenada, and Dominica (World
Bank, 2017) that provides direct knowledge of identified procurement reform needs in Dominica motivated the
procurement reforms.

The operation was designed based on sound analytical underpinnings, World Bank analysis and that of other
development partners. Furthermore, the team was resourceful in using analytical underpinnings developed by
other institutions, such as the Public Investment Management Assessment of the IMF and the Feasibility Study
for resilience of the transmission network and Master Plan for Resilient Electrical System supported by the
French Development Agency (AFD, for its acronym in French).

The ambition of the PAs was very high. While each of the PAs was highly relevant for Dominica’s
macroeconomic challenges, collectively the set of 15 covered a wide array of fiscal areas that included revenue
mobilization, expenditure cuts, fiscal deficits, debt transparency and limits, procurement system reform, social
protection system reform, capital investment project assessment reform and methodology for a climate resilient
economy, fiscal framework design and adoption, contingency fund, and energy policy. The overall coverage of
areas and issues was too large for a small state government that was already grappling with the reconstruction
related with Hurricane Maria and the COVID-19 pandemic. A smaller set of policy reforms could have been more
successful for more fiscal policy reforms to be fully implemented. Most of the reforms under PDO2 related to
strengthening fiscal policies, public financial management and debt transparency for a climate-resilient recovery
were initiated but could not be completed for lack of capacity or time.

The energy sector reform (PA15) focused on the transition to renewable energy was overly complex for a one-
or two-year DPC operation and could have been pursued with a separate IPF operation. The GoCD was already
not able to address all reforms under DPC1 and DPC2 and did not have the capacity to attend to an economy-
wide energy reform requiring the transition to renewable energy. No progress was made in this area.

Several targets and timelines were unrealistic. As an example, even though the effectiveness date of DPC1 was
May 2021, the target for RI1 and RI2 was set for June 2021. Some of the RIs seem to have been selected
without verification of available data to facilitate measurement. RI8 related with Cabinet approved discretionary
exemptions of taxes on vehicle imports was not achieved because the sentiment was to extend not curtail the
exemptions. RI9 related to the number of joint audits conducted by the Customs and Inland Revenue authorities
was not achieved because their databases were not harmonized. Several RIs related with systemic reforms that
moved entire systems from manual to automated processing and would have introduced largescale efficiency
gains failed because government departments could not set up the websites or electronic databases. This

                                                                                                  Page 25 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



happened in the areas of procurement, PSIP reforms, social protection, and debt transparency reforms.
Systemic changes for a select set of areas or a phased program may have had a better chance of successful
implementation than all reforms squeezed into a one or two year period.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The Bank aided Dominica through TA for specific activities and throughout the design/preparation and
implementation of the series and played a key role in helping the program meet expectations, especially in the
context of the pandemic. TA played a crucial role in advancing the development agenda towards a climate
resilient recovery, in support of the fiscal rules framework, contingency fund management, public investment
planning, and procurement reform. The first operation focused more on the pandemic response, and as the
pandemic continued and the Government’s response to the pandemic was recognized as being well-managed
and effective, the Bank was able to adapt the second operation towards recovery. The design of the original
PDO allowed for this flexibility, reflecting positively on the team’s understanding of GoCD’s priorities.

There was a strong dialogue and collaboration between the Bank and government authorities. Completing
several supported reforms would not have been possible without Bank engagement and Bank provided TA.
Despite the limited Bank budget available for the provision of TA, the Bank was instrumental in ensuring that the
Fiscal Rules Framework represented best practice in incorporating appropriate objectives, feasible targets, and
adjustment mechanisms. Similarly, Bank TA was critical in the development of operating guidelines for the
Vulnerability, Risk, and Resilience Fund. Furthermore, the Bank’s engagement in the new Procurement
legislation and particularly in drafting of related procurement regulations ensured that the legislation and
regulations reflected best international practice. These activities would not have been possible without Bank TA
support.

The cooperation between the Bank and the authorities was exemplary. The Bank helped the GoCD with the
content and drafting of the Debt Portfolio Review. Even after the completion of these reforms, the GoCD
continues to share drafts of the annual DPRs before publication to solicit Bank advice on content and
presentation. This illustrates the level of engagement and meaningful cooperation between the Bank and the
authorities. The provision of ongoing TA throughout the operation and subsequently resulted in a near constant
monitoring of reform progress and regular contact with the authorities.

The Bank could have done better in monitoring implementation. The ICR notes that “it is recognized that the
Bank should have better monitored the implementation progress of the results indicators. Some of the individual
results indicators were not achieved due to capacity constraints and competing demands within the
administration. With stronger monitoring of specific indicators, several of the delays and oversights around some
of these indicators could have been noted and relevant TA brought in to bear to ensure their completion. The
Bank should have reviewed ongoing progress more regularly against the result indicators. In hindsight some of




                                                                                                  Page 26 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



these failings could have been easily addressed by the provision of TA, and if resources had been available,”
(ICR, para 74).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With Bank Design and Bank Implementation ratings being Moderately Satisfactory, the Overall Bank
Performance rating is also judged Moderately Satisfactory.




Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

This DPC has had a clear and positive impact on poverty. The short-term impact on poverty reduction can be
attributed mostly through PAs 1, 2, and 3 in DPC1 and PA 1 in DPC2, which were focused on limiting the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic by saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and preserving jobs. The support provided
through these operations to the COVID-19 testing protocols, entry requirements, the certification of COVID-19
compliant tourist facilities, and supporting liquidity and continuity of businesses affected by COVID-19,
unambiguously limited household exposure to COVID-19 and helped maintain consumption levels among the
most vulnerable households. These measures could also have a positive long-term effect by improving human
capital, productivity, and stimulating economic growth.



b. Environmental

The DPC-supported policy reforms are not expected to have significant negative environmental effects and may
have some positive effects due to their support for climate change mitigation and adaptation.



c. Gender


                                                                                                  Page 27 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)



Women have clearly shared in the benefits though given limitations in data availability; this is difficult to quantify.
The supported measures enhanced the effectiveness of social protection programs and helped maintain
business continuity and jobs. This is likely to have benefited women to a greater extent given they were
disproportionately affected by the pandemic crisis and that job losses were concentrated in the tourism and retail
sectors where employment levels among women are highest (PD1, p. 21, Table 8). However, several indicators
could have included greater gender disaggregation, though again this is limited by data availability. To ensure
these measures effectively promoted gender outcomes, it is necessary to collect and analyze gender
disaggregated data and implement gender-sensitive budgeting in the near term. The latest poverty survey is for
2008.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is well-drafted and systematically followed IEG’s recommended method for presenting an ICR. It is
comprehensive in coverage, internally consistent in the narrative presented and well written. It pieces together
sound evidence from both operations and presents a coherent discussion. All PAs and RIs were properly
presented and discussed. The exception was a numbering issue (RI10). The main shortcoming of the ICR is in
its self-assessment of efficacy where little consideration is paid to the dates when the numerical targets were
achieved. There an absence of discussion related to the delay of over a year in the achievement of some targets
and the specific date when the target was meant to be achieved (RI1 – RI3).


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately            Moderately
 Outcome
                                  Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                Too many complex PAs,
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory unrealistic RI targets and
                                                                                insufficient TA .
 Relevance of Results                                   Moderately
                                  ---
 Indicators                                             Unsatisfactory
 Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                       Page 28 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Dominica First COVID-19 Recovery DPC (P174927)




The ICR presents four lessons with which IEG concurs.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                     Page 29 of 29
