     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024273

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P117449                                  Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 West Bank and Gaza                       Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18323                                 31-Dec-2022                                           4,416,885.12

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Apr-2015                              31-Dec-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          4,500,000.00                                     4,500,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           4,500,000.00                                     4,500,000.00

 Actual                                       4,416,885.12                                     4,416,885.12




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Craig Phillip Kullmann    Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective in the PAD (p.5) and grant agreement (Schedule 1, p. 8) was to reduce
   the environmental pollution from wastewater produced in the Hebron Municipality.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   No

                                                                                                Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Wastewater Treatment Infrastructure. (US$39.9 million at appraisal, and US$37.75
   million actual). This component financed the design and construction of a wastewater treatment plant
   (WWTP) to serve Hebron Municipality with the possibility to add treatment capacity to serve additional
   communities under future phases. The contract for the WWTP was a design, supply, and install (DSI)
   modality with a period of five years for operation before handing over to local authorities. (PAD, p.6)

   Component 2: Sustainable Management, Operation, and Maintenance of Hebron Regional
   Wastewater Treatment Plant. (US$17.0 million at appraisal, and US$16.08 million actual). This component
   financed two subcomponents. The first sub-component financed staffing, materials, and management costs
   for operating the wastewater treatment plant on a gradually declining basis over five years after the WWTP
   is commissioned. The second sub-component financed technical assistance for the Hebron water and
   wastewater department that included consulting services for technical training for the operation and
   maintenance of the WWTP, project monitoring, water, and wastewater sector planning, a tariff study, billing
   and collection reform analysis, and a public awareness campaign to improve willingness to pay for water
   and wastewater management services.

   Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Master Plan Implementation
   Planning. (US$4.75 million at appraisal, and US$4.49 million actual). This component financed
   management and monitoring costs of the Palestinian Water Authority (PWA) as well as staffing costs in
   Hebron municipality. This component financed special studies such as wastewater effluent reuse as well as
   preparation for second phase to this project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The total project cost was estimated at US$56.15 million but the actual total cost was US
   $43.28 million.

   Financing: At appraisal, the IDA grant financing was estimated at US$4.5 million. The amount disbursed
   was US$4.42 million, which was 98 percent of the grant. The United States Agency for International
   Development (USAID’s) financing was estimated at US$4.82 million. The amount disbursed was US$4.82
   million. The European Commission's financing was estimated at US$18.73 million. The amount disbursed
   was US$15.51 million. The French Agency for International Development (AfD) financing was estimated at
   US$13.87 million. The amount disbursed was US$9.20 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower committed US$14.23 million and disbursed US$9.33 million in
   counterpart financing.

   Dates: The Project was approved on April 15, 2015, became effective on February 10, 2016, and closed on
   December 31, 2023, following one extension that added 12 months to the project period. A Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was not conducted. There were two restructurings of the project that included the following:

         On March 20, 2017, a level 2 restructuring to reallocate funds between disbursement categories.

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



                          On December 22, 2022, a level 2 restructuring modified: (i) the closing date of the loan agreement
                           by 12 months, (ii) minor adjustments to the results framework, and (iii) disbursement estimates. At
                           the time of the second restructuring, US$4.17 million (93 percent) of the grant was disbursed.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is sufficiently outcome-orientated and appropriate for the
development status of the West Bank related to reducing environmental pollution but was silent on the
institutional capacity required to effectively manage wastewater services. The West Bank faces serious
water resource constraints, which are exacerbated by untreated wastewater. The need to improve
wastewater treatment services remains relevant to the World Bank’s West Bank and Gaza Assistance
Strategy for FY22-25, particularly for Objective 2.3 - Improve infrastructure through World Bank investment
that leverages donor resources, and Objective 1.2 - Support service providers to become financially
sustainable. In addition, the ICR noted that the project was expected to contribute to improving the
Palestinian Authority's (PA) fiscal balance by canceling the net lending deductions made by the
Government of Israel (GOI) of about US$10.5 million per year.

The PDO was relevant to the PA’s National Water and Wastewater Policy and Strategy for Palestine 2014-
2032, as well as the PA’s medium-term Strategic Development Plan 2017-2022 which strongly focused on
improving wastewater services and structure, including collecting, treating, and reusing wastewater. (ICR,
p.9)

Moreover, countries in the European Union are important investors in the West Bank and Gaza, and in
2023 they announced that wastewater treatment and reuse projects will be one of the sectors to receive
priority funding.

The project and PDO were based on limited historical wastewater treatment experience in the West Bank
and Gaza and were also based on a master plan financed by USAID around 2002. This limited experience
guided the design in two ways. The first was to pursue a design, supply, and install contracting modality.
While this approach had merits, the Palestinian Water Authority's (PWA) capacity was insufficient to
adequately manage the procurement of a DSI contract. The second was to include a component on
capacity building to help strengthen the capability to operate and maintain the new infrastructure in a
sustainable way, which included charging a tariff for wastewater services; however, the institutional capacity
building was not reflected in the PDO.

The PDO, while relevant to the current Assistance Strategy and the PA’s national sector planning, could
have also explicitly included strengthening institutional capacity to provide wastewater services in a
complex environment. Overall, the PDO is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Reduce the environmental pollution from wastewater produced in the Hebron Municipality.

               Rationale
               The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, p. 7) identified that
               the outcome of interest was to reduce the environmental pollution from wastewater produced in the Hebron
               Municipality.

               The mix of inputs identified was inadequate to reach the outcome. These inputs included financing: (i) a
               Design, Supply, and Install (DSI) contract to design and construct the WWTP and operate and maintain it for
               the first 5 years after commissioning, (ii) technical assistance to train staff on the WWTP O&M, billing and
               collection analysis, wastewater tariff studies, and public awareness campaigns to improve willingness to pay
               for wastewater and water services. However, there were several significant shortcomings.

               The first key shortcoming was consultations with local stakeholders. The PAD states that stakeholder
               engagement was done through the Environment, Social and Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment (ESCHIA),
               but the extent of that engagement is unclear with the PAD citing 36 individuals from the local community were
               interviewed. If local communities who resided next to the proposed site of the WWTP were not properly
               consulted that would risk the acceptance of the siting for the WWTP.

               Another key input for the viability of the WWTP was that the USAID-funded project to establish in-situ pre-
               treatment facilities for the stone carving industry would be implemented and regulated by the municipality of
               Hebron. This was a critical assumption because if the operation and enforcement of the pre-treatment
               facilities were not working that would result in significant volumes of inorganic material being received at the
               WWTP disrupting its operation.

               Additionally, the municipality of Hebron’s water department provides intermittent water supply services
               contributing to a lack of confidence and willingness to pay for water services. The project was solely focused
               on wastewater and did not attempt to improve the quality of water supply services in tandem with wastewater
               services. The assumption that the low collection rate for water supply was a public awareness problem was a
               significant shortcoming in the design and theory of change.

               The ability of the project to achieve its PDO outcome of reduced environmental pollution from wastewater in
               Hebron Municipality was likely unrealistic given these shortcomings.

               OUTPUTS:

               The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

                     Contract for design, supply installation, and operation of the HR WWTP signed. (achieved) A contract
                      was signed on February 11, 2019. A one-year extension was granted from December 2022 to

                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



       December 2023, but during that time there were financial disputes between the subcontractors which
       caused the project to stop between April 10 and September 2023. The project has been further
       delayed by the conflict in Gaza that started in October 2023 and has continued as of this ICRR. The
       contract is currently in place but faces challenges with the ongoing conflict and ability to attract
       workers resulting in very slow progress. (ICRR interview)

      Institutional arrangements are in place for WWTP O&M beyond the project end. (Original target was
       Yes). (partially achieved) The core contract in the project was for the design, supply, and installation
       of the wastewater treatment plant and the subsequent 5-year operation and maintenance (O&M)
       contract which was signed on February 11, 2019. The O&M contract would be effective upon the
       completion of the DSI contract; however, the uncertainty of its completion remains high given the
       ongoing conflict and the ability to resolve the pre-treatment issue with the stone carving industry.

      Wastewater treatment plant was not commissioned. (Original target was Yes). (not achieved) By
       project close, December 2023, the plant was estimated at 80 percent completion without a clear
       completion date due to the ongoing conflict in Gaza and the resolution of the pre-treatment of stone
       carving industry’s effluent.

      36 percent tariff collection rate. (Original target as 50 percent). (not achieved) (ICR, p. 12) Hebron’s
       water and wastewater department’s collection rate has decreased over time, which is partly explained
       by the economic shock of the ongoing conflict and the shock of COVID-19, but likely due to the quality
       of services provider and commercial management by the municipality.

      Wastewater tariff introduced. (Original target was Yes). (partially achieved). The Hebron local council
       approved the wastewater tariff in November 2022 and announced its introduction in January 2023.
       The PWA reports that the Water Sector Regulatory Council reviewed the tariff to comply with the
       recent tariff bylaw in November 2023 and that the Cabinet of Ministers endorsed the tariff in December
       2023. While the tariff was reviewed and introduced, it is currently not being implemented by local
       authorities because of the economic impact of the current conflict on the local population and there
       are no wastewater services being provided. (ICR, p. 12)

      Wastewater utility established and staffed with appropriately trained staff. (Original target was Yes).
       (partially achieved) The intent of this indicator appeared to be focused on establishing an
       independent regional water utility that is administered separately from the Hebron municipality. During
       project implementation, the Hebron Municipality, in consultation with the Palestinian Water Authority,
       assessed options to establish the regional utility and decided that a semi-autonomous wastewater
       management department reporting to the municipal council would be the most appropriate structure.
       Hebron Municipality’s Wastewater Management Department (WWMD) was staffed with newly
       recruited engineers to oversee the department's operational activities and support the implementation
       of key reform activities. (ICR, p. 12) Some new staff have been recruited and remain employed, such
       as the General Director of Water and Wastewater, and technicians. (ICRR interview)

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework are the following:




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




                                  Zero tons per year of BOD pollution load removed by treatment plant under the project. (Original
                                    target was 3,000 tons per year) (not achieved) (ICR, p. 12)

                                  Zero days of treated wastewater meeting effluent standard. (Original target was 340 days). (not
                                    achieved) (ICR, p. 12)

                                  Zero direct and Female Beneficiaries. (Original target as 165,000 direct beneficiaries, of which 48
                                    percent are female) (not achieved) (ICR, p. 12)

                            The project did not achieve the PDO targets by the project closing date of December 31, 2023. The current
                            conflict has raised uncertainty about the completion of the wastewater treatment plant and its operation by the
                            firm for 5 years after the plant is commissioned. Likewise, the issue of the stone carving industry’s effluent
                            remains an impediment to commissioning the WWTP without finding a resolution for pre-treatment.

                            The ICR’s ToC partly captured the causal chain but missed important aspects of water supply, technical
                            aspects related to the stone carving industry, social acceptance, and did not include any assumptions. The
                            results framework measured the technical aspects specific to wastewater but fell short of measuring important
                            social indicators such as beneficiary satisfaction which would be important to know for billing and collection
                            interventions as well as serving as a feedback loop about acceptance of the project. Likewise, the project did
                            not address water supply-related issues that would be precursors to improvements in billing and collection.



                            Rating
                            Negligible


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given the project could not achieve the outcomes, efficacy is rated as negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Ex Ante Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the economic rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 12 percent
   and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$3 million for the investments based on various benefit streams for
   wastewater that were limited to: (i) cost savings related to Israel’s charges to the Palestinian Authority for
   wastewater they receive and treat, (ii) and improved collection efficiency of tariffs. (PAD, p. 56). The
   methodology used for the economic analysis was a cost-benefit analysis, which is appropriate for this type of
   investment project. The NPV calculation used a discount rate of 10 percent.


                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



Ex Post Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis at project completion used the same approach and
benefit streams as identified at appraisal, which followed standard practice for the sector and these types of
projects. Because the project did not generate any benefits by project close, there was no EIRR that was
calculated. The economic analysis focused on the NPV of net benefits which were a negative US$24.5 million
(ICR, p 14)

Financial Efficiency: The financial rate of return at appraisal was estimated at -5 percent with estimated net
benefits at negative US$18.5 million. The project was not estimated to be financially viable. At ICR, a financial
rate of return was not calculated, but the net benefits were estimated at negative US$40 million as the project
did not generate any financial benefits for the utility. (ICR, p. 14)

Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented over 7.5 years with
an estimated effectiveness date of May 2015 and a closing date of December 2022. The project did experience
delays due to factors that were inside and outside the control or influence of the Project Implementation Unit
(PIU). The factors where the PIU had influence were: (i) procurement delays, (ii) subcontractor disputes, and (iii)
social unrest due to lack of acceptance of the project by local stakeholders. These factors were compounded by
external factors outside the control of the PIU that included: (i) the COVID-19 pandemic (lockdowns, limited
mobility, and global supply chain issues), and the ongoing conflict. By project close, the delays resulted in
US$3.7 million in increased costs. (ICR, p. 14, 18-19)

Conclusion. The economic analysis of the project did not show any benefits as the WWTP was not operational
as of project close and there is no clear timeline to complete it with the ongoing conflict in the region; therefore,
the efficiency rating is negligible.


Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   12.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                 0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's overall outcome is rated Highly Unsatisfactory. While the Project objective remained relevant at
closing, efficacy and efficiency were negligible, and the project did not meet the outcome indicators and targets.
The one-year extension did not advance the achievement of project outcomes.


                                                                                                        Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcomes is very high. While the Project did not achieve the PDO by the closing
date, the PWA, with financial support from the AfD, will continue to implement the project. As of the writing of
the ICRR, the WWTP was 80 percent complete; therefore, the WWTP may be completed as AfD is working
to secure additional grant funding to ensure that the DSI is fully funded. However, the ongoing conflict and
related movement restrictions have increased the uncertainty about when the project could be completed.
Likewise, the issue of the stone carving industry’s proper pre-treatment of its effluent is another key factor
that will impact the commissioning of the WWTP. There is a likely scenario that the physical works get
completed, but commissioning the plant could be delayed.

Additionally, if the security situation improves to allow for the completion and commissioning of the plant and
the pre-treatment issue is resolved, the long-term sustainability of the plant is at high risk after the 5-year
operating phase concludes. The contractor that will operate the plant will be financed or partially financed by
donor funds. The economic shock due to the conflict resulted in Hebron’s municipal council not approving
the implementation of the WWTP tariff. This coupled with low billing and collection rates for water services
will make it even more difficult for the municipality to cover operating costs through user tariffs if it cannot
improve billing and collection.

Lastly, this project was a result of collaboration between various financing entities such as the World Bank,
European Union, AfD, and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). While the
collaboration is notable, the number of financing actors, coupled with their own timelines and interests
increases the complexity of maintaining alignment over time putting at risk the ability of the PWA to secure
financing to achieve the desired outcomes. This risk was apparent when USAID decided that it would end its
project related to pre-treatment facilities for the stone carving industry. If AfD is not able to secure additional
financing, then there is a risk that the project will not be completed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the Bank played a small financing role, its role in coordinating with other donors was instrumental
  in securing financing of the project. Other donors relied on the Bank’s expertise and policies for
  environmental and social safeguards as well as procurement. Nevertheless, preparation by the Bank
  team fell short on several fronts that included the following: (i) inadequate consultations with community
  stakeholders and the Hebron Governate; (ii) inadequate assessment of PWA’s capacity to handle a
  sophisticated procurement process for a DSI contract modality and provision of procurement support, (iii)
  lack of attention to improving water supply services in tandem or as a pre-requisite to wastewater


                                                                                                         Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



  provision, and (iv) assumptions that local authorities would ensure that pre-treatment facilities were
  operational for the stone cutting industry. In addition, Israeli water quality standards would drive the
  required wastewater treatment technology, and the Bank did not sufficiently assess the gap between
  the capability of the Hebron water and sanitation provider to operate and manage a system that would
  meet Israeli standards. (ICR, p.22)

  These shortcomings during identification, preparation, and appraisal are considered major and as a result
  the rating is Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 18 supervision missions over the 8.5-year implementation period of the project, which
 is two formal missions per year. The Bank team played an important coordination role throughout the
 project with the PWA and local counterparts, donors, and Israeli authorities. In addition, the Bank was able
 to mobilize additional resources to support the PWA with procurement matters and community
 engagement; however, these efforts were too late to ensure that the project stayed on a viable path to
 complete the construction and commissioning by the closing date. (ICR, p.10)

 During supervision, the project faced challenges that were outside the control of the Bank team, PA, and
 the PWA which included COVID-19 and the related restrictions that were placed on implementation, and
 the conflict in the Middle East. While the conflict occurred near the end of the project, it increased
 uncertainty of when and whether the project would be completed.

 Factors that were subject to the PA and PWA’s control included recruitment of staff within the PWA to
 adequately manage the project, procurement, social conflicts that arose during implementation, as well as
 conflicts between contractors that resulted in delays. The PWA did not adequately engage local authorities
 in the Hebron governate, nor adequately manage stakeholder consultation for site selection as well as the
 issues arising from the stone-cutting industry.

 The Bank team provided more intensive support to the PWA on managing the social conflicts that were
 arising during the first three years of the project, but not after the violent protests. (ICR, p. 10). The Bank
 team was proactive in getting high-level attention from the Program Manager, Regional Vice President, and
 Country Director through project visits to help support the dialogue to move the project forward, but these
 efforts were insufficient to overcome implementation challenges. As a result, the rating for the supervision
 is moderately unsatisfactory.

 While the Bank team did play an important coordinating role and was able to provide needed technical
 assistance on procurement and social aspects, these efforts were too late to ensure that the project stayed
 on a viable path to completion. The complexity of the overall context required greater attention from the
 Bank team to make course corrections early on during implementation. Given the significant shortcomings
 throughout project preparation and implementation, the overall rating of the Bank’s performance is
 unsatisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While the PDO indicators captured the PDO statement, the theory of change and project design had
 notable deficiencies with respect to this project being viable. The design and M&E framework were silent
 on improving the quality of water supply services, which are intermittent and linked to the consumers'
 willingness to pay for both water and wastewater services.

 The results framework was focused on the commissioning and operation of the WWTP and the number of
 people that would benefit. The output indicators such as whether a DSI contract was signed, water utility
 staff trained, wastewater tariff introduced, and institutional arrangements in place for O&M of the WWTP
 beyond project end were necessary but insufficient. The intermediate outcome indicator of tariff collection
 rate was appropriate, but the results framework indicators were insufficient to measure other important
 aspects such as beneficiary satisfaction with water and wastewater services. In addition, the project made
 important assumptions around improving billing and collection rates as well as reductions in non-revenue
 water without explaining how that would occur beyond mentioning that technical assistance would be
 provided for a public awareness campaign. The provision of wastewater services does not happen in a
 vacuum within a water utility as fees collected for water services often help offset costs of providing
 wastewater services. The results framework indicators focused on the construction of the WWTP but failed
 to account for other important commercial and operational aspects of utility services beyond collection
 rates. The PAD makes a passing reference to USAID providing resources for water supply, but it is unclear
 what were the interventions and the intended impact.

 The PWA designated the M&E reporting to a supervising engineer of the WWTP, which was just one
 aspect of the results framework indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PWA provided monthly progress reports regarding the construction of the HR WWTP and delivered
  quarterly reports on the Project, but the reports were submitted often with delays and sometimes not
  delivered. (ICR, p. 20) A major shortcoming of the M&E implementation was that priority was given to
  reporting the construction of the WWTP, and did not provide updates on the other project components
  such as the status of technical assistance. The M&E system was not institutionalized within PWA, and
  did not have a dedicated person within the project implementation unit to follow up on all activities.




                                                                                                Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E system was not systematically used to inform the decision-making. Starting in late 2019, the
  Bank’s team facilitated monthly site meetings at the construction site with all concerned stakeholders to
  review progress and recommend corrective actions. The ICR reported that the technical assistance
  component was not monitored.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social: The project was rated a Category A project and triggered OP 4.01 on
   Environmental Assessment. The environmental and social rating fluctuated throughout the project and was
   rated as Moderately Satisfactory at the project closing. During project implementation were as low as
   unsatisfactory due to adherence to community health and safety requirements, the project’s management of
   significant social concerns related to the closure of access to lands neighboring the WWTP, and erecting
   electricity transmission poles to provide power to the plant, and the management of the stone carving
   industry’s effluent.

   Environmental and social issues remained unresolved at the closing date. Some of the challenges and
   problems were directly related to the construction of the WWTP and were within the control of the PMU, the
   PWA, and donors such as community health and safety impacts. Other issues were not associated with or
   directly related to the construction of the WWTP, such as community demands for local development
   initiatives.

   Resolving these broader demands was outside of the purview of the project but may have been able to
   mitigate them with adequate consultation at the beginning of the project. The ICR reported that PWA’s
   performance in the management of specific environmental and social (E&S) project-related impacts and
   issues improved over time (e.g., labor management, citizen engagement, management of grievance redress
   mechanism (GRM)). However, important environmental concerns, such as the resolution of the stone
   carving industry’s effluent and social issues that arose during implementation were unresolved. (ICR, p 20)

   The project's Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established in 2019. PWA disseminated
   information regarding the GRM system to the nearby communities using different channels, including
   project signboards, a user-friendly leaflet with information on the available tools, uptake channels and
   processes for filing complaints, and briefings on the system during consultations. There were 27 complaints
   registered in the GRM system since August 2019, and of these, 15 complaints were directly related to the
   project and were processed according to the procedure specified in the GRM manual. These complaints
   were primarily related to noise due to late working hours, alleged encroachment of private land, and fencing.
   Most of the complaints were resolved and closed in the system. However, four complaints related to land-
   related issues are still pending. (ICR, p.44)




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The ICR reported that the rating for Financial Management (FM) was Satisfactory
   at project closure and that adequate financial management arrangements were in place during
   implementation to ensure proper use and accountability of project funds. The Project Management Unit
   (PMU) at PWA was responsible for the financial management and disbursement of the project funds.

   The PMU had adequate staff and systems and appointed an external auditor to audit the project’s financial
   statements. All audit reports received for the project had unmodified clean opinions, and the management
   letters did not report significant weaknesses in internal controls. Unaudited IFRs were acceptable, and the
   majority were provided on time.

   Procurement. The procurement rating was satisfactory at project closure, but the project faced
   considerable challenges during implementation. The ICR reported that the complexity of the contract type
   DSI chosen at appraisal and the limited experience of the PWA in implementing it jeopardized the
   procurement implementation of the project from the outset. (ICR, p. 21) AfD financed the DSI contract,
   which faced many challenges and issues, resulting in multiple work suspensions. As a consequence, the
   time-based engineering supervision contract was extended several times to ensure day-to-day engineering
   supervision of the DSI contract. The engineering supervision contract's successive cost and time
   extensions resulted in cost and time overruns. (ICR, p 21)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   none



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                               Highly
Outcome                                              Highly Unsatisfactory
                               Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance               Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 Severe shortcomings in the M&E
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Negligible                  systems design, implementation
                                                                                 and utilization.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



1. Identifying stakeholders’ needs, interests, and values is critical to project sustainability
and implementation. This project demonstrated that limiting engagement largely to stakeholders at
the central level and designing the project around their interests creates significant pitfalls that can
halt project implementation and result in undesirable outcomes. Task teams need to understand the
views of stakeholders who are most impacted by the project (i.e. those potentially benefiting and
those who would be responsible for administering assets after project closure) in order to design the
project so that it is fit for purpose.

2. The West Bank and Gaza have a unique administrative and geopolitical relationship with
Israel that extends to water resources and transboundary water issues influencing the PWA’s
water resource strategy including wastewater treatment. Israel charges the PA for the volumes
and quality of wastewater received from the West Bank and Gaza. Assessing viable institutional and
financial arrangements along with technologies that match local capabilities will be important to
understand if those arrangements and technologies can meet Israeli standards allowing the PA to
reduce or eliminate the chargebacks. Operating and maintaining wastewater infrastructure that does
not meet Israeli standards could create a double burden on the PA if it is financing capital
investments and operating and maintenance costs of municipal providers' wastewater treatment,
and also being charged by the Israeli government for not meeting its standards.

3. Project design for wastewater projects should account for the provision of water supply
services when the quality of water supply is poor. This project was silent on improving the
quality of water supply despite the problems of intermittency. In contexts where the quality of water
supply provision is poor, households are also less inclined to pay for water supply services.
Moreover, global sector knowledge shows that households have a higher willingness to pay for
water services than wastewater services, and water supply revenues often help offset the true costs
of wastewater provision. In a context where billing and collection rates are low for water supply and
the quality of water supply is poor the expectation that households would begin paying for
wastewater let alone water supply is unrealistic. In such contexts, project design should address
both issues and tailor the interventions to resource constraints.

4. Financing complex projects that have longer durations such as this project should
consider the complexity of donor relations and interests. Donor coordination can be complex
and cumbersome because it involves the participation of several layers of decision-makers
in different organizations to secure and release funding. Particularly for projects that have long
implementation periods, donor interests and priorities may change with time and could negatively
impact the project outcomes. The number of financing institutions that will contribute to a project
should be balanced with the risk of shifting organizational priorities over time.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management-1 (P117449)



The ICR was comprehensive, well-written, transparent and candid about the shortcomings of the project
design, implementation, and Bank performance. The ICR was aligned with the OPCS guidelines and internally
consistent. The ICR provided a rich set of lessons learned for doing similar types of projects in such a complex
setting as the West Bank.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 14
