     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024167

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P113266                                     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51100,IDA-61480,IDA-61500,IDA-          31-Dec-2017                                        275,873,018.23
 D2440,IDA-D2470,IDA-H7700

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2012                                 15-Mar-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           176,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            294,713,021.34                                               0.00

 Actual                                        275,873,018.23                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan           Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The First Phase of the Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea (CLSG) Power System Re-
   Development Sub-Program of the West African Power Pool (WAPP) Adaptable Program Lending Program
   were supported by two projects under one project number: The CLSG Power Interconnection Project (CLSG
   Project) and the WAPP Integration and Technical Assistance Project (WAPP Project).



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement for Liberia dated August
   16, 2012 (Credit Number 5110-LR, p.9) and the Project Appraisal Document (p.9), the original objectives of
   the CLSG Project were “(i) to reduce the cost of and increase the electricity supply at utility level; and (ii) to
   increase the export capability of Côte d'Ivoire.”

   According to the IDA WAPP Financing Agreement dated August 20, 2012 (Grant Number H770-3A, p.7) the
   Project Appraisal Document (p.9), the objective of the WAPP Project was “to increase the technical
   integration of the WAPP network.”

   At the time of the additional financing in October 2017, the objective of the CLSG Project was revised to read
   as to “(a) reduce the cost of electricity supply at the utility level for Liberia and Sierra Leone; and (b) increase
   the amount of electricity traded among all the participating countries.” The objective of the WAPP Project was
   not revised. A separate financing agreement was signed with Sierra Leona to finance a part of the
   transmission line in that country.

   Reasons not to undertake a split assessment of the project outcome:

   Although the project objective was revised at the time of the additional financing in October 2017, a split
   assessment of the project outcome will not be undertaken in this review because the revision was
   necessitated to clarify the formulation of the objectives and better capture the project outcomes. First, cost
   savings from the electricity trade facilitated by the transmission line were expected to materialize mostly in
   Liberia and Sierra Leone. Therefore, the first objective of the CLSG Project was revised to specify these two
   countries. Second, the transmission line was to encourage imports and exports of electricity among all
   beneficiary countries rather than only Cote d’Ivoire. Therefore, the second objective was revised to better
   capture this outcome. Thirdly, the definitions of two key indicators were revised to better and more realistically
   capture the project outcomes rather than lowering the outcome targets of the project. Taking these points into
   consideration, since there was no material change in the objectives of the project because of the revision of
   their formulation, this review will not undertake a split assessment of the project outcome and will assess the
   project’s performance based on the achievement of the revised objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Oct-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The CLSG Project consisted of two components with various subcomponents:



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



A. High Voltage Transmission Interconnection among Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and
Guinea. (Appraisal cost: US$321.95 million; revised cost at the time of additional financing: US$440.80
million; actual cost: US$480.25 million)

This component was to finance the construction of a 1,349 kilometer (km) transmission interconnection line
and its associated substations between the participating countries. This component consisted of five
subcomponents.

A.1. Construction of a 225 kilovolt (kV) interconnection among the participating countries: This
subcomponent was to finance the construction of a 1,349 km of a 225 kV one-circuit transmission
interconnection line starting from Man in Cote d’Ivoire, passing through Monrovia in Liberia and Benongor in
Sierra Leone, and ending at Linsan in Guinea. The transmission line was to be built to allow the future
installation of a second circuit.

A.2. Substations: The project was to finance the construction of eleven 225 kV substations associated with
the transmission line. Four of those substations were to be built in Liberia financed by the IDA credit. Five of
the remaining seven substations were to be built in Sierra Leone and two in Guinea, and the Man
substation in Cote d’Ivoire was to be expanded, all of which to be financed by other international donors.

A.3. Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA): The subcomponent was to finance the
acquisition and installation of a SCADA system to monitor and control the interconnected transmission line
in the territory of the participating countries

A.4. Compensation and Frequency Regulation Equipment: The subcomponent was to finance the
acquisition and installation of the equipment to enhance frequency control along the interconnected
transmission line.

A.5. Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plans and the Resettlement Action
Plans: This subcomponent was to support the implementation of the Environmental and Social
Management Plans and the Resettlement Action Plans under the relevant World Bank safeguard policies.

B. Institutional Framework and Project Oversight. (Appraisal cost: US$45.42 million; actual cost IDA
contribution: US$46.49 million)

This component consisted of two subcomponents:

B.1. Establishment of the Regional Transmission Company (RTC): This technical assistance subcomponent
was to support the establishment of the RTC through the setting up of its procurement and financial
management systems and recruitment of its staff, provide capacity building to the RTC and the participating
utilities in fiduciary matters, and finance the operating costs of the RTC during the construction of the
transmission line.

B.2. Implementation Support: The subproject was to support the RTC in project management and
supervision including procurement, design, construction, and preparation for operation and maintenance of
the investments, supervision and monitoring of the safeguard policies, preparation of a compensation and
frequency regulation studies and measures, and implementation of audits of the RTC. An owner’s engineer
was to be hired under this subcomponent.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



  The WAPP Project consisted of two technical assistance components:

  C. Supply Alternative Studies and Project Preparation Support. (Appraisal cost: US$10.00 million;
  revised cost at the time of additional financing: US$27.50 million; actual cost: US$27.50 million)

  This component was to finance a program to ensure that the generation capacity along the transmission line
  would be developed in the medium and long-term in a timely manner and in accordance with least cost
  principles.

  D. Integration of the WAPP Network and Strengthening of the WAPP. (Appraisal cost: US$21.50
  million; actual cost: US$21.50 million)

  This component consisted of two subcomponents:

  D.1. Integration of the WAPP Interconnected Network: This subcomponent was to support the WAPP to
  implement a synchronization program to establish a sub-regional market for electricity through the
  interconnection and synchronous operation of the regional transmission networks of at least five power
  utilities in the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) region.

  D.2. Strengthening of the WAPP: This subcomponent was to provide technical assistance to the WAPP to
  develop, implement, and monitor the WAPP priority projects, deploy the operational security and mitigation
  plan for the power pool operation, implement a certification process for the network operators, and prepare
  a study to establish a road map for the market and a tariff methodology.

  Revised Components

  The construction of the Linsan substation in Guinea was transferred to the Organization for Development of
  the Gambia River (OMVG - L'Organisation pour la Mise en Valeur du Fleuve Gambie) regional project.

  At the time of additional financing, following activities were added to the WAPP project (ICR, p.11):

      a. Strengthening of the commercial framework for energy trade through the CLSG,
      b. The identification and preparation of further development of hydropower plant on the St. Paul River
         in Liberia, and
      c. Provision of institutional strengthening and technical and safeguards experts for the hydropower
         studies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The CLSG Project cost was originally estimated at US$444.39 million and the WAPP Project
  cost at US$31.50 million including 10 percent physical contingencies and 4.5 percent price contingencies
  for the World Bank-financed parts. The total cost estimated at appraisal was US$475.89 million. The revised
  project cost at the time of the additional financing in October 2017 was US$535.20 million. According to the
  information the World Bank project team provided, the total actual cost of the CLSG Project was $526.74
  million and the WAPP Project $41.76 million, totaling US$568.50 million.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



Financing: At appraisal, the total IDA financing amount was estimated at US$176.00 million consisting of
US$144.50 million for Liberia and US$31.50 million for WAPP. In October 2017, and additional financing
totaling US$122.30 million was approved—US$59.60 million to Sierra Leone, US$45.20 million to Liberia,
and US$17.50 million for the WAPP—to cover the financing gap caused by exchange rate losses, provision
of 10 percent contingency on all contracts, cost increases after detailed studies, increased cost because of
the use of shield wire technology for electrification, and post-Ebola effects and delays in effectiveness (ICR,
p.11). The total IDA financing increased to 298.3 million. The project had disbursed a total of US$275.87
million by project closing in March 2023. In addition to the World Bank, the European Investment Bank (EIB)
was to provide US$105.18 million, the African Development Bank (AfDB) US$28.83 million as loan and
US$104.26 as grant (total US$133.09 million), and the Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau of Germany (KfW)
US$40.77 million. According to the information provided by the World Bank project team, the actual
disbursements of the other donors as of December 2023 were as the following: the EIB US$82.76 million,
the AfDB US$114.09 million, and KfW US$65.88 million.

Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the governments of the participating countries were estimated to
provide a total of US$20.84 million for the construction of the transmission line and the substations. The ICR
does not report the actual contribution of the governments to project financing. According to the information
provided by the World Bank project team, the total actual contribution of the participating countries as of
December 2023 was US$21.96. In addition, TRANSCO provided US$9.83 million from the revenues the
company collected from electricity trade after the commissioning of the transmission line in October 2021.

Project Restructurings: The project was restructured eight times including an additional financing.

      First Project Restructuring (January 30, 2015 – Level 2): The project closing date was extended
       by 22 months from December 31, 2017 to October 31, 2019 because of the delays in the CLSG
       Project’s effectiveness and project implementation. The CLSG Project credit’s effectiveness was
       delayed because some effectiveness conditions could not be met despite the ratification of the
       financing agreement by the Liberian Government and extension of the effectiveness date four times.
       Those unfulfilled conditions were revised into dated covenants or disbursement conditions such as
       the execution of the establishment agreement between the regional transmission company
       (TRANSCO) and each of Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, the transmission service agreement
       and the power purchase agreement. The indicator “Distribution line from Monrovia (near Mount
       Coffee) to the city of Monrovia” was deleted because KfW was to finance this activity. The Mid-term
       Review date was changed from October 2016 to January 2017.
      Second Project Restructuring and Additional Financing (October 25, 2017 – Level 1): An
       additional financing in the amount of US$122.30 million was approved (see sections Revised
       Components and Financing above). The project objective and the definitions of two key indicators
       were revised to better and more comprehensively capture the project outcomes (see section 2.a.
       Objectives and Revised Components above). A new indicator (supply alternative analyses
       completed) was added to the results framework. Because of the inclusion of the technical assistance
       for the development of hydropower generation capacity in Liberia to the project scope, three
       additional safeguards policies were triggered (OP 4.36 on Forests, OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams, and
       OP/BP 7.50 on Projects on International Waterways). The project closing date was extended by 13
       and half months from October 31, 2019 to December 15, 2020 to allow time for the completion of
       newly added activities to the project scope and the transmission line and its related substations.
      Third Project Restructuring (May 21, 2019 – Level 2): The project was restructured to allow the
       use of IDA funds for the financing of an overrun cost in the total payment for lands and


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



            compensation to the people affected by the project in Sierra Leone under the Involuntary
            Resettlement safeguards policy.
           Fourth Project Restructuring (June 1, 2020 – Level 2): The closing date of the additional
            financing was extended by 23 months from December 15, 2020 to November 15, 2022 to allow time
            for the completion of the additional project activities that were delayed because of the slow progress
            in recruiting the temporary operator that was to operate and maintain the first section of the line from
            Man in Cote d’Ivoire to Monrovia in Liberia. This closing date extension was also to allow sufficient
            time for the completion of the technical assistance activities under the WAPP Project. The original
            financing agreements were expected to close on December 15, 2020 (see the Fifth Project
            Restructuring below).
           Fifth Project Restructuring (November 30, 2020 – Level 2): The closing date of the original
            financing agreements signed in 2012 was extended by 23 months from December 15, 2020 to
            November 15, 2022 because of the adverse impact of COVID-19 restrictions on project
            implementation and allow time to address the complexities faced in synchronizing the electricity
            supply through the transmission line built under the project in participating countries.
           Sixth Project Restructuring (May 9, 2022 – Level 2): The funds were reallocated to cover the
            costs of the owner’s engineer for Liberia and the temporary operator of the transmission line.
           Seventh Project Restructuring (November 12, 2022 – Level 2): The closing date of the additional
            financing was extended by 4 months from November 15, 2022 to March 15, 2023 to allow time for
            the completion of the transmission line activities and synchronization of the participating countries
            systems that were delayed because of the COVID-19 restrictions. It was also expected that this
            project closing date extension would have allowed sufficient time for the governments of four
            participating countries to prepare a credible strategy for TRANSCO to reach self-sustainability in the
            medium-term so that a second additional financing could be processed. However, because of an
            absence of a credible strategy and a proposal from the governments, a second additional financing
            could not be processed.
           Eighth Project Restructuring (March 15, 2023 – Level 2): An additional financing amount of
            US$3.6 million for the WAPP Project was cancelled on project closing date.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 31, 2012. The grant for the WAPP Project became effective on
   December 21, 2012. The credit to Liberia under the CLSG Project became effective in January 2015 (see
   First Restructuring in the section above). A Mid-Term Review was conducted in January and February
   2017. The original project closing date was December 31, 2017, but it was extended by 5 years and two
   and a half months (please see the project restructurings above for the reasons of project closing date
   extension). The project closed on March 15, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project objectives were highly aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Africa Regional
Integration Strategy for FY2018-23. The project objectives were also highly aligned with World Bank
country partnership frameworks (CPFs) for Liberia (FY19-24), Sierra Leone (FY 21-26), and Guinea (FY18-
23). The project sought to address the development problem of insufficient and expensive electricity supply,
which was a major barrier to economic recovery and poverty reduction in these countries. The project’s

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



               outcome was expected to be transformational in providing cheaper and more reliable electricity supply from
               Cote d'Ivoire while supporting the further technical and operational development and strengthening of the
               WAPP. The project was to achieve these outcomes through the construction of a 1,349 km transmission
               line and 11 substations that were to act as a backbone transmission line between these countries and
               technical assistance to the WAPP in strengthening its operation with the goal of achieving a regional power
               market in the long-run. The project objectives correspond to “Objective 2.1. Supporting priority regional
               energy generation and transmission connections” and “Objective 2.2. Transforming subregional power
               pools into effective, commercially run entities, actively enhancing power trade between nations” of the
               Africa Regional Integration Strategy. They also correspond to Liberia CPF’s objective to expand access to
               more affordable and reliable electricity under its pillar for narrowing the infrastructure gap in the country. In
               the Sierra Leone CPF, the project objectives support the achievement of the “Objective 3.1. To build
               resilient infrastructure (power, mobility, technology) for enhanced competitiveness. The project also
               supported the Guinea CPF’s economic growth pillar by connecting the country’s hydropower generation to
               Sierra Leone and Liberia contributing to regional power trade.

               The project objectives were highly relevant to the country contexts. With very low electrification rates in
               Liberia and Sierra Leone, the project was expected to provide these countries with cheaper and more
               reliable electricity that would allow the expansion of access to electricity. With the involvement of the
               WAPP, the project countries were expected to achieve the project objectives. The original and revised
               project objectives were outcome-oriented and appropriately pitched for the development status of the
               participating countries.

               The project benefited from the experience gained through the World Bank’s engagement with the countries
               in the region and the WAPP under the APL series that started in 2002. The project objectives were
               sufficiently challenging for a project, which was fourth in this series. The project was to complement the
               other transborder transmission lines constructed under the APL series in establishing a technical
               infrastructure for the development of the regional power market while supporting the WAPP through
               technical assistance in developing regional market mechanisms.

               Overall, the relevance of the project objective is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce the cost of electricity supply at utility level in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



Theory of Change of Objectives 1 and 2

The project was to finance the construction of a high voltage transmission line along with the associated
transmission substations connecting the national grids of Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea and
support the establishment of a regional transmission company to operate and maintain the transmission line.
The project outputs of transmission line and substations constructed would have been expected to lead to the
intermediate outcome of increased amount of hydropower generated electricity supplied to Liberia and Sierra
Leone from Cote d’Ivoire and Guinea. The project’s expected outcomes would have been an increase in the
availability of electricity supply in Liberia and Sierra Leone and a decrease in the overall generation cost of
electricity because of the replacement of expensive thermal generation electricity by hydropower generated
electricity, and increased access to affordable electricity in the medium and long-terms contributing to
economic development and poverty reduction. The establishment of the regional transmission company
would have been expected to ensure the sustainability of project outcomes because of adequate and efficient
operation of the transmission system.

Overall, the project’s theory of change was simple and straightforward. The causal links from project’s
activities and outputs to expected outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the project
objective could be directly attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

      Transmission line constructed: The project financed the construction of 1,303 km of single circuit
         transmission line connecting the Man substation in Cote d’Ivoire through Monrovia in Liberia and
         Bikongor in Sierra Leone to Linsan in Guinea as planned. The target was 1,349 km. The balance 50
         km of the Monrovia-Monrovia City line was financed by other donors.
        225 kV substations constructed: The project financed the construction of 11 substations against the
         target of 11. The Linsan substation in Guinea, originally to be constructed under the CLSG
         Project, was constructed under the OMVG Regional Power Project, but KfW financed the construction
         of an additional substation in Botota, Liberia under the project.
        Regional Transmission Company’s fulfillment of obligations on time and to the quality
         required. The project also supported the establishment of a supranational regional transmission
         company called TRANSCO by financing its establishment and operating costs during project
         implementation as planned.
        As a result of the construction of the single circuit transmission line, a 200 MW transmission capacity
         is created among the participating countries. The transmission line was built to allow the stringing of a
         second circuit in the future, which will increase the transmission capacity to 400 MW.
        The project also financed the acquisition and installation of SCADA and frequency regulation
         equipment as defined in the project design, but these activities were not captured by the results
         framework.

Outcomes

      Difference between the annual weighted cost of imported electricity through the CLSG and the
         annual weighted cost of other sources of supply for utilities in Liberia and Sierra Leone As a
         result of the availability of hydropower generated electricity from the neighboring countries through the
         transmission line and substations built under the project, the utilities in Liberia and Sierra Leone
         imported electricity between August 2022 and July 2023 at a price that is US$0.13 per kWh cheaper in

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



       Sierra Leone and US$0.11 per kWh cheaper in Liberia than the annual weighted cost of thermal
       generation, the only alternative source of generation. When the definition of this indicator was revised
       (from “Annual weighted cost of electricity supply at power utility level in Liberia and Sierra Leone”) in
       October 2017, the targets were not revised. Therefore, there was a mismatch between the new
       definition of the indicator, which focused on the cost of electricity generation, and the targets inherited
       from the original indicator, which were related to a reduction in the cost of supply. Therefore, to better
       measure the outcome of the project’s intervention on electricity costs, the ICR calculates the impact of
       the imported electricity on the weighted average annual generation cost (which include thermal and
       hydropower generation costs) in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The calculations show that because of the
       electricity imported through the transmission line, the weighted average cost of electricity generation
       between August 2022 and July 2023 decreased from US$0.264 per kWh to US$0.132 per kWh (20
       percent decrease) in Liberia and from US$0.203 per kWh to US$0.134 kWh (34 percent) in Sierra
       Leone. However, the impact of the imported electricity on weighted average cost of electricity
       generation drops to 12 percent in Liberia and 23 percent in Sierra Leone when the debt service cost of
       the transmission line is taken into consideration.

The commercial operation of the transmission line connecting the participating countries began in December
2021 in Sierra Leone, in April 2022 in Guinea, and in November 2022 in Liberia. The transmission line
established a robust electricity transmission backbone in Liberia an Sierra Leone with the possibility to double
the transmission capacity when the second circuit is added. The electricity imported from neighboring
countries now, and other WAPP countries in the future, is expected to help Liberia and Sierra Leone to further
lower their electricity generation weighted average costs while increasing access to electricity subject to
additional distribution network investments. The transmission line is also likely to support the development of
domestic generation capacity in Liberia and Sierra Leone because of the availability of excess transmission
capacity.

Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective to reduce the cost of electricity supply at
utility level in Liberia and Sierra Leone is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the amount of electricity traded among all the participating countries.

Rationale
Theory of Change of Objective 2.

Please see Theory of Change under Objective 1.

Outputs

Please see outputs under Objective 1 above.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



Outcomes

      Annual electricity supply from CLSG imports at utility level (disaggregated: Liberia, Sierra
       Leone, and Guinea): The target was a total of 300 GWh of electricity delivery annual and the project
       facilitated the delivery of 314 GWh of electricity between August 2022 and July 2023 because of the
       transmission capacity created by the transmission line. However, there were differences at the utility
       level. Originally, it was targeted that each utility in Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea would have
       supplied 100 GWH from imports through the transmission line. The actual amount of electricity
       supplied by each utility was 116 GWh in Liberia, 166GWh in Sierra Leone, 31 GWh in Guinea and 1
       GWh in Cote d’Ivoire. Actual electricity import by Guinea was lower than the estimated amount
       because currently only one city is connected to the transmission line. All electricity supplied through
       the transmission line was generated in Cote d'Ivoire, which in return received 1 GWh from the Liberian
       utility to offset against imports by the same utility. The initial demand for electricity was lower than the
       estimated amount because of the delays in the electrification projects of the national utilities.
      Direct project beneficiaries: The number of people benefited from the project’s intervention was
       estimated at 2.8 million against the target of 5.2 million. The lower achievement was because of the
       slow progress in the electrification activities of the utilities compared to the original estimates. The ICR
       (p.18) notes that the original target could have been overestimated because there was only one city
       connected to the transmission line with a population of approximately 200,000 people in Guinea, a
       small fraction of the Guinea’s population of 13.9 million.

The project resulted in a higher amount of electricity supplied through the transmission line. The transmission
line has a 200 MW transmission capacity. In 2023, 81 MW of that capacity was contracted. In 2024, the
contracted capacity increased to 104 MW. Similar increases in the contracted capacity were seen in the other
WAPP interconnection transmission line projects, such as the transmission line between Ghana and Burkina
Faso. Therefore, it is expected that the amount of electricity supplied through the transmission line will
increase in the near future that might require the addition of the second circuit to the transmission network
increasing the transmission capacity to 400 MW.

Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective to increase the amount of electricity
traded among all the participating countries is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase the technical integration of the WAPP Network.

Rationale
Theory of Change of Objective 3

The project activities were expected to result in the project outputs of synchronization equipment installed in
the WAPP system, WAPP priority project studies prepared, capacity of the WAPP staff strengthened through
training, and supply analyses completed to develop generation projects. These outputs would have been

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



expected to result in the project outcomes of technical synchronization of the WAPP system, a first step
before the development of a commercial framework for the regional power pool. The causal chains from
project activities and outputs to outcomes were direct and valid, and the achievement of the outcomes could
be attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

      Synchronization equipment installed: The ICR (p.19) states that the project procured, installed and
       tested equipment for synchronization but does not provide detailed information what that equipment
       was.
      Key experts recruited to support WAPP Secretariat: The project recruited five key experts to
       support WAPP in the synchronization of the WAPP zones, pre-investment study preparation, and
       other project activities, as planned.
      WAPP Priority projects brought to the point where investment-grade feasibility studies and
       associated documentation have been completed: The project was to prepare three pre-investment
       studies. The achievement was two—Souapiti Hydropower Project in Guinea and Pilot Solar
       Photovoltaic at Mount Coffee in Liberia. The project financed the preparation of three more studies,
       but these studies were partially completed at the time of project closing—Mount Coffee Hydropower
       Extension in Liberia, St. Paul River Hydropower 2 in Liberia, and Median Interconnector with
       approximately 1,600 km of double circuit transmission line in Nigeria, Benin, Togo, Ghana and Cote
       d’Ivoire. The partially completed studies were transferred to the Regional Emergency Solar Power
       Intervention Project (P179267) in March 2023.
      Number of supply alternative analyses completed at feasibility stage: The project provided
       technical assistance to three activities as planned. The first was an update of the rules, procedures,
       and technical specifications for national grids to facilitate synchronization. The second was the
       preparation and dissemination of an operation manual among WAPP utilities including training of the
       utilities’ staff. The third was the establishment of regional working groups to strengthen collaboration
       between the WAPP and the utilities. The project also supported the development of a commercial
       framework of the regional market.

Outcomes

      Ratio of annual total hours of synchronization of WAPP Zone A against total hours in a year
       within TCN-CEB-GRIDCO interconnection: During project implementation, WAPP revised its
       definitions of zones from A and B to 1, 2 and 3. As a result of the project outputs, Zones 2 (a part of
       Togo and Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Cote d’Ivoire, part of Mali, Liberia, Sierra Leone and part of
       Guinea) and 3 (the remaining part of Mali and Senegal) of the WAPP were synchronized 94 percent of
       the time, but Zone 1 (Nigeria, Niger, and the remaining part of Togo and Benin) could not be
       synchronized with the other two zones because of the difficulties in synchronizing with TCN in Nigeria.
       Therefore, the ICR takes half of the 94 percent synchronization as the achievement—47 percent. The
       target was to achieve synchronization by 50 percent of the time focusing on four countries including
       TCN of Nigeria. However, the project aimed at synchronizing the whole WAPP zones. The
       synchronization of Zone 1 with Zones 2 and 3 was transferred to the Regional Emergency Solar
       Power Intervention Project (P179267) in March 2023.

The project resulted in the partial synchronization of the WAPP zones which is expected to be completed
under the ongoing Regional Emergency Solar Power Intervention Project. The project also delivered the

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



                            studies for the WAPP priority projects. Technical assistance support and training strengthened the
                            institutional capacity of the WAPP secretariat.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project in achieving the project objective to increase technical integration of the
                            WAPP network is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project successfully completed the construction of the transmission line and associated substations
                            connecting the national grids of Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone and Guinea. This resulted in an increased
                            supply of electricity in Liberia and Sierra Leone, and to a lesser extent in Guinea. The cost of the electricity
                            generation dropped in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The project also achieved the partial synchronization of the
                            WAPP system, which will continue under an ongoing World Bank-financed project for full synchronization.
                            The project was transformational because it provided a robust backbone transmission line for the Liberia and
                            Sierra Leone, which would be expected to facilitate the connection of more households and businesses to
                            grid electricity. The technical integration of WAPP would also be expected to increase electricity trade among
                            WAPP member countries eventually paving the way for the development of a regional electricity market.
                            Overall, the project’s efficacy on achieving the project objectives was Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, a “with project” and “without project” cost-benefit analysis was conducted. The without project
   scenario consisted of optimal expansion plans of the electrical grids of the four participating countries without
   the interconnection transmission line. The with project scenario included an interconnection transmission line to
   be constructed under the project. The economic benefits included in the analysis were fuel and other energy
   cost differentials among countries and locations in the four countries, the reduction of the need for spinning
   reserve, and ability smoothen the load curve in each country. The costs were taken as the cost of the
   transmission line and associated substations. The calculations resulted in an Economic Internal Rate of Return
   (EIRR) of 36 percent for the four countries and a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$570 million at a discount rate



                                                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



of 10 percent. The high EIRR and NPV were because of the project’s estimated impact on lowering the cost of
electricity in Liberia and Sierra Leone, and economic benefits of increased electricity export by Cote d’Ivoire.

At project closing, a new model was used for economic analysis. The quantifiable economic benefits were taken
as fuel savings from replaced thermal generation, avoided construction and fuel and O&M costs of new
generation not built in the importing countries, and the value of avoided greenhouse gas emissions. The costs
were included in the analysis were the construction and O&M costs of the transmission line, connection costs of
new customers served by the electricity imported through the transmission line, additional generation costs
incurred by Cote d’Ivoire and Guinea for exports, and the costs of additional emissions for gas-fired based
exports from Cote d’Ivoire. The economic benefits included in the economic analysis at appraisal were not taken
into consideration because the model used at appraisal was very complex and never systematically updated.
The calculations at project closing resulted in an EIRR of 19.2 percent excluding benefits from a reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions, and 21.2 percent when that benefit is included. The NPV was calculated at US$1.2
billion without greenhouse gas benefits and US$1.6 billion with greenhouse gas benefits at a discount rate of 6
percent.

The economic analyses conducted at appraisal and project closing confirm the economic viability of the project’s
intervention, but these two analyses are not comparable because they use different methodologies. However,
the assumptions of the methodology used at project closing are more relevant and appropriate to analyze the
economic impact of the project’s intervention because it includes more realistic quantifiable benefits and costs.

Financial Analysis

At appraisal, a financial analysis was conducted to assess the impact of the project on the financial viability of
regional transmission company (i.e., TRANSCO) that was to be established under project and operate the line.
The costs were taken as the cost of the transmission line and the associated substations, operation and
maintenance costs of the transmission line and the SCADA system, operating costs of TRANSCO, and the cost
of technical support TRANSCO was expected to hire. The financial benefits were to come from the electricity
trade through the transmission line. Although more than US$150 million of the project funds were grants from
the AfDB and KfW, the financial analysis calculations resulted in a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of
minus 2 percent and a financial net present value (FNPV) of minus US$194 million. The reason for these
negative values was the tariff assumption, which was high enough to cover TRANSCO’s cash operating costs,
asset renewal costs, and debt service obligations, but low enough to encourage electricity trade through the
transmission line. It was estimated that the cumulative debt service ratio of TRANSCO would remain above 1.5.
The calculations were based on the assumptions that the transmission line would have been constructed in
three years (between 2013 and 2015), and the stringing of the second circuit would have been completed in two
years in 2020 and 2021 increasing the transmission capacity and amount of electricity traded. This would
correspond to an initial electricity trade amount of 145 MW in the first phase, and 290 MW in the second phase.
These assumptions, including the cumulative debt service ratio assumption, were overly optimistic for a large
project that required the coordination of four countries and multiple donors to be implemented in a large project
area.

The assumptions used in the financial analysis at appraisal did not materialize as anticipated. In 2021, the
Steering Committee set the tariff at 65 percent of the amount that was required for full cost recovery to
encourage the use of the transmission line. The commissioning of the transmission line could only begin in
2021, which was nine years after project approval. The actual construction and O&M costs of the transmission
line and the operating costs of TRANSCO were higher than the costs estimated at appraisal. Lastly, the
electricity initially traded through the transmission line was lower than the amount anticipated at appraisal


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



because of the connection of a single major city in Guinea to the transmission line and the delays in the
construction of distribution lines in Liberia and Sierra Leone that would have connected more households to the
grid. The ICR does not report the FIRR and FNPV calculated at the time of project evaluation but reports that
TRANSCO is not financially viable and cannot cover fully cover its operating costs nor of its debt obligations,
which are covered by the participating countries increasing the fiscal burden of those countries (ICR, p.22 and
Annex 7).

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

The project’s efficiency suffered from significant delays in effectiveness. Complex effectiveness conditions,
ratification of the project agreements by four parliaments, and the establishment of a new supranational
electricity company owned by the four participating countries were the reasons for the delay in project
effectiveness and implementation. This significantly contributed to a more than five year extension of the project
closing date. The lack of local funds for the processing of compensations to project affected people was another
reason for delays in project implementation. The project cost was also underestimated at appraisal. Coupled
with exchange rate fluctuations, this necessitated the processing of an additional financing to cover the financing
gap. The project was restructured eight times. The technical assistance activities under the WAPP Project were
also delayed and activities that could not be completed were transferred to the Regional Emergency Solar
Power Intervention Project (P179267) in March 2023.

Overall, although the economic analyses conducted at appraisal and project closing are not comparable
because of differences in methodology, both analyses confirm the economic viability of the project’s intervention,
but the financial analysis shows that the project did not result in sufficient funds to cover the operating costs of
TRANSCO, O&M costs, and debt service obligations. The project’s efficiency was also adversely affected by the
significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project that led to lengthy delays
in project effectiveness and implementation. Therefore, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective
is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      90.00
 Appraisal                                                  36.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      92.00
 ICR Estimate                                               21.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)




The project was highly aligned with the World Bank regional integration and country strategies for Cote d’Ivoire,
Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea, and relevant to the country context in all four countries. The project aimed at
addressing the lack of electricity supply in Liberia and Sierra Leone by constructing a transmission line that
would be expected to supply cheaper, hence, more affordable electricity to those countries. The project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objectives was Substantial. The project successfully completed the construction
of the transmission line that resulted in a decrease in the cost of electricity generation for Liberia and Sierra
Leone and increased the amount electricity supplied in those countries. The project was also partially successful
in synchronizing the three zones of the WAPP. However, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project
objectives is rated Modest, because of significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency
of the project because of lengthy delays in the effectiveness and implementation of the project. Overall, the
project’s outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: The financial viability of TRANSCO stands out to be substantial risk for the adequate operation
and maintenance of the transmission line. In 2024, TRANSCO’s revenues were estimated to be sufficient to
pay for its operating costs and the cost of the temporary operator but insufficient to cover the repayment of
its concessional loans and short-term commercial loans. Although TRANSCO’s revenues are expected to
increase as the amount of electricity transmitted along the transmission line increases, it would be necessary
for the governments to cover the debt service in the medium-term. Because of its weak financial viability,
TRANSCO could not sign a four-year contract with a private company experienced in transmission line
operation and maintenance. The line is still operated and maintained by the temporary operator CIE
(Compagnie Ivoirienne d’Electricité) of Cote d’Ivoire.

Governance: The inactivity of the steering and implementation committees is a substantial risk to the
operational effectiveness of TRNASCO. If these committees met regularly, it would be expected that the
issues related to the efficient operation and adequate maintenance of the transmission line could be
resolved. The Board of TRANSCO does not play an active role in strategically leading the company (ICR,
p.28). Such weaknesses in the governance of TRANSCO could weaken the operational performance of the
utility resulting in inadequate operation and maintenance of the transmission line.

Insufficient investment in distribution networks: The ultimate goal to achieve by increased availability of
electricity supply through backbone transmission lines is to increase access to electricity. This requires
additional investments in distribution networks. Currently, the expansion of distribution networks in Liberia
and Sierra Leone is not at the estimated level. This constitutes a substantial risk for the achievement of the
ultimate development impact of the project’s intervention, i.e., increased access to electricity. At project
closing, only about 50 percent of the estimated direct project beneficiaries were connected to electricity.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Increasing the availability of reliable and cheaper electricity supply in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea
  with the ultimate goal of increasing access to electricity and the further technical integration of the WAPP
  through the construction of a backbone transmission line passing through these countries and technical
  assistance for synchronization of national grids within the WAPP were of high strategic importance for the
  project countries and the regional power pool. The project was designed as consisting of two different
  projects, one for the construction of the transmission line and the other technical assistance to the
  WAPP. This design was to be expected to increase the implementation efficiency of the project while
  ensuring coordination between the infrastructure investment and technical integration of the national
  grids. The construction and later the operation of the transmission line investment by a regional
  transmission company (i.e., TRANSCO) to be established by the four participating countries was
  appropriate because the implementation of each section of the project by the corresponding national
  utility could have been unsuccessful because of the weak project implementation capacities of some
  national utilities. The economic analysis was adequately conducted to assess the economic viability of
  the project based on the criteria and assumptions at the time of appraisal. The project’s fiduciary and
  safeguards aspects were adequate (see section 10. Others below).

  However, the project design had moderate shortcomings. The project did not introduce any mechanisms
  (such as legal covenants) in ensuring the regular meetings of the steering and implementation
  committees consisted of the representatives of the four participating countries. These committees only
  met a couple of times during project implementation rather than quarterly as planned in the project
  agreements (ICR, p.27). At appraisal, the risks were adequately identified but the mitigation measures
  were ineffective when most of the risks materialized. For example, the establishment of a regional
  transmission company was adopted as measure to mitigate the political interference by national
  governments, but because the national utilities played a role in the board of TRANSCO, national interests
  adversely affected the operation of the transmission line, which became significantly visible when
  TRANSCO faced financial constraints in early operation of the transmission line. The project was
  designed with a focus on financing the construction of the transmission line and the operating costs of
  TRANSCO during the construction period. The focus on the post-operation of the transmission line by
  TRANSCO and the regional utility’s financial viability to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the
  transmission line was insufficient. This created a substantial risk to the sustainability of the project
  outcomes.

  Overall, the quality at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of moderate shortcomings in the
  appraisal of the project.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project team conducted 17 supervision missions including virtual missions during the COVID-19
 pandemic. A review of the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoirs showed

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



 that the performance reporting was candid and detailed. The project teams focus on fiduciary and
 safeguards aspects of the project were adequate but there were occasional issuance of no-objections to
 procurement results where some criteria in the terms of reference were not met (see section 10. Other
 Issues, Procurement below). When funds were insufficient to process compensations to project-affected
 people, the project team restructured the project to allocate project funds for that purpose. Coordination
 with other donors was effective. The project team’s focus on the development impact of the project was
 adequate, but implementation issues stemming from the shortcomings in project design were not
 adequately addressed. The supervision of the convening of the steering and implementation committees
 was inadequate. These committees were inactive during the construction, which convened in 2021 when a
 tariff increase had to be made for TRANSCO. There were also shortcomings in the transition arrangements
 for regular operation of project supported activities after project closing such as the incomplete hiring
 process of a company for the operation and maintenance of the transmission line because of the poor
 financial viability of TRANSCO. Although the project team proactively acted for the processing of a second
 additional financing to improve the financial viability of TRANSCO, this additional financing could not be
 processed because of inaction from the project participating countries. As the ICR (p.37) notes “the project
 closed without resolving TRANSCO’s immediate operational and financial issues.”

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of moderate shortcomings in
 the project team’s supervision of project implementation and role in ensuring adequate transition
 arrangements.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project objectives were clearly defined and outcome-oriented, and the project’s theory of change was
 adequately reflected in the results framework. The indicators adequately captured the outcomes expected
 from the project’s intervention in increasing electricity supply through the transmission line and reduction in
 the annual weighted cost of electricity supply and the synchronization of the WAPP zones. The indicators
 were specific, measurable, and time-bound, but the indicator “annual weighted cost of electricity supply at
 power utility level in Liberia and Sierra Leone” was not fully relevant because the indicator measured the
 cost reduction in supply whereas the project’s impact was expected as a reduction in the generation cost of
 electricity. The intermediate result indicators adequately captured the construction of the transmission line
 and the associated substations, but there were shortcomings in capturing the intermediate results related to
 the establishment of the regional transmission company under the CLSG Project, and those related to the
 technical assistance activities and installation of the synchronization equipment under the WAPP Project.
 Two of those indicators (i.e., regional transmission company fulfillment of obligations on time and to the
 quality required, and synchronization equipment installed) were designed in the form of “Yes/No”
 achievements that did not provide sufficient information about the project’s outputs. The implementation

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



 arrangements were in place. The regional transmission company was to monitor the construction and
 commissioning of the transmission line. The WAPP was to monitor the completion of the studies and the
 installation of the synchronization equipment.



b. M&E Implementation
  The shortcomings in the results framework were partially addressed. The indicator measuring the
  reduction in the weighted average cost of electricity supply was redefined to measure the reduction in
  generation cost, but the baselines and end targets were not revised making the measurement of this
  indicator difficult. The start of commercial operation of the transmission line in December 2021 allowed
  the collection of data about electricity supply through the transmission line and its impact on reduction of
  electricity generation cost. Other indicators were measured and reported in the ISRs. TRANSCO and the
  WAPP provided M&E data. The shortcomings in capturing the intermediate results expected from the
  implementation of the technical assistance activities were not addressed during implementation. The
  M&E functions are likely to be sustained because of the SCADA systems installed that monitors the
  transmission line, and the WAPP has the technical capacity to monitor the synchronization of the WAPP
  grid. An MTR was conducted for the WAPP Project in February 2017. A separate MTR was conducted for
  the CLSG Project in October and November 2018. These MTRs were effective in addressing some
  project implementation issues, improving the performance of the project (see section 8.b. Quality of
  Supervision above).



c. M&E Utilization
  TRANSCO and the WAPP provided quarterly progress reports including M&E findings regularly. These
  findings resulted in the processing of an additional financing to cover the financing gap. The project was
  restructured eight times, but the M&E findings were critical in the first three restructurings (including the
  additional financing) that resulted in improving project implementation. The ICR uses the M&E data
  adequately to provide evidence of achievement of outcomes and provides a detailed explanation
  supported by data about the impact of cheaper electricity supplied through the transmission line on
  reducing the electricity generation cost in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The M&E findings were to inform a
  second additional financing to improve the financial viability of TRANSCO to ensure the adequate
  operation and maintenance of the transmission line, but it did not materialize. These findings did not
  inform a subsequent intervention.



  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system’s design and implementation, but the
  M&E data and findings were generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objectives and
  test the links in the results chain. Therefore, the M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). At the time of additional financing in October 2017, the project additionally triggered Forests
   (OP/BP 4.26), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
   safeguards policies because of the addition of preparatory studies for a hydropower project on the St. Paul
   River in Liberia to the scope of WAPP Project.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category A because of the
   potential irreversible impact of the transmission line construction activities on the environment. According to
   the requirements of this safeguard policy, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and
   associated Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared for each country and
   published in the countries and the World Bank’s InfoShop. Following the visits to potential environmental
   hot spots along the route the transmission line was to be built, it was confirmed that the design avoided
   these areas. A waiver was obtained for the same consultant to prepare the environmental assessments and
   the design of the transmission line route. TRANSCO hired experienced environment and social experts in
   its headquarters in Abidjan and local offices in four countries and adequately reported the implementation of
   ESMPs in its quarterly reports. Safeguards specific two World Bank missions were held during project
   implementation to four countries in addition to the supervision of the safeguard implementation in regular
   supervision missions. The project closed in compliance with the requirements of the Environmental
   Assessment safeguard policy.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the significant
   potential changes in critical natural habitats present in the project area. In accordance with the requirements
   of this safeguard policy, the transmission line route was designed to avoid any critical natural habitats.
   These included two national parks, one with a high chimpanzee population. As a result, the project activities
   did not have any adverse impact on natural habitats in the project area.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the
   possibility of chance finds along the 1,349 km transmission line to be built under the project. The
   transmission line design avoided a sacred forest and a water body. The project activities did not encounter
   any chance finds.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because the route of
   the transmission line to be built under project was to pass through farmlands and urban and semi-urban
   areas that was expected to result in resettlement of people and acquisition of land. At appraisal a
   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and published in four countries and on the World Bank’s
   InfoShop. At appraisal, it was estimated that 1,634 households (or 10,158 people) were estimated to be
   affected by the construction of the transmission line and the associated substations through physical
   relocation or loss of access to agricultural lands in the right of way of the transmission line. During project
   implementation, the number of households affected by the project activities increased to 6,744. To provide
   funds for the financing of compensations to project-affected people, the World Bank project team
   restructured the project to allow project funds to be used for that purpose. A total of US$7.52 million was
   paid as compensation to project-affected people. Overall, the implementation of the resettlement activities
   was compliant with the requirements of the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy, but the final RAP


                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



  audit was delayed because of the departure of the environment and social leads from the project when it
  became clear that a second additional financing would not be processed.

  Forests (OP/BP 4.26): The project triggered this safeguard policy because the future location of the Via
  Reservoir, for the development of which a study was added to the project scope, included natural forest
  areas. During the construction of the transmission line, a total of 445 hectares (ha) of degraded forest areas
  were reforested as planned, 31 ha of which was in Cote d’Ivoire, 134 ha in Liberia, 194 ha in Sierra Leone,
  and 86 ha in Guinea.

  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37): The project triggered this safeguard policy because some studies added to
  the project scope at the time of additional financing were related to a dam. Since the project activities
  consisted of the preparation of studies only, these activities did not contradict with the requirements of this
  safeguard policy.

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50): The project triggered this safeguard policy because
  the St. Paul River, which originates in Guinea, is considered an international waterway. At the time of
  additional financing, prefeasibility and feasibility studies were added to the project scope for the
  development of a hydroelectric power plant on this river. Since these activities did not involve any physical
  infrastructure investments on the waterway, an exception to the notification requirement to the other riparian
  countries was approved by the World Bank’s regional management on September 29, 2017.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  After the signing of the IDA Financing Agreement with Liberia, TRANSCO took the financial management
  of the CLSG Project. The WAPP project implementation unit was responsible for the financial management
  of the WAPP Project. The project hired qualified financial management staff, but the preparation of a
  financial management policy for the CLSG Project could only be approved in June 2016 (four years after
  project approval) because of delays in project effectiveness and development of financial management
  systems. Quarterly financial reports and audit reports of the CLSG project were submitted irregularly
  because of delays in adequate bookkeeping. The financial management of the project improved following
  the MTR in October 2018. An internal auditor was appointed, and the Audit and Good Governance Board
  Committee became effective in November 2018. The project provided technical assistance support to the
  finance and accounting teams, and a new computerized accounting system was installed at TRANSCO.
  The flow of funds arrangements were adequate; the World Bank transferred the advances and payments
  to contractors directly after TRANSCO’s approval. Payments for consulting, salary and other expenses to
  TRANSCO and WAPP were processed through designated accounts. However, internal controls were
  inadequate on large cash payments that resulted in some irregular bookkeeping that were corrected during
  project implementation. The project team confirmed that all project funds were accounted for at the time of
  project evaluation. The ICR does not report any issues of corruption or misuse of funds associated with the
  project.

  Procurement



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



   The project followed the World Bank procurement policies and procedures. TRANSCO was responsible for
   procurement for the CLSG Project. The WAPP was responsible for procurement for the WAPP Project.
   The owner’s engineer hired under the project supported TRANSCO in procurement. TRANSCO’s
   procurement team included a senior procurement specialist supported by an assistant. Until the
   procurement of a contractor for the O&M of the transmission line in 2021, procurement was conducted
   without a major issue. The procurement of the O&M contractor had to be relaunched because of a single
   bid in the first tender. Because of the financial constraints TRANSCO faced, the procurement could not be
   completed. The hiring of the TRANSCO manager, which received World Bank’s no objection, did not follow
   the requirements in the terms of reference for the job, and a manager without corporate experience was
   hired.

   The WAPP was assessed to have sufficient procurement capacity and familiarity with the World Bank
   policies and procedures, but high turnover of procurement officers weakened its procurement capacity.
   The WAPP hired an experienced senior procurement consultant under the project to strengthen the
   WAPP’s procurement capacity through his support to project’s implementation and training of local staff.

   A World Bank procurement specialist, a member of the project team, conducted regular supervision of
   procurement and post-procurement review at least once a year. Some years, the procurement specialist
   conducted multiple supervisions. Such supervision supported TRANSCO and the WAPP in procurement.
   The donor coordination in procurement was also adequate. The regular dialogue among donors ensured
   that there were no interruptions in the project works because of insufficient funding or delays in
   procurement activities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)



12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Insufficient measures to ensure the financial viability of regional electricity transmission
companies can jeopardize the achievement and sustainability of the outcomes in increased
supply of cheaper and cleaner electricity. Since the transmission line constructed under the
project passed through four countries, it was decided the four project participating countries would
establish a regional transmission company to construct and later operate and maintain the
transmission line rather than the national transmission companies. This proved to be an appropriate
approach in completing the construction and commissioning of the transmission line, but the
measures were insufficient to ensure the financial viability of the regional transmission company.
The assumptions used at appraisal regarding the financial viability of the utility did not materialize. A
second additional financing could not be processed that could have helped the utility to address its
short-term financial issues. The project currently yields its expected results in electricity trade and
reduction in cost of electricity generation in Liberia and Sierra Leone, but this depends on the
national governments covering the cost of debt repayment obligations of the regional transmission
company. The sustainability of the project outcomes is at high risk because of the weak financial
viability of the regional utility. The ICR (p.38) states that "the financing plan needs to consider an
initial period where revenues from operations may not fully cover costs."

The development impact of mega transmission projects can be increased if such
investments are complemented by distribution network investments on a timely basis. While
the project objectives were to reduce the cost of electricity generation in Liberia and Sierra Leone
and increase the supply of electricity through the transmission line to be built under the project, the
ultimate goal of increased availability of electricity was to increase access to electricity in these two
countries with low electrification rates. The project did not finance any distribution network expansion
investment, which was to be implemented by the respective national utilities separately. There were
delays in those investments, which resulted in fewer people getting access to electricity, and lower
electricity demand. Although the transmission line was a transformational investment connecting
four countries’ electricity grid and should be expected to result in higher electrification rates in the
medium and long-term, such development impacts could be achieved earlier if distribution network
infrastructure is built in tandem with the transmission line investments.

Transborder electricity transmission infrastructure investments accompanied by technical
assistance to regional power utility can accelerate the technical and eventually commercial
integration of countries under a regional power pool. The project consisted of two separate
subprojects, one investment project for the construction of the CLSG transmission line and the
establishment of the regional transmission company, and the other technical assistance project for
the synchronization of the West African Power Pool (WAPP) zones. These two projects
complemented each other in achieving the project objectives. The transmission line was a critical
investment in connecting four countries to the WAPP system through a high voltage transmission
capacity, and the technical assistance was critical to allow the flow of electricity under a
synchronized regional electricity system. The technical integration of the national electricity networks
under the WAPP system was a critical first step towards achieving a regional power market. The
technical assistance project also supported the development of a commercial framework for that
purpose.


                                                                                                      Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This is the fourth project in an APL series supporting the infrastructure development of the West African Power
  Pool. If a major evaluation is conducted on the World Bank Group’s support to the development of regional
  power pools in Africa, this APL series would be a good candidate for a cluster PPAR, the findings of which
  would contribute to the evaluation.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a highly detailed overview of the project and its performance. The narrative is candid,
accurate, and highly evaluative, rather than descriptive. The evidence is credible, appropriately referenced, and
adequate to support the achievement of the project objectives. To fill in the gaps that existed in the results
framework, because of the revision in the definition of a main outcome indicator that was not accompanied by a
revision of the end targets, the ICR provides detailed explanation how that outcome was achieved. There is a
clear linking of evidence to the findings. The report is adequately focused on what occurred as a consequence
of the project. The analysis broadly responds to the project’s theory of change, but the theory of change is
presented in a way explaining what happened as a result of the project’s intervention, rather than what was
aimed at achieving at the appraisal stage. In that regard, the theory of change figure in the ICR highlights how
activities informed project’s outputs and outcomes, and how the objectives were achieved. The ICR also
provides a detailed assessment of the sustainability of the project outcomes and how the risks to the
sustainability could be mitigated. The ICR is internally consistent but there are some gaps in following the Bank
guidance, such information about the implementation of each safeguard policy is missing although there is an
annex for safeguard implementation, the Annex 1.B. Key Outputs by Component is not filled, and the actual
costs of the components of each project (i.e., the CLSG Project and the WAPP Project) are not provided. The
discussion in the section V. Lessons and Recommendations follow the narrative in the ICR, but they are in the
form of findings rather than lessons.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) CSLG (P113266)




                                                                  Page 24 of 24
