     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024225

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P154253                                    SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines             Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60600                                  31-Jul-2022                                            9,935,088.95

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-May-2017                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            10,700,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             10,700,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          9,935,088.95                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Livia Maria Angelica        Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs), as stated in the Financing Agreement, were “to strengthen the
   quality of service delivery in education, to improve efficiency of social protection systems, and to improve
   effectiveness of labor market systems in the Recipient’s territory.” The PAD had the same statement, but
   instead of the Recipient’s territory, it stated “in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.”

   As part of a Level 2 restructuring, in June 2022, the second PDO was revised from “improve efficiency of
   social protection systems” to "improve the administrative efficiency of social assistance." Also, there were

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



   substantive shifts affecting all PDOs and outcome indicators. For example, under the objective to improve
   effectiveness of labor market systems, there was a shift in focus in its assessment from employment
   outcomes to training outcomes and certification. Under the objectives to strengthen the quality of service
   delivery in education, in lieu of using the Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS) that was not
   implemented, MOE opted to assess the effectiveness of in-service teacher training through pre- and post-
   training tests of teachers’ pedagogic competence. Therefore, this ICR applies a split rating.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening Pedagogy for Basic and Special Needs Education (appraisal: USD 2.16
   million, restructuring: USD 1.98 million; actual: USD 1.68 million). This component aimed to strengthen the
   capacity of teachers to deliver and of school leaders to support high quality classroom instruction in order to
   improve learning outcomes for primary and secondary school students. This component was to be
   implemented by the Ministry of Education, Ecclesiastical Affairs and National Reconciliation (MOE).

   Sub-component 1.1. Strengthening teaching capacity. This sub-component would focus on teachers
   and would adapt teaching and learning standards, train teachers, monitor teacher classroom practices, pilot
   a remedial program (called Building Lasting Opportunities and Outstanding Minds Caribbean Vocational
   Qualification, BLOOM), and strengthen special education for children with autism spectrum and behavioral
   disorders. An impact evaluation was included to assess the effectiveness of the activities under this sub-
   component. Citizen engagement would also be promoted. As part of the restructuring, the original
   assessment tool based on class observation to determine teacher effectiveness was replaced by tests
   taken before and after in-service teacher training.

   Sub-component 1.2. Developing capacity of school leaders to support teachers in improving
   pedagogy and help build a pipeline of effective future school leaders. This sub-component would
   provide training and materials for principals and senior teachers, develop a performance appraisal tool for
   principals and a mentoring program for principals.

   Component 2: Building Responsive Social Protection Service Delivery Systems (appraisal: USD 3.46
   million, restructuring: USD 2.09 million, actual: USD 2.28 million). This component aimed to strengthen the
   social protection services. The Ministry of National Mobilisation, Social Development, Family, Gender
   Affairs, Persons with Disabilities and Youth (MONM) was responsible for the coordination of this
   component.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



  Sub-component 2.1. Support in completing an Enhanced Country Poverty Assessment (eCPA). This
  sub-component would finance data collection, processing and analysis of a Living Conditions Survey (LCS)
  and a Household Budget Survey (HBS) to inform the safety net program policies and design. This activity
  was cancelled as part of the restructuring.

  Sub-component 2.2. Support in Strengthening the Social Protection System. This sub-component
  would finance the development and implementation of a targeting system, a beneficiary registry linked to a
  new management information system (Social Assistance Management Information System, SAMIS), an
  improved payment system, and capacity building to manage, monitor and evaluate, and communicate with
  beneficiaries. The digitalization of the payment system was cancelled during the restructuring as it was
  financed by a different source. On the other hand, new activities were included in support of the expansion
  of the social protection regulatory framework’s scope, especially with regard to the elderly and individuals
  with disabilities.

  Component 3: Strengthening Labor Market Systems and Improving Skills Training of Poor and
  Vulnerable Populations (appraisal: USD 3.84 million, restructuring: USD 5.25 million, actual: USD 4.76
  million). This component would finance labor data collection to inform policy and deliver technical and
  vocational education training (TVET) to poor and unemployed persons. As part of the restructuring, the
  resource allocation for this component was increased so as to increase the scope of activities.

  Sub-component 3.1. Support in Strengthening the Certification Framework. This sub-component
  would finance technical assistance, investments and training to fill remaining gaps in service delivery,
  including expanding access to training for poor and vulnerable youth and adults (the Youth and Adult
  Training for Employment program, YATE) and enhancing the system’s capacity for TVET delivery. This
  would involve both improving the learning environment and TVET delivery in selected secondary schools as
  well as improving human resource capacity for TVET training and administration. The MOE was responsible
  for this sub-component.

  Sub-component 3.2. Support in Strengthening of Labor Legislative Framework. This sub-component
  would finance technical assistance to update existing legislation, carry out a labor force survey and a labor
  demand survey. The Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information and
  Labour (MOEP), and, after a government restructuring, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries, Rural
  Transformation, Industry and Labour was responsible for the implementation of this sub-component.

  Component 4: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal USD 1.38 million,
  restructuring: USD 1.38 million, actual: USD 1.21 million). This component would finance project
  management activities, including administration, implementation and monitoring. Overall project
  coordination was under the responsibility of the Public Sector Investment Programme Management Unit
  (PSIPMU) In the MOEP.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  The total project cost at appraisal was USD 10.7 million (SDR 7.90 million equivalent), fully financed
  through an IDA credit. At closing, actual disbursements were USD 9,935,086, that is, 93 percent of the
  original credit.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



   The project was approved on May 25, 2017, and became effective on September 12, 2017. The midterm
   review was on October 22, 2019.

   A level 2 restructuring was approved on June 29, 2022, where the following revisions were made: (a) the
   PDO was revised, (b) the results framework was revised to modify the three outcome indicators and targets,
   (c) project activities were modified under all three components, (d) the project safeguards category was
   revised from C to B, and (e) the project was extended by 17 months, from the original closing date of July
   31, 2022 to December 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) was highly vulnerable to economic
shocks and natural hazards. As a small island country, with an estimated population of 109,000 people, its
open economy had been affected by external macroeconomic trends, including the 2008-9 financial crisis.
By 2015, its economy was growing at a modest 1.6 percent. Losses due to hydro-meteorological disasters
were also significant, impacting the economy with an estimated annual average loss of approximately 1.3
percent of GDP.

SVG had achieved significant human development milestones, but some important challenges
remained. Education coverage was almost universal at the primary and secondary levels. Births assisted
by skilled health workers and children’s immunizations reached ninety-nine percent. Still, unemployment
rates were higher than in other Caribbean countries, especially youth (at 42.7 percent) and female
unemployment was 26.4 percent, compared to men at 19.4 percent. At the same time, a survey of
employers had cited that a major obstacle to employment was the limited education and skills of the work
force. An underlying cause was the lack of clear teaching and learning standards and low capacity of
teachers to use information on student learning to adjust the learning process. This was aggravated in the
case of students with special needs, as teachers were not trained and did not have the appropriate
materials to work with. Further to this, schools were not adequately equipped to provide Technical and
Vocational Education and Training (TVET), and the existing programs did not respond to the labor demand.

At the institutional level, SVG faced challenges in the effective and efficient delivery of services. There were
significant information gaps, for example the most recent available poverty data was from 2008. The social
protection and labor programs and services were not guided by an overall social protection policy, such that
priorities and objectives for the sector were not clearly articulated and efforts to reach the poor were
fragmented. The main program was called Public Assistance (PA), a cash transfer managed by the MONM.
PA provided 17 different benefits with overlapping criteria and purposes.

The country had recently initiated several reforms to strengthen the social safety net system as well as the
TVET framework. The social safety net reform included the modernization of service delivery, improving
targeting, reducing the duplication of benefits, improving program monitoring and evaluation, and
establishing a policy foundation. The TVET sector was supported by the Sector Skills Development Act
(passed in 2010) and the TVET certification framework had been established, enabling the country to issue
National Vocational Qualifications (NVQs) and Caribbean Vocational Qualifications (CVQs).


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



               The project aimed to strengthen the quality-of-service delivery in education, improve the efficiency of social
               protection systems and to improve the effectiveness of labor market systems. The design was aligned with
               the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Education Sector Strategy 2012-2021, which
               included a focus on increasing access to TVET training for disadvantaged youth and enhancing the
               system’s capacity for TVET delivery. At that time, SVG was also finalizing a Social Protection Strategy
               which aimed to provide a roadmap for the delivery of social protection and labor programs and services.

               The objectives were relevant at appraisal with respect to the Regional Partnership Strategy for the OECS
               for the period FY 15-19 (Report Number: 85156-LAC, October 17, 2014). The project was aligned with the
               outcomes under the Resilience Pillar, “Improved Targeting and Reduced Fragmentation of Social Protection
               Systems” which prioritized the reduction of fragmentation, inefficiency, inadequate targeting and limited
               ability to respond to exogenous shocks, and “Establishment of Quality Education Standards” which focused
               on improving the education and skill set of OECS populations to enhance the employability of the labor
               force.

               At closing, the objectives remained relevant under the Regional Partnership Framework for the Eastern
               Caribbean States for the period FY22-25 (Report no. 160349-LAC, April 19, 2022) under the Improved
               Human Capital higher level objective. Specifically, under the objective “Strengthen Social and Financial
               Protection for the Poor,” the Strategy aimed to strengthen the social protection policy framework, increase
               the coverage of cash transfer programs and improve the implementation of social programs across the
               region. Under the objective “Strengthen Health Services Delivery and Skills Enhancement Programs,” the
               strategy aimed to boost human capital development to increase labor force productivity and reduce poverty
               and unemployment, with a particular focus on TVET.

               The project was designed in coordination with other tasks being carried out in SVG. The Regional Disaster
               Vulnerability Reduction Project (P117871) was developing a pilot curriculum on climate resilience which
               was to be integrated into the teacher training program to enhance awareness and improve resilience to
               climate change. The Rapid Social Response Grant (P161103) focused on improving the effectiveness of
               the social safety net programs in responding to natural disasters. In addition, SVG was part of the OECS
               Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant (P158836) which supported the development of teaching and
               learning standards to improve teachers’ pedagogy, and the development of guidelines for revision of
               teachers’ professional development.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the quality of service delivery in education.


                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)




Rationale
The theory of change stated that quality of service delivery in education would be strengthened through
improved teaching practices in the classroom, to be measured through the classroom observation tool
Classroom Assessment Scoring System (CLASS). Improved teaching practices would be achieved by training
teachers in line with new learning standards, implementation of formative assessment to target instruction,
and improving capacity of school leaders to support teachers in effective classroom practices.

Outputs

The number of teachers who completed in-service training was 122 teachers, above the revised target of 100
teachers. During the first phase of the project, a training pilot was implemented for 29 teachers, allowing for
the evaluation of the process and the development of tools for the second phase of the training program
where 93 additional teachers were trained. In addition, 104 teachers with tertiary degrees underwent an
eighteen month training and certification program for uncertified graduate teachers.

80.60 percent of primary and secondary school principals were prepared in leadership training programs,
exceeding the original target of 70 percent. The target was not revised. In addition, 30 deputy school leaders
received the same training to help build a stronger pipeline of school leaders.

The BLOOM remedial program was developed in seven schools to support 100 at-risk students, for which 22
teaching assistants were hired and trained. The program focused on students who had difficulties in
mathematics and literacy. Although results varied, students showed improvements in numeracy and literacy
skills.

The inclusive education pilot was implemented in Bequia Island, resulting in the inclusion of 22 students in the
program.

A total of 19 focus group discussions were held with education component beneficiaries (citizen
engagement), achieving the original target. This target was not revised.

Outcome

The percentage of primary and secondary teachers rated effective on classroom practices was not measured
as the CLASS tool was not implemented.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Strengthen the quality-of-service delivery in education.

Revised Rationale



                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



Although the objective did not change, pre- and post-teacher training tests would be used in lieu of the
classroom observation tool (CLASS). The underlying assumption was that these tests could be a proxy for
measuring in-class teaching practices.

Revised Outcome

The increase in the competency score of teachers who benefited from in-service teacher training was 8.2
percentage points, above the target of an increase in 7 percentage points.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve efficiency of social protection systems.

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective stated that the efficiency of social protection systems would be
achieved through (a) the improvement of social safety net service delivery systems which would be a result of
modernized and relevant service delivery instruments, and informed by a strong evidence base, (b)
strengthening of human resource capacity for the provision of social protection and labor programs and
services, and (c) enhancement of institutional mechanisms and strategy for more efficient, coordinated and
transparent service delivery, in the context of grounded policy and strategy with strong public engagement.

Outputs

The number of beneficiaries of safety nets programs was not measured. This indicator was deleted in the
restructuring as it was not found relevant, given that the project did not finance cash or in-kind transfers for
safety net programs.

The Enhanced Country Poverty Assessment (eCPA) was not completed.

The number of households from priority geographic areas with complete information stored in the Central
Social Registry could not be estimated as the eCPA was not completed and the Central Social Registry was
not implemented.

The SAMIS was designed and installed. Testing was carried out on the functionality of the system.
Beneficiary intake was not started.

The number of information and education sessions held with the Public Assistance Program (PAP)
beneficiaries were 54 sessions, exceeding the target of 45 sessions.

The social protection strategy was developed and was reviewed by MoNM but was not reviewed by the
Cabinet and the legal act was not tabled in Parliament, as originally planned.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



The legislation related to formulating the Disability Act and the Elderly Act was prepared, the first of which
was reviewed by the MoNM. Neither draft was submitted to Cabinet as originally planned.

Outcome

The share of PAP beneficiaries whose eligibility was determined through a household assessment using the
revised targeting tool was not measured. Achievement of this outcome depended on the development of a
targeting tool based on the results from the eCPA, which was not implemented.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve the administrative efficiency of social assistance.

Revised Rationale
Under a reduced scope for this objective, administrative efficiency of social assistance would be achieved
through the development of SAMIS, including the design, procurement of equipment and software, capacity
building, strengthening operational procedures linked to the SAMIS and improved public communication and
engagement with stakeholders. Further to this, development of legislation on social assistance to the
disabled and the elderly would provide the institutional framework for the social assistance program.

Revised outcomes

The average number of days to complete the intake process for beneficiaries was reduced from a baseline of
21 days to 7 days at completion, exceeding the target of 15 days. This outcome was measured through two
tests carried out on SAMIS that confirmed the functionality of its modules.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve effectiveness of labor market systems.


Rationale
The theory of change for this objective stated that effectiveness of labor market systems would be improved
through an expansion of training for poor and vulnerable youth and adults. This expansion would be achieved

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



through increased capacity for TVET delivery, including upgrading training facilities, training of instructors,
assessors, verifiers and ministry staff, and technical assistance for the development of occupational
standards. This chain of activities would be supported by an improved regulatory system and the
development of evaluation capacity. The underlying assumption was that the supply of qualified labor would
impact labor market systems as there was demand for workers with the specific skills to be provided through
TVET.

Outputs

The number of beneficiaries of the Labor Market Program YATE was 1346 vulnerable youths and poor adults
exceeding the original target of 1340 beneficiaries, and the revised target of 1,000 beneficiaries. Of these,
823 beneficiaries were women, as compared to an original target of 670 and a revised target of 620 women.

The share of enrolled trainees who completed the training was 86.40 percent, slightly below the target of 87
percent (this target was not modified). In the case of female beneficiaries, 63 percent of women completed
the training, below the target of 65 percent.

The proposed Protection of Employment Act and Labor Relations Bill were reviewed by the Cabinet and
submitted to the General Attorney’s office for review, but were not tabled in Parliament, as originally
envisioned.

Outcome

The expected outcome was an increase, nationwide, in the share of graduated trainees employed or in further
training 12 months following training completion from a baseline of 57 percent to an end target of 65
percent. This outcome was not formally measured but, according to a longitudinal study of one cohort of
YATE trainees, 45 percent of graduates were employed or in further training in November 2023, as compared
to 30 percent prior to training.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve effectiveness of labor market systems.

Revised Rationale
The objective did not change, but there was a shift in focus from employment to training outcomes and
certification in response to the reduced employment options resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and the
volcanic eruption of April 2021.

Outcome

The share of enrolled trainees certified in at least five CVQ units increased from a baseline of 48 percent to
78 percent, exceeding the target of 65 percent. The longitudinal study carried out on one cohort of YATE

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



                              graduates showed that there was a shift from part time and temporary work toward full-time employment in
                              graduates with 81 percent of graduates working full time after six months of completing the program, as
                              compared to 21 percent before training. In addition, 94 percent of YATE graduates were working five days
                              per week or more six months later as compared to 61 percent immediately after completing the training
                              program. 86 percent of YATE graduates considered the program “Good” or “Extremely Good.”

                              The target under the revised outcome indicator was exceeded, however, it did not fully reflect the
                              achievement of the stated objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 (Strengthen the quality of service delivery in education) and Objective 3 (Improve effectiveness of
                            labor market systems) are rated Modest as there were important shortcomings in their
                            achievement. Objective 2 is rated Negligible as it was not achieved. The aggregate rating for overall efficacy
                            is Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After restructuring, the outcomes for all three revised Objectives are rated Substantial as they were almost
                            fully achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, economic analyses were carried out for all three objectives. In the case of objective 1,
   strengthening the quality-of-service delivery in education, the analysis relied on the literature to estimate the
   expected impact of teacher training, tailored teaching practices, feedback provision from classroom observations
   and improvement of school leadership, concluding that project interventions could increase student learning

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



outcomes by 0.12 to 0.23 standard deviations by the end of the project. The analysis also used literature
evidence that a one-standard-deviation increase in numeracy skills was associated with an 18 percent wage
increase among prime-age workers. The benefit estimates were based on the assumption that the project
impact would last for 20 years, that the first cohort would enter the labor market in 2031, at a discount rate of 10
percent. The resulting IRR fell in the range of 11 to 22 percent. This was expected to be a lower bound since
there were additional returns to educational attainment such as higher productivity and longer life expectancy.

In the case of Objective 2, the analysis was qualitative, with no IRR estimate. The analysis used evidence from
the literature to argue that there would be long term benefits that involved reduced administrative costs over
time, increased transparency and accountability, and better targeted distribution of resources to support the
poor. The literature supported the project’s strategy to use a combined geographic and proxy means test to
improve targeting. In addition, the registry and MIS would reduce duplication in the receipt of benefits. A digital
payment system would reduce transaction costs and reduce risks related to management of cash.

In the case of Objective 3, the economic analysis estimated that 1200 unemployed poor adults and at-risk youth
would be trained at an average cost of USD 535 per person. At a discount rate of 10 percent, the IRR was
estimated for different scenarios in which the increase in the probability of being employed as a result of the
skills training ranged from 0 percent to 4 percent and the increase in wages as a result of the skills training
ranged from 0 percent to 4 percent. A positive IRR of 5 percent was estimated with an increase of 2 percent in
both probability of being employed and in an increase in wages, reaching a 20 percent if the increase in the
probability of being employed and in the increase in wages went up to 4 percent.

The ICRR (p. 24) included a similar analysis for the first and third objectives. In the case of Objective 1, the
same assumptions were used as during the appraisal period, with the added assumption that the teacher
training program would improve pedagogical skills. The Net Present Value (NPV) was calculated to be USD
1,040,794, the Benefit-Cost Ratio was 1.62 and the IRR was 14.9 percent, in line with the ex-ante estimates. In
the case of Objective 3, the analysis focused on the YATE Program and took into account the number of
trainees that were certified in five or more CVQ units, the changes in pre- and post-employment status and in
weekly wages based on the findings of the longitudinal study of the 6the cohort, and the actual costs. The NPV
was calculated at USD 6,168,373, the benefit-cost ratio was 2.3, and the IRR was 23.8 percent.

In terms of implementation, the project suffered significant delays during the first four years, with 46 percent of
disbursements occurring during the last 18 months of the life of the project. A share of 7 percent of the credit
was cancelled due to the cancellation of the physical rehabilitation of TVET labs and of the second round of the
BLOOM remedial program. There were challenges in the implementation arrangements due to insufficient staff
in the PIU and to a lack of clarity in the responsibilities of sector focal points. Capacity limitations resulted in
procurement processes taking longer than planned, and delays in the processing of payments of stipends for the
YATE beneficiaries. Implementation activities were also affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic and the eruption of
the Soufriere volcano. Although the mid-term review was carried out in October 2019, the request for project
restructuring was not received until September 2021.The project had to be extended by 17 months, for a total of
six years and seven months. This duration is similar to the average length of project implementation in
Caribbean countries, which is six years and five months.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   56.00
Appraisal                                                20.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   65.00
ICR Estimate                                             21.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High in view of the alignment with the OECS Regional Strategy at appraisal
and closing, and with the OECS Education Sector Strategy 2012-2021. Under the original objectives, Efficacy is
rated Modest as the project only partly achieved its objectives. Under the revised objectives, Efficacy is rated
Substantial as the objectives were almost fully achieved, but with some shortcomings. Efficiency is rated
Substantial. These ratings are indicative of a Moderately Unsatisfactory outcome rating under the original
objectives, and Satisfactory under the revised objectives. At restructuring, 53 percent of funds had been
disbursed.

Weighting the outcome ratings according to IEG/OPCS guidelines:


Rating Dimension                   Original Objectives                          Revised Objectives


Relevance                          High                                         High

Efficacy                           Modest                                     Substantial
Efficiency                         Substantial                                Substantial
Outcome Rating                     Moderately Unsatisfactory                  Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value               3                                          5
Disbursement (%)                   53                                         47
Weight Value                       1.59                                       2.35
Aggregate                                        3.94 (Moderately Satisfactory)



The overall Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project contributed to institutional strengthening and capacity building in the three sectors. In the case of
the Ministry of Education, tools and manuals were developed for teacher training, for school leadership
training, and for the remedial program. The SAMIS was developed, together with key administrative
processes, including intake into the PAP. As reported by the Task Team, the World Food Program is
currently supporting the roll out of the SAMIS. In addition, the World Bank is currently preparing the Beryl
Emergency Recovery Loan (P507316), which will further support the intake of households that were
impacted by the hurricane so that they can receive temporary income support grants. TVET delivery
capacity was enhanced with updated lab equipment and training and certification of 21 TVET instructors. The
labor policy and legislative framework was strengthened, and the Labor Force Supply and Demand surveys
were carried out, informing future training and policy.

Specific risks related to the sustainability of the program include ensuring an adequate budget allocation to
continue with teacher and school leader training, continue implementation of the remedial program, and
support the pending infrastructure needed for TVET training, such as installation of adequate electricity
supply and air conditioning. The government decided not to scale up the pilot on inclusive education.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design aimed to support SVG to improve human development service delivery in basic
  education, social assistance and labor access through TVET. As such, the project worked in three
  sectors, education, social development and labor. This project design, while complex, was appropriate to
  generate sufficient investments to justify an operation in a small country. The design also built on global
  knowledge and World Bank expertise in the education and social protection sectors and considered other
  relevant activities in the region, such as the OECS GPE grant that was working on the development of
  teaching and learning standards region-wide.

  A theory of change was prepared separately for each of the three objectives. However, the monitoring
  indicators did not rely on government systems, making them difficult to measure, and requiring the
  development of a parallel system.

  The project design was overly ambitious given the implementation capacity in the responsible institutions.
  While this risk was acknowledged in the PAD (p. 20) there were no significant mitigation measures, other
  than the reliance on the project implementation unit, the PSIPMU in the MOEP. At the sectoral level, the
  project design relied on staff whose responsibilities with respect to project implementation were not clear.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)




b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank carried out regular supervision missions as well as monthly meetings during the early phase of
 the project. Aide Memoires and ISRs reported on progress and critical pending issues that were then
 addressed to the client through Management Letters, which came with the support of the Country
 Management Unit. Supervision missions included procurement and financial management. There was one
 ex-post procurement review carried out for the project. Progress and issues with respect to fiduciary and
 safeguards were regularly reported in the ISRs. The Mid-Term Review was carried out as planned, at
 which time the specific areas for restructuring were identified. However, the project’s restructuring was
 significantly delayed as the request letter from government only arrived in September 2021, with an
 updated request in May 2022, and restructuring was only approved in June 2022. An extension of 17
 months, from July 2022 to December 2023, was required to implement the restructured project. The
 restructuring took into account the challenges faced by the project during the first phase and adequately
 changed the objective and outcome indicator for the second objective on social assistance. On the other
 hand, the restructuring modified the outcome indicators for the other two objectives, but not the objective
 statement. This resulted in outcome indicators that were not optimal to fully measure the stated objectives.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project design included a results framework with outcome and intermediate indicators for each
 objective. The outcome indicators did not reflect the full extent of the stated objectives and required
 revisions during the restructuring process. The indicators were not based on data from government
 systems, thus requiring parallel monitoring tools. In the case of Objective 1, the indicator relied on a tool
 that had not been previously used and whose implementation cost had not been considered during the
 design process. In addition, the number of teachers targeted for training was not quantified. In the case of
 the indicator for Objective 2, its measurement relied on a chain of activities, including the collection of the
 eCPA data which was not implemented successfully. The indicator for Objective 3 required an independent
 survey to assess employment of trainees after 12 months after program completion. The revised indicators
 were simpler and could be measured more easily, but did not fully address the achievement of the
 objectives.

 The PSIPMU in the MOEP was responsible for coordinating and reporting results monitoring and
 evaluation. Each implementation agency was expected to submit progress reports to the PSIPMU on a
 quarterly basis during the first two years of the Project and semi-annually during the final three years. The
 project design also included surveys, the eCPA, the Living Conditions Survey (LCS), the Household Budget

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



 Survey (HBS) and the labor force and labor demand surveys. An impact evaluation was included to assess
 the teacher strengthening activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  Prior to restructuring, there was regular reporting on intermediate indicators, but there was no progress in
  monitoring outcome indicators. The decision not to use the CLASS tool made the outcome indicator for
  the first objective irrelevant. This was also the case for the second outcome indicator as it depended on
  the implementation of the eCBA, which was not completed. In the case of the indicator for the third
  objective, employability conditions were hampered by the COVID-19 pandemic and the volcanic eruption,
  leading to the decision to modify the indicator.

  Subsequent to the restructuring, the project M&E improved. M&E activities included: measuring teacher
  training tests to the 93 teachers who received in-service training and were tested, the pilot test was
  carried out to the SAMIS to measure functionality and effectiveness, and the longitudinal study was
  carried out on the sixth cohort of the YATE program. This study was originally envisioned to focus on the
  first and second cohorts of the YATE program. A process evaluation of the inclusive education model
  was carried out instead of the impact evaluation. The labor force and labor demand surveys were
  completed.



c. M&E Utilization
  The challenges posed by the initial results framework made M&E utilization difficult. By December 2020,
  disbursements had reached 34 percent of the credit but there was little progress with respect to project
  indicators. Even though overall M&E was weak, the PIU maintained adequate records which permitted
  the monitoring of implementation progress and informed the project restructuring. Also, the labor force
  and demand surveys helped identify and prioritize areas of training under the YATE program.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was initially rated C for Environmental Assessment as none of the activities were expected to
   lead to adverse environmental impacts. The original design only involved installation of equipment and
   minor upgrades to TVET labs. Safeguard risks were rated as Low. As part of the 2022 restructuring, larger
   rehabilitation and retrofitting activities were included for 12 schools, triggering OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment and OP/BP 4.09 Pest Management, and a resulting change in the rating to B. The PIU
   prepared the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) but never implemented it as the
   rehabilitation of TVET labs did not occur. Safeguards ratings were consistently Satisfactory from the time
   that they were triggered to project closing.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



   Potential risks were identified with respect to the implementation of TVET training. The project established
   clear codes of conduct for training providers and employers at internship locations. In addition, routine spot-
   checks were carried out at training and internship locations. A grievance redress mechanism (GRM) was
   also developed to attend to potential trainee complaints and was accessible through the government’s and
   World Bank’s websites. No complaints were reported through the GRM.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM) was under the responsibility of the PSIPMU, which was responsible for
   implementation of all World Bank financed projects. While the PSIPMU had prior experience with respect
   to the Bank’s FM policies, the risk was deemed as Substantial given the complex nature of the project and
   the multiple line ministries involved. During implementation, interim financial reports and audits were found
   acceptable, but were submitted with delays. During the life of the project, FM performance was mostly
   rated as moderately satisfactory, being upgraded to satisfactory at closing given that there were no
   outstanding documents.

   The PSIPMU was also responsible for procurement activities. A procurement assessment was carried out
   at appraisal, concluding that the risk was substantial mainly because of the complex project design. During
   implementation, procurement was generally rated as moderately satisfactory, with the exception of one
   period where it was rated moderately unsatisfactory due to long delays in procurement processes and in
   updating of the system. A procurement post-review led to the upgrade of the rating to moderately
   satisfactory as adequate staff was hired and the project prepared a credible procurement plan. At closing,
   rating was moderately satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR provided important lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons restated
by IEG Review:

Multisector operations face difficulties due to the complexities associated with working with several
implementation agencies. In the case of small countries, multisector projects are often necessary in
order to achieve economies of scale. However, this type of design brings challenges linked to having
several agencies, each of which requires dedicated focal points who can ensure adequate
implementation of project activities and can coordinate with a central project unit. Sectoral ownership
of project activities, clear and specific terms of reference, and a well-prepared operations manual
can contribute to mitigate these issues.

Well-designed indicators are critical in the assessment of project objectives. In the case of this
project, indicators were not realistic as they depended on the implementation of a number of
activities that were not ready at the time of project launching. This is the case of the CLASS
assessment tool for objective 1, and the dependence on the eCPA targeting tool for Objective 2. In
addition, a baseline could not be prepared and indicators did not rely on existing institutional
databases.

Institutional development contributes to sustainability, but reforms associated with changes in the
framework may be difficult to achieve through an investment operation. This project supported
important reforms in the Social Protection and Labor sectors, including the PAP Act, the Disability
Act, the Elderly Act, and the Protection of Employment Act, as well as the Labor Relations Bill,
aiming that they be reviewed by Cabinet and/or be tabled in Parliament. Although development of
legal documents is technical and can be supported by a project, approval processes are usually
political and, therefore, beyond the scope of the project.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was results-oriented and well written, providing a clear analysis of the project’s achievements and
challenges. The theory of change (TOC) was based on that of the PAD. The TOC correctly included the critical
assumptions underlying the results chain and recognized the weaknesses of the original and revised outcome
indicators. The ICR included additional information for objective 3 (longitudinal study for the YATE program),



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG HD Service Delivery Project MST (P154253)



contributing to the assessment. The ICR was internally consistent and complied with ICR guidelines, although it
was somewhat lengthy. The ICR provided important lessons, relevant to projects in small countries.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
