     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024223

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P160162                                  DCIDP-Thai Nguyen

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                 Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-62970                                31-Dec-2023                                         50,508,232.38

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jun-2018                              31-Dec-2023

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         80,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          50,508,232.38                                               0.00

 Actual                                      50,508,232.38                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero      Peter Nigel Freeman          Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11),
   the project development Objective (PDO) of this Dynamic City Integrated Development Project (DCIDP) - Thai
   Nguyen Project was “to improve access to urban infrastructure and to improve integrated urban planning and
   management in the project city.” The FA noted that the project will improve the quality of transport
   connectivity, urban environmental sanitation, and education services.



                                                                                                Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



   This review will assess project performance against this PDO that has been parsed into the following two sub-
   objectives:

         To improve access to urban infrastructure – transport connectivity, urban environmental sanitation,
          and education services
         To improve integrated urban planning and management in the project city.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1: Structural Investments – Rehabilitation and Construction of Urban Infrastructure (at appraisal,
   US$87.5 million consisting of US$75.7 million in IDA, and US$11.8 million in counterpart funds;
   restructuring increased the allocation to US$92.03 million although IDA was reduced to US$54.30 million;
   actual, US$ 84.7 million consisting of US$50.51 million in IDA, US$34.23 million in counterpart funds). This
   component was to finance investments in environmental sanitation, transport, and amenities to improve
   access and reliability of urban services for the bottom 40 percent of the population. Sub-components to be
   financed were to include: (i) the construction of new drains, dredging and embankment of ditches, streams
   and channels to improve the local drainage system and flood management; (ii) the rehabilitation and
   construction of sewer collection networks, and the expansion of the existing wastewater collection system;
   (iii) transport investments in strategic urban roads and bridges, aligned with existing master plans, and
   based on sound analyses of travel and traffic demand and street design patterns; (iv) urban amenities and
   public spaces such as new, accessible public spaces around the improved infrastructure and the
   construction and rehabilitation of two preschool facilities. The first restructuring increased overall funding for
   this component from counterpart fund sources. The second restructuring reduced the scope of drainage,
   road, and bridge investments, the amount of public space to be created or improved (see Dates below on
   restructuring).

   2: Non-Structural Investments – Technical Assistance and Implementation Support (appraisal,
   US$6.56 million consisting of US$4.31 million in IDA, US$2.25 million in counterpart funds; restructuring
   increased the funding to US$7.97 million in IDA; actual, US$0.93 million, all from counterpart funds) This
   component was to finance the preparation of an integrated urban development plan. This component was
   also to finance technical assistance to prepare and implement project investments. The second
   restructuring replaced an integrated urban development plan with a public transport strategy and an urban
   asset management plan. The implementing agency used provincial funds to complete the following planned
   activities under component 2 (see Section 5 Efficiency, Administrative and Operational Efficiency below).

         Integrated planning. This activity was to finance the development or updating of comprehensive,
          context-specific strategic urban development plans that were based on the specific needs,
          resources, and development issues of the project city (including a reassessment of economic and

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



         demographic assumptions and growth projections). These plans were to be functionally and spatially
         aligned with the updated provincial-level and regional-level strategic plans; and would reinforce Thai
         Nguyen’s role as a secondary city within the National Master Plan. In addition, the plans would be
         informed by disaster and climate risks. The city and province were to work closely with the national
         technical body for urban planning, the Ministry of Construction (MOC).
        Public transport planning. Restructuring added this technical assistance to finance the
         development of a public transport development strategy aligned with the updated city master plans
         and promote the expansion of local public transport systems. The component was to identify and
         include safeguard provisions for suitable public transport in Thai Nguyen. Further, the plans were to
         provide a framework for decision-making, with sustainable urban mobility indicators (e.g.,
         sustainable urban transport index [SUTI] by UNESCAP), to define specific targets, such as higher
         network coverage and modal share by public transport, accessibility, affordability, safety, etc.
        Asset management. Restructuring added this technical assistance to finance the development of
         asset management plans for sustainable urban assets. These plans were to include financial
         sources for operations and maintenance (O&M) of completed project assets. The plan was to
         include an analysis of the financing needs and own-source revenue mobilization forecasts and
         implementation challenges for the project city. The plans were to help Thai Nguyen achieve efficient
         and sustainable capacity to manage urban assets.
        Project implementation support. This component was to finance the technical designs for sub-
         projects; construction supervision and contracts management; monitoring of environmental and
         social safeguards; and financial audits.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$100 million consisting of US$80 million in IDA and
  US$20 million in counterpart funds. The first restructuring cancelled US$23 million of the IDA credit (see
  below). The credit disbursed US$50.5 million. The balance was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) Scale-Up Facility (SUF) financed this credit.

  Borrower Contribution: The government originally committed US$20 million in counterpart contributions
  consisting of US$5.9 million to finance front end, commitment, interest, and other fees and the balance of
  US$14.1 million to finance land acquisition and resettlement. The government increased their commitment
  to US$43 million at restructuring to meet increased costs of land acquisition and resettlement. The
  government disbursed US$27.7 million at closing after scaling down the project scope and reduced
  resettlement needs.

  Dates: The Board approved this credit on June 22, 2018 and it was made effective on December 27, 2018.
  The credit closed on December 31, 2023 as originally scheduled. The Mid-term Review was conducted on
  November 25, 2021. Two Level 2 restructurings project were approved:

        On August 11, 2021 (Report No. RES47762) to cancel US$23 million and acknowledge the
         government’s commitment to increase its contributions from US$20 to US$43 million to finance land
         acquisition and resettlement. Two reasons led to this increase: (i) the appraisal underestimated (by
         three times) the number of households to be resettled, and the amount and cost of the unit price of
         land (by two times); and (ii) in May 2020 the national government began to require that counterpart
         funds free up IDA resources for investments by financing IDA-eligible project expenditures (taxes,

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



          front-end fees, commitment fees, interest) instead. The Thai Nguyen People’s Provincial Committee
          (PPC) anticipated lengthy Implementation and retained the US$100 million overall project envelope.
          The PDO formulation and outcome targets were unchanged.
         On March 30, 2022 (Report No. RES50089), in response to the PPC request to scale down
          investments as counterpart funding began to increase. The following targets in outcome and
          intermediate outcome indicators in drainage and roads were reduced:
               o For the following outcome indicators:
                        (4) People with access to new and improved roads – from 38,133 to 36,050 people.
                          The target of the share of female beneficiaries and the share of the bottom 40 percent
                          beneficiaries from 51 to 49.6 percent.
                        (6) People with access to new or improved public spaces – from 42,611 to 42,150
                          people. The target of female beneficiaries and ‘bottom 40 percent’ beneficiaries –
                          from 56 to 51 percent.
                        (8) Direct project beneficiaries – from 81,951 to 79,495 people.
               o For the following targets of the intermediate outcome indicators due to reduced investments
                  in new roads, bridges, ditches, and upgraded roads:
                        The additional wastewater treatment capacity – from 1,100 to 930 m3.
                        The length of roads and bridges constructed or improved – from 14.45 to 13.75 km
                        The area of new/improved walkable public space – from 151,925 to 116,605 m2
               o One outcome indicator was revised and corresponding targets for two intermediate outcome
                  indicators were increased:
                        Replaced the outcome indicator (9) from “Integrated urban management plans
                          developed” – to “Integrated urban development plan, public transport strategy, and
                          urban asset management plans approved by Thai Nguyen City for implementation.”
                        Targets of two intermediate outcome indicators were increased – (i) the number of
                          plans to be delivered – from one to three; and (ii) the target for the number of
                          residents consulted to acknowledge two consultations – the initial one and a
                          subsequent one to consult on redesigned elements of these plans.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be made. The PDO was unchanged. Investments were
   scaled down because of the expanding need for counterpart funds to finance land acquisition and
   resettlement. Targets for these investments were correspondingly reduced but the reductions were not
   significant and the split rating would not have implications on the pre- and post rating. Efficacy will be
   assessed against the revised targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: Viet Nam became a middle-income economy in 2018 following reforms. GDP growth
averaged 5.3 percent annually since the late 1980s. Cities like Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City contributed to
over half of the national GDP. However, urbanization was characterized as low-density and fragmented.
Secondary cities and rural areas faced inadequate services and increased vulnerability to climate change.
The government classified urban centers according to population, density, and ratio of non-agricultural
laborers. This resulted in fragmented urbanization and inefficient sprawl that contributed to traffic

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



congestion, air pollution, and informal settlements. This project was formulated to achieve the economic
and social benefits associated with cities that had more compact development patterns, strong public
transport linkages, and access to services and jobs. More efficient use of infrastructure would reduce
environmental degradation.

Thai Nguyen is 80 kilometers away from the capital and located in the more mountainous North-East of the
capital region. The city-level annual GDP growth rate was of over 15 percent over the period 2011-
2015 compared to the country's annual GDP growth rate of 5.9 percent during the same time. The
city has historically served as a center for heavy industry focused on steel and iron. The city local economy
consisted of 75 percent in industry/construction sector; 20 percent in trade/services/commercial sector; and
5 percent in agricultural/forestry production. Thai Nguyen has a population of 420,000 in 2018, its poverty
rate is 3.6 percent and 22.8 percent of its city population fall below the national low-income classification
level. It lacked financing sources and its priority investments in road network development encouraged
motorization, with little attention to developing the public transportation systems. This increased traffic
congestion, flooding, uneven spatial development, and led to the deterioration (or lack) of public spaces.
Residents have uneven access to basic services, including lack of 24-hour water supply, wastewater
treatment, childcare services, and road networks. The city's master plan of the city through 2030 called for
the conversion of agricultural to urban land and urban expansion with minimal restrictions, without clear
market demand analysis or an indication of phasing plans. Thai Nguyen was a large Class I city, served as
the provincial capital and regional hub of the Northern Mountainous Region. This importance as
an economic engine undergoing rapid urbanization, need improved urban infrastructure services
and demonstrated significant potential growth as a province- and region-level urban economic center and
was deemed ready to showcase a Dynamic City Integrated Development approach where secondary cities,
such as Thai Nguyen could demonstrate its economic potential to play a greater role in enhancing
productivity and growth. Its successful implementation was to inform the support to the government's urban
development agenda.

Country Plans: Urbanization had a strategic role in the country’s industrialization and modernization plans.
In 2009 the national government developed the Framework Master Plan for Urban Development in Viet
Nam to 2025 and Vision to 2050 (i.e., National Master Plan). These plans aimed for well-planned urban
growth to support Viet Nam's continued transformation into a high-income economy. The National Master
Plan emphasized the importance of urban connectivity as well as the treatment of surface and wastewater
(Section 5. “Plan for arrangement of national urban technical infrastructure”). The PDO was relevant to the
objectives of the country’s urbanization plans. The PDO remained relevant to Viet Nam’s national
development plans and policies, including the January 24, 2022 Resolution No. 06-NQ/TW “On planning,
construction, management, and sustainable urban development in Vietnam to 2030, with a vision to 2045.”
This policy called for improving urban infrastructure services, delivering effective urban social services,
such as education, by addressing the lack of urban management capacity to spur urban development. The
country planned to implement a five-city ‘Dynamic Cities’ project" consisting of the secondary cities of Thai
Nguyen, Ky Anh, Tinh Gia, Hai Duong, and Yen Bai but proposed Thai Nguyen to showcase the approach
because of its size, the scope of the proposed interventions in response to its needs, and its existing urban
plans.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework. The PDO was relevant to the goals of the World Bank
Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Vietnam, FY2018-2022 (Report No. 111771-VN). The
PDO was relevant in contributing to the achievement of two CPF objectives: Objective 5, “to improve
planning, management and delivery of infrastructure and land in cities”, and Objective 10, “to increase
climate resilience and strengthen disaster risk management.” The CPF also noted “the need for further

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



               productive infrastructure remains, particularly in energy, transport, water, sanitation, and
               telecommunications.” The CPF for Vietnam, FY2023-2027 is to be finalized but the PDO remained relevant
               to this updated CPF’s priorities of climate resilience, sustainable growth, and gender inclusion. The PDO
               was also substantially relevant to the World Bank’s Country and Climate Development Report for Vietnam
               (July 2022), since the pilot city of Thai Nguyen was in a potential flooding hotspot region (ICR, paragraph
               25).

               World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: In its urban sector engagement strategy, the
               Bank likewise recognized the importance of secondary cities for balanced and sustainable urban growth,
               and a 2016 report jointly authored with Viet Nam’s Ministry of Planning emphasized the need for
               institutional strengthening to foster integrated urban planning as well as the need to improve road quality
               and the quality of urban transport services. The Bank’s approach at the time was to prepare multi-city
               lending operations for these secondary cities, and Thai Nguyen was part of a proposal for a five-city lending
               project (the other cities being Ky Anh, Tinh Gia, Hai Duong, and Yen Bai). A multi-city project – ‘Dynamic
               Cities’ – was designed, but at the time of appraisal the national government of Viet Nam deemed only Thai
               Nguyen ready to receive World Bank financing, therefore this standalone project was proposed to the Board
               instead. It was envisaged that successful aspects of the project could be replicated in the other cities once
               they were operationally ready for an urban lending project to be commenced. The World Bank urban
               infrastructure projects in Vietnam include the ongoing Dynamic Cities Integrated Development Project
               (P168290, 2019) that followed this project and focused on increasing access to urban infrastructure and
               improving integrated urban planning for four secondary cities: Yen Bai, Hai Duong, Tinh Gia, and Ky Anh.
               Another ongoing project is the Vinh Long City Urban Development and Climate Resilience Project
               (P171700, 2020), that is providing new and improved drainage systems, and reducing travel times.
               Discussions are ongoing about streamlining a similar model to support Class-2 and Class-3 cities.

               Overall, the PDO was pitched at an appropriate level to pilot the approach on how to address the urban
               development problems faced by an emerging secondary city of Thai Nguyen.

               The relevance of the PDO is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to urban infrastructure. The FA referred to ‘transport connectivity, urban environmental
                             sanitation; and education services.'

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



THEORY OF CHANGE (TOC): The Project Appraisal Documents included a TOC. The Bank team
acknowledged that as an early formulation this TOC had shortcomings, including indicators that were
presented as long-term rather than short-term outcomes. At appraisal, the inputs (financing and technical
assistance) were to lead to completed investments and plans to improve access to urban infrastructure. The
urban infrastructure services to be improved were in transport, urban environmental sanitation, and
education. The team updated the TOC at the second restructuring clarifying the expected outputs and
classified outcomes as short-term vs long term, indicating that the project was designed to achieve short term
outcomes. Activities under this objective was to finance investments in urban environmental sanitation, urban
transport, and urban amenities. The completed investments in these urban services were expected to
improve access and reliability of urban services for the bottom 40 percent of the population in the target area.
These investments were to promote more compact and denser urbanization and meet demands for climate
change adaptation. This project was formulated to achieve the economic and social benefits associated with
cities that had more compact development patterns, strong public transport linkages, and access to services
and jobs. More efficient use of infrastructure would reduce environmental degradation. Additionally, gender-
inclusive economic opportunities were needed.

INPUTS: were to be the financing of the urban investments in the three sectors and training and technical
assistance to improve capacity to deliver these services.

OUTPUTS: were to be the completed investments in transport connectivity such as roads, bus shelter; in
urban environmental sanitation such as drainage, the flood protection works; and in education services such
as in preschool facilities.

OUTCOMES: were to be improved service delivery in transport, environmental services, and education.
Outcomes were to be expressed in the number of beneficiaries and end users, the land area covered by flood
prevention, and the satisfaction rate expressed by beneficiaries for the access to services delivered. There
was a lack of indicators to reflect the impact of the outputs on the lives and livelihoods of beneficiaries,
including, for example, lives saved, and property destruction avoided because of the flood prevention
measures investments, or the jobs created for women with more time freed from unpaid childcare because
they use pre-school care.

A CRITICAL ASSUMPTION was to be that the City People’s Committees (CPC) budgets would include
annual allocations for infrastructure operations and maintenance (O&M) and kindergarten staffing. The
likelihood that the outcomes would be achieved was to increase if this assumption came to bear.

Overall, the TOC established a reasonable causal link between inputs, outputs and expected outcomes. The
outcomes were measured in the number of beneficiaries and the satisfaction generated by the improved
access to the services in transport, sanitation, public space, and education.

OUTPUTS:

      To improve access in transport connectivity,
            o Completed a bus station along the canals used by workers commuting from Thai Nguyen to
               the major industrial sites south of the city (target achieved).
            o Constructed or improving 14 km of roads and bridges, (achieving target of 13.75 km)
               consisting of 6.5 km in Huong Thuong-Chua Hang Road (including Molinh 1 and Huong
               Thuong bridges); 2.3 km in Bac Nam Road; 1 km in Le Huu Trac Street; 3.8 km in Dong Bam


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



            Street (including Molinh 2 bridge) and 0.3 km in the Dan bridge. Huong Thuong, a new four-
            lane, cantilevered bridge replaced a toll bridge, and was free to cross.
    To improve access in environmental services,
          o Constructed 2.2 km of drains (target achieved), consisting of 1.5 km in the Xuong Rong canal
            and 0.7 km in the Mo Bach canal.
          o Constructed 930 m3 of additional water treatment capacity (target achieved: 540 m3 in the
            Phan Dinh Phung and Gia Sang areas of the city, and 390 m3 of capacity provided in Tan
            Thinh and Thinh Dan).
          o Connected 887 households to new or improved wastewater treatment systems (exceeding the
            target of 840). These households previously discharged water directly into ditches, into septic
            tanks, or into the ground.
          o Improved 1.5km of new pipeline in the Xuong Rong canal and 1.3km the area in the Mo Bach
            canal to improve the city sewer system, (achieved the target of 2.8km).
    To improve access in education services,
          o Constructed preschool facilities in Huong Son Kindergarten and rehabilitated the preschool
            facilities in Phan Dinh Phung Kindergarten (target achieved). Both preschool facilities met the
            government standards for teacher-to-student ratios across the age groups (two teachers for
            every thirty pupils for children aged 25-36 months and two teachers for every thirty-five pupils
            for those between 37 and 72 months.
    To improve access in public spaces,
          o Constructed 116,605 square meters of walkable public space (target achieved). This improved
            space consisted of 98,555 m2 in Bac Nam-Huong Thuong and Huong Thuong–Chua Hang
            roads; 15,550 m2 in Dong Bam Road and 2250 m2 in Le Huu Trac Road.
          o Planted 667 trees, providing shade, natural flood risk reduction (no target) and improving air
            quality (no target).

OUTCOMES:

    In improved access to environmental sanitation, three targets were exceeded and two were achieved:
          o Reduced the flood risk for 643 ha of the target area prone to floods (exceeded the target of
            631 ha baseline reported was 643 ha per the PAD).
          o 1,323 people who live or work in the areas in which flood risk is reduced benefited from the
            improved drainage (exceeded the target of 1,207 people). The achievement exceeded the
            target because of an increase in the number of residents within the geographic area. 51.8
            percent of these beneficiaries were female, (exceeding target of 51 percent), and 54 percent
            of them were from the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution (achieving the target of 54
            percent).
          o 3,291 people benefited from improved access to sanitation (exceeded the target 3,178). 51.8
            percent of these beneficiaries were female (achieved the target of 51 percent), 58.7 percent
            were from the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution (achieved the target of 58 percent).
    In improved access to education services, two targets were exceeded, and one was achieved:
          o A 60 percent reduction in time spent on unpaid childcare by mothers of young children, aged
            3–72 months (exceeded the target 50 percent). This achievement was informed by surveys,
            computed as a weighted average of the 58 percent reduction for mothers of children enrolled
            in the Huong Son Kindergarten and 62 percent for mothers of children enrolled in the Phan
            Dinh Phung Kindergarten).


                                                                                              Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



            o 98 percent of users were satisfied with the childcare services provided (exceeding the target
               of 80 percent).
            o The preschool facilities improved the teacher-to-student ratios across the age groups (2:30 for
              children aged 25-36 months against a baseline of 2:45; 2:35 for those between 37 and 72
              months (60 in the TOC), against baselines of 2:40 for those aged 37-60 months and 2:50 for
              those aged 61-72 months. The improved ratios meant that the targets were achieved.
      In improved access to transport connectivity, all targets were exceeded:
            o 37,331 people have access to new and improved roads (exceeded the target of 36,050). 51.8
              percent were female (exceeded the target of 49.6 percent). The share from the bottom 40
              percent was 54 percent, (exceeded the target of 49.6 percent).
            o 97 percent of users were satisfied with the completed roads (exceeded the target of 80
              percent). The same remarkably high level of satisfaction was found among 97 percent of
              female users (exceeded the target of 80 percent) and 97 percent of users with incomes in the
              bottom 40 percent of the distribution ((exceeded the target of 85 percent). The roads and
              bridges reduced the travel time from the outlying districts into the city by 40-50 percent less
              than before the project. In particular, the use of the four-lane, cantilevered Huong Thuong
              bridge, reduced the travel time from the far side of the Cau river into the city from 15-20
              minutes to 5 minutes. These completed roads and bridges were designed guided by the city
              masterplan and served to mitigate against flooding.

      In improved public spaces, all but one target was exceeded. One target was not achieved.
            o 43,646 people were provided with access to new or improved public spaces (exceeded the
                target of 42,150). 51.8 percent were female (exceeded the target of 51 percent), 52 percent of
                users with incomes in the bottom 40 percent of the distribution (did not achieve the target of
                56 percent). According to the ICR, this target was not achieved because Thai Nguyen city
                enjoyed an unexpected faster than average income growth during the project period (ICR,
                footnote 8).
              o 97 percent of users were satisfied with the improved public spaces (exceeded the target of 80
                percent). The satisfaction levels 97 percent of female users (exceeded the target of 80
                percent) and 97 percent of users from the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution
                (exceeded the target of 85 percent).
      Overall, 80,235 people were direct project beneficiaries (exceeded the target of 79,495). This
       consisted of 1,323 who benefited from the investments in flood risk reduction; 3,291 who benefited
       from the investment in sanitation; 37,331 who benefited from investments in transport connectivity,
       and 43,646 who benefited from investments in improved public spaces. These beneficiaries include
       3,500 residents who also benefitted from the construction of Huong Son Kindergarten preschool
       facility and the renovation of Phan Dinh Phung Kindergarten preschool facility and were not included
       in the total count of direct beneficiaries to avoid double counting.
      One outcome was reported but was not part of the results framework and had no target. Anecdotes
       from local officials reported a six-fold increase in value of land surrounding project areas.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial because the outcomes that
were attributable to the project activities were achieved or exceeded. The target beneficiaries expressed
satisfaction with the investments made in improving access to transport connectivity, environmental
sanitation, public spaces, and education.




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve integrated urban planning and management in the project city

Rationale
THEORY OF CHANGE: A TOC was prepared at appraisal as part of a new World Bank requirement for
project appraisal. The second restructuring updated the TOC to improve the attribution of the outcomes to the
outputs generated. TA and project implementation support to Thai Nguyen PPC was to strengthen its
capacities for integrated economic and spatial planning informed by climate change and disaster risks. The
TA was to ensure the strategic relevance and efficiency of the municipal infrastructure investments to be
financed. The technical assistance and implementation support activities were to (i) link financing and
budgets to the investment programs of the city; (ii) consolidate spatial and sectoral plans into integrated
strategic development plans; and (iii) encourage the community to participate from planning to
implementation. The integrated urban development plans would enable the project city to manage
urbanization in a more comprehensive manner to achieve more compact, denser urban development. City
level officials were to use these integrated plans to prioritize infrastructure financing and achieve efficient and
sustainable capacity to manage urban assets. The plans would reinforce Thai Nguyen’s role as a secondary
city within the National Master Plan.

INPUTS: were to be the financing of training and technical assistance to develop or update a comprehensive,
context-specific strategic urban development plan that was based on the specific needs, available resources,
and development issues of the project city. Inputs associated with gender sensitive approaches were training
to mitigate the risks of the influx of predominantly male construction laborers during implementation.

OUTPUTS: were to be the integrated urban development strategy. Restructuring expanded the number of
plans from one to three and now included a public transport strategy and an urban management asset plan.

OUTCOMES: were to be the approved three plans noted above by the Thai Nguyen City People’s
Committee. Restructuring replaced the language from “developed” to “approved” by the CPC.

A CRITICAL ASSUMPTION was that continued implementation of integrated urban development plan, public
transport strategy, and urban asset management plans, if realized would increase the likelihood that the
outcomes would be achieved.

Overall, the TOC established a reasonable causal link between inputs, outputs and expected outcomes. The
outcomes were measured in the approval and implied implementation of the three plans.

OUTPUTS:

The following targets were exceeded:

      52.5 percent of participants were female (target 44 percent)


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)




                                  54 percent were from the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution (target 42 percent).

                            The following targets were achieved

                                  Conducted five stakeholder consultation sessions or training activities in integrated urban
                                   development planning
                                        o Three consultations were held in April, July, and November 2022.
                                        o Two training sessions were held in July and August 2023.
                                        o COVID-19-related restrictions led to an initial consultation by email.
                                  2,350 beneficiaries participated in these consultations for project planning, implementation, or
                                   evaluation
                                        o 810 beneficiaries participated in evaluation
                                        o 1,530 beneficiaries participated in technical design consultation, social and environmental
                                          safeguard consultations

                            OUTCOMES: The following targets were achieved using the government’s contributions, pointing to
                            improved urban planning processes and strengthened corresponding national government capacity.

                                  Thai Nguyen City approved an integrated urban development plan, a public transport strategy, and an
                                   urban asset management plan for implementation.
                                       o The integrated urban development plan incorporated sectoral plans (e.g., land use planning,
                                          transportation, and other basic service infrastructure) and linked them with socio-economic
                                          development plans, budgets, and investment phases to address urban planning weaknesses.
                                          The approved urban development plan was integrated to provincial and national plans.
                                       o The public transport strategy was integrated to provincial and national plans.
                                       o The urban asset management plan was implemented, using a new software system. City and
                                          regional officials approved indicative O&M budgets, implying implementation.

                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial, with minor shortcomings due
                            to lack of outcome evidence to reflect how the approved plans were implemented and strengthened capacity.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve both sub-objectives is rated Substantial with
                            minor shortcomings. The TOC established reasonable causal links between the outputs and expected
                            outcomes. Most of the outcomes were fully achieved. While the project met the targets for approval and
                            implementation of the plans and strategies on urban management, additional evidence could have been
                            provided with regard to the outcomes of the implementation of plans.


                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 20
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis confirmed the economic viability of all the proposed sub-projects
of Thai Nguyen. At appraisal, a ‘with and ‘without’ economic analysis, sensitivity analysis (10 percent increase in
the economic investment cost and a 10 percent decrease in the quantifiable economic benefits) compared
scenarios and quantified the economic benefits of the different physical elements of the project. The analysis
used a 10 percent economic opportunity cost of capital, following World Bank guidelines. The estimated
economic internal rates of return (IRRs) ranged from 10.6 - 24.6 percent to justify the project’s economic
viability. The overall IRR and NPV of the project components were not calculated at appraisal.

The same economic analysis methodology used at appraisal was applied at closing. The (IRRs) of the
completed investments ranged from 13.8 – 28.8 percent. Traffic counts along Le Huu Trac Road at completion
were significantly lower than forecasted at appraisal because Le Huu Trac Road was not constructed as
planned at appraisal following the downscaling of the project leading to the much lower VOC savings compared
to other roads built or improved as part of the project. This caused a slightly reduced IRR from 18.2 to 16.8
percent. At closing, the project investments achieved an overall IRR of 20.26 percent and an overall NPV of US$
50.86 million. Economic efficiency of the investments at appraisal could not be compared at closing.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Implementation had delays in the first three years of
implementation. In addition, the following lack of institutional coordination among regional and policy directives,
and factors outside the control of the government led to administrative and operational inefficiencies:

      The government did not include this project in its Medium-Term Investment Plan (MTIP) 2016-2020.
         Counterpart funds were not available for land acquisition during the early implementation period.
        Appraisal seriously underestimated the resettlement land area needed, its unit cost, and the number of
         households to be relocated and resettled. Corrective measures called for increasing government
         contributions. The government consequently requested scaling down of the project.
        On May 25, 2020 the national government issued a decree stipulating that counterpart funds, not IDA
         funds, would be used for certain expenditures, even if these were IDA eligible. The new government
         policy and the underestimated costs strained counterpart financing needs.
        On March 14, 2023 the national government approved the Thai Nguyen PPC-initiated provincial plan.
         This new integrated plan for the whole province overlapped with the activities to be financed under
         component 2 – land management, tourism, transportation, urban development, wastewater, and waste
         management. Provincial funds financed these overlapping activities and led to using less than US$1
         million in IDA credit under Component 2.
        The Vietnam Dong strengthened against the US$ in the early implementation period. The government
         feared that funds would not be sufficient for the original scope of the project and scaled it back. This led
         to a reduction in public space area and additional wastewater capacity. When the US$ bounced back
         toward closing, there was not enough time to use the balance.



                                                                                                        Page 12 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



      COVID-19 disrupted the supply of labor and materials. The cost of material increased.

The government requested to cancel US$23 million of the original credit because the project was to close soon.
Two restructurings reflected the reduced targets for the outcome and output indicators of the results framework.

Overall, project efficiency is rated Substantial given the high economic internal rates of return at closing even
though there were some implementation delays.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the objectives is rated High because the PDO remained relevant to the country’s urbanization
policies and the World Bank’s updated partnership strategy for the country. The efficacy and efficiency of the
project to achieve the two sub-objectives is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The overall outcome is
rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcome:

       Financial risks. This is a moderate risk. In this project, an intermediate indicator referred to the
        development of an urban asset plan ‘with annual budgets for O&M.’ This was to ensure that adequate
        investments would be available after project closing. However, it belongs to the nature of public
        authority budgets that they can be changed and therefore such investment cannot be guaranteed.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



      Given that the local government approved and implemented asset management plans. are already
      under implementation, the risk is unlikely to materialize.
     Governance and Ownership Risks. This is a moderate risk. In this project, the second component
      was dedicated to establishing strategies and plans to sustain the infrastructure services financed
      under the first component. At restructuring, the government recognized that outcomes were not “to
      develop” sustainable infrastructure investments plans but “to approve and implement” these. Local
      leaders in both the city and the province expressed their commitment to implement future investments
      informed by these plans. To mitigate the risk that commitments may waver, the ongoing World Bank-
      financed Dynamic City Integrated Development Project (DCIDP, P168290) adopted the design of this
      pilot.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, the World Bank team designed the project to support the World Bank’s objectives for
  Vietnam in its Country Partnership Framework. The team considered the government’s urbanization
  strategy to address the urban sprawl pattern by promoting a more compact development to increase
  urban density. The Project Management Unit (PMU) had limited experience with Bank financial
  management and procurement procedures. The team designed mitigating measures to strengthen the
  PMU’s capacity to implement the project as designed. The team decided to pilot Thai Nguyen before
  other secondary cities and towns under the subsequent Dynamic Cities Integrated Development Project
  (DCIDP). Lessons from similar prior World Bank-financed projects informed design. These included
  operations in Vietnam such as the Medium Cities Development, the Da Nang Sustainable Development,
  the Vietnam Urban Upgrading, and the Can Tho Urban Development and Resilience Projects. Similar
  urban development projects in China, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, and Uganda also provided
  lessons. Among these were sustained political commitment; evidence-based integrated urban
  development strategies or master plans linked to the budget process; in-situ resettlement or early
  resettlement sites preparation; and enjoining community participation in planning, designing, and
  implementing project activities.

  The Bank team complied with a new requirement for project appraisal and used the indicators of the
  results framework to form a Theory of Change. However, the team acknowledged that some outputs
  were misidentified as outcomes. Activities were designed to promote compact development. However,
  the team acknowledged that not all the interventions would contribute to achieving this aim. For example,
  constructing dual carriageway roads may lead to development away from the center rather than compact
  development. Transport elements turned out not fully aligned with the Bank’s emphasis on sustainability,
  nor “consistent with low carbon and climate-resilient development pathways.” While a reliable bus system
  that uses the new roads may reduce Thai Nguyen’s emissions from this sector, the improved roads may
  also increase the use of personal vehicles rather than traveling by bus.

  There was also lack of implementation readiness. There was delayed inclusion of the project into the
  government’s Medium Term Investment Plan. This action affected the timely availability of government
  contributions. Project design also significantly underestimated the number of households to be resettled
  as part of the planned civil works, from a planned 133 to an actual of 466 households. This also meant an


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



  underestimate of the resettlement area needed at implementation. There were also shortcomings in the
  original Theory of Change and the outcome indicators.

  Overall, the performance of the Bank team at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank conducted 12 supervision missions and met regularly with the Thai Nguyen PPC, city
 officials, and the PMU over the five-year period, including virtual missions during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 During early implementation, the World Bank team adopted corrective measures to address delays,
 administrative issues, and financial complications that arose. They completed two restructurings, revised
 the results framework to address the mismatch in outcome indicators, cancelled US$23 million in IDA
 funds, and scaled down activities. On March 14, 2023 the national government approved the Thai Nguyen
 PPC-initiated provincial plan. This new integrated plan for the whole province overlapped with the activities
 under component 2 – land management, tourism, transportation, urban development, wastewater, and
 waste management. The World Bank team responded by providing technical inputs and guidance to add
 details to improve the provincial plans. The Bank team acknowledged that poor coordination was reflected
 in the August 2021 restructuring where component 2 increased its allocation rather than anticipating that
 the component and the overall project would now cost less than planned. The short period between
 restructurings (seven months) also highlighted the presence of complex oversight requirements, with
 different processes and procedural priorities – one by the government, and the other by the World Bank
 (ICR paragraph 79).

 Adequate land acquisition proved problematic because the national government’s Medium Term
 Investment Plan (MTIP) 2016-2020 did not include this project. The pass through-delivery of IDA funds
 from central national government in 2019-2020 took longer than expected. Restructuring led to
 downscaling to make up for time lost. An increase in government counterpart financing was to address
 these dropped activities, but the Thai Nguyen PPC budget did not finance all aspects of the
 dropped activities, nor were these subjected to the project's control and coordination. The ICR
 acknowledged that the Bank team could have provided closer oversight of M&E implementation (ICR,
 paragraph 80).

 Overall, the quality of the Bank performance at supervision is rated Satisfactory. The World Bank team
 provided corrective measures in response to the government’s changing administrative landscape and the
 challenges brought by the pandemic and foreign exchange losses. The project did not require a time
 extension.

 Overall, the quality of Bank performance at entry and supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change (TOC) at appraisal outlined a reasonable, logical, causal link between activities to
 be implemented, outputs, and expected outcomes, duly reflected in the results framework. Some outcome
 level indicators were limited to intermediate results or output level, such as the number of urban
 development strategies developed, the beneficiaries of the infrastructure investments, or level of
 satisfaction with the completed investments (rather than the services delivered). Other M&E methods
 mentioned were sound – each subproject would conduct semiannual M&E evaluations; each city would
 conduct a mid-term and a final project evaluation including a beneficiary survey. The intermediate results
 indicators adequately captured the contributions of the activities to achieve the PDO. The indicators were
 specific, achievable, relevant, and timebound. They were measurable except the World Bank team
 acknowledged that some methodology was unclear (ICR, paragraph 66). For example, “people who have
 access to new and improved roads under the project” was defined as “the number of people, (motorized
 and non-motorized users), with access to new or improved roads within a 500-meter range” without
 clarifying if survey respondents were users who live; work; live and work in the area; or non-residents who
 use the roads. Relevant baseline ratios were reported. The PAD reported that beneficiaries were to be
 consulted in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of project investments.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Thai Nguyen City People’s Committee (CPP) Project Management Unit (PMU) supported by third-
  party consulting firms implemented the M&E system as designed. The PMU reported on progress against
  indicators in the results framework and refined an outcome indicator for improving urban planning to
  address its weakness – i.e., “approved,” implying implementation, rather than merely “developed,” an
  output indicator at best. At restructuring, the PMU reduced targets in response to the cancelled funds and
  downscaling of activities to complete the project on time. The PMU monitored compliance with
  environmental and social safeguards (see Section 10 Other Issues below). The PMU used drones to
  supplement data collection in monitoring construction progress. The ICR reported that beneficiaries were
  consulted, and training sessions were conducted as part of the integrated urban development planning
  and in the preparation and implementation of project investments. Beneficiary surveys were conducted to
  evaluate the completed project investments.



c. M&E Utilization
  The team, and the government used M&E data generated by the system to inform on progress, identify
  challenges, and prepare corrective measures to resolve these. The World Bank team used the data to
  complete to formulate corrective measures to resolve implementation challenges. M&E data informed
  restructurings. According to the ICR, beneficiaries were informed of outcomes, based on surveys

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



  conducted at closing. M&E data informed the design of the follow-on project, the Dynamic Cities
  Integrated Development Project (DCIDP, P168290).

  Overall, the quality of the M&E is rated Substantial. There were shortcomings in outcome indicators at
  design of which most were addressed during restructuring. M&E implementation informed project
  outcome and guided the completion of the project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards The project, which was classified as category B requiring a partial assessment
   and triggered the following safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats
   (OP/BP 4.04) because of the work on bridges and ditches; Forests (OP/BP 4.36) because the project
   acquired 1.45 ha of forest, and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), because of relocating 58 graves.
   The project completed an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to identify potential impacts
   and risks associated with the proposed physical investments in each subproject; and an Environmental and
   Social Management Plan (ESMP) for each ESIA to identify mitigating measures to address risks; monitoring
   and supervision plans; and institutional arrangements. The project team disclosed the English and
   Vietnamese versions of the ESIA/ESMP locally and in the World Bank Infoshop on March 1, 2018. The
   PMU designated staff responsible for the environment, health, and safety (EHS) aspects of subprojects and
   construction supervision firms were assigned EHS compliance monitoring responsibilities. During COVID-
   19, the construction supervision consultants ensured continuity with the oversight responsibilities, including
   participation in virtual meetings and inspections. Project contractors complied with the EHS terms and
   conditions in construction contracts. They also implemented corrective measures when gaps were identified
   (e.g., lack of personal protective equipment and inadequate site safety measures). The project complied
   with World Bank environment and social safeguard policies (ICR, paragraph 70).

   Social Safeguards. The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12). The team prepared a
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The RPF and the RAP were
   disclosed locally on January 11, 2018 and on the World Bank’s website on March 29, 2018. The RAP
   updated the costs, scale, and scope of the project land acquisition and resettlement (LAR), and the
   livelihoods restoration program (LRP). Both LAP and LRP were disclosed locally on December 22, 2023
   and on the Bank external website on December 25, 2023. The project affected 49.2 hectares of land, 20.1
   hectares of agricultural land, 8.3 hectares of residential land, and 1.6 hectares of production forestland; and
   a total 1,220 households. 98 households were relocated. Partial loss of agricultural land affected 905
   households. The city maintained a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) based on a national GRM
   mechanism that applied to all administrative levels and the courts. The PMU appointed a GRM focal point to
   coordinate the resolution of grievances. The project received 51 resettlement compensation complaints. All
   were reported resolved. The PMU conducted training on acceptable behavior of male non-resident workers
   who were coming to work on construction sites. There were no reports of sexual abuse or harassment.
   Clearing the land for roads, bridges and drains were delayed until the project's final months, because



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



   property owners were dissatisfied with the compensation and because family disputes made establishing
   land ownership difficult. These problems were resolved in time for the project to close as originally planned.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management The project complied with the World Bank’s Financial Management (FM) policies
   (ICR, paragraph 74). The Thai Nguyen Project Management Unit (PMU) was adequately staffed. The PMU
   submitted financial reports on time, assessed to have managed the designated account adequately,
   adopted sufficient internal controls, and updated the accounting software and information management
   systems. Financial audits were found acceptable. The auditor was conducting a final audit of expenditures
   at the time of the ICR preparation. The government did not include this project in its Medium-Term
   Investment Plan (MTIP) 2016-2020. No counterpart funds for land acquisition were available for the period
   2019-2020. However, the shortage of counterpart funds was eventually resolved.

   Procurement The Bank’s prior and post reviews of procurement contracts confirmed that the project
   complied with the World Bank procurement policies (ICR, paragraph 75). In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic
   happened. In 2021, the country experienced foreign exchange losses (Vietnamese Dong strengthened
   against the US$). In the first two years of implementation, land acquisition was also delayed. Procurement
   activities were delayed as a consequence. A portion of the credit was cancelled and restructuring reduced
   the scope of works. The PMU responded by undertaking a flexible scheduling of construction activities.
   The PMU maintained the data on civil works. Construction Supervision Consultants monitored
   implementation progress. Following the restructuring, the project accelerated procurement and awarded 21
   Bank-financed contracts. All were completed by the original closing date (December 31, 2023). All were of
   acceptable quality and without cost overruns. The World Bank team provided hands-on guidance, intensive
   training, and timely support to mitigate the PMU’s initial lack of experience with World Bank procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    Shortcomings in quality at entry.

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)




12. Lessons

The operation offered the following lessons:

        The accuracy of the estimates of the extent of the land area to be acquired, its unit
         costs, and the number of households to be relocated and compensated are critical
         since they would affect the scale and timeliness of the infrastructure to be delivered.
         In this project, design was informed by a lesson from similar operations, but, unfortunately,
         this lesson was ignored. As a result, the project experienced delays, downscaling, and
         reduced impact of the investments made. To mitigate this risk, project teams need
         to estimate costs accurately as part of the conditions for credit or loan effectivity; or hire
         consultants to prepare such estimates.
        If multi provincial urban infrastructure projects were clustered around a theme, a
         streamlined design and coordination can be optimized. In this project, design and
         implementation revolved around coordination among many actors from the national,
         provincial, city levels. For example, the national Ministry of Construction was to provide
         upstream technical support for investment design to ensure alignment with the country’s
         development objectives. At the same time, the Ministry of Construction could use the data
         from these designs to develop cost or design standards when building or improving drainage
         channels per kilometer for other cities with similar conditions. Or recommend how to
         sequence project construction to reduce disruption or delays. Multiprovince urban
         infrastructure projects could offer cities incentives to adopt lessons from each other’s
         experience under an umbrella national program. Such a national program could then lead to
         more efficient management and coordination of activities. The World Bank, for its part,
         could consider a more streamlined financing approach such as a Series of Projects (SOP) or
         Multi-Phase Program approach.
        Planned activities to mitigate a development problem stated in a project
         objective need to be clearly defined to justify their inclusion. This project was intended
         to achieve higher urban density to promote compact urban development. However, some
         proposed infrastructure investments in transport connectivity, for example, could promote the
         opposite effect of reducing density because improved road connectivity can reduce travel
         time to the center and promote suburban living. A clear Theory of Change could help clarify
         how inputs lead to expected outcomes to achieve the development objective.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report followed the guidelines, was internally consistent, and highlighted how the activities informed the
outcomes. The TOC provided a useful overview of the project. The M&E system generated the evidence to
support the achievements reported. Table 1 was particularly helpful in providing an overview of the impact of

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      DCIDP-Thai Nguyen (P160162)



the reduced investments and reduced targets in achieving the expected outcomes. The annexes filled the gaps
to support the evidence and the ratings, particularly the detailed breakdown of the results reported in Annex 1
and efficiency analysis in Annex 4. The report was candid, illustrated the operational realities and justified the
measures adopted in response to the changing administrative landscape. Lessons were derived from the
project operation. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 20 of 20
