     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024193

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P155522                                       BRRP

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                         Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59380                                    31-Dec-2022                                          147,972,220.25

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Dec-2016                                  31-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             235,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              153,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          147,972,220.25                                                0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Marc H. Juhel                 Fernando Manibog             Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The PDO was to improve rural road connectivity in project districts and enhance management of rural roads in
   Bihar.

   For this evaluation, the PDO will be broken down into its two sub-objectives:

          i. PDO 1: improve rural road connectivity in project districts, and


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



         ii. PDO 2: enhance management of rural roads in Bihar.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   At appraisal the Project consisted of two components:

   a. Component 1: Rural Roads Improvement (Allocation at approval: US$320 million; Actual cost at
   completion: US$211 million). Construction and improvement of the state core network to improve the road
   connectivity of target habitations under MMGSY (Mukhya Mantri Gram Sampark Yojana), the GoB funded
   program to provide road connectivity to habitations with population in the 250‐499 range in Project districts.
   It included:

   • Sub-Component 1.1: Civil works for rural roads. Civil works for about 2,500 km of rural roads, including
   standalone bridges. The road improvements would incorporate road safety measures and environmentally
   optimized and climate resilient road designs.

   • Sub-Component 1.2: Design, implementation, and management support. Supervision, quality monitoring,
   and preparation of cost-effective and climate resilient designs.

   • Sub-Component 1.3: Pilots on innovative bridge construction, retrofitting road safety and climate resilience
   measures in the existing rural road network (identified under 2.1 and 2.3).

   b. Component 2: Asset Management and Institutional Effectiveness (Allocation at approval: US$15
   million; Actual cost at completion: US$3 million). Support the Rural Works Department (RWD) to
   implement the Road Sector Modernization Plan (RSMP) through the following:

   • Sub-Component 2.1: Asset management. Implementation of the Asset Management Plan (AMP) and
   development of an Asset Management System (AMS); preparing plans for capital works and maintenance
   and development of a Geographic Information System (GIS) based road inventory and condition database;
   enhancing and expanding the use of maintenance contracts for 20 percent of the core network; climate
   vulnerability assessment for roads and bridges and development of mitigation plans; and introduction of
   improved, low-cost, innovative, environment friendly road and bridge designs to withstand flood related
   risks.

   • Sub-Component 2.2: Institutional effectiveness. Implementation of the existing Human Resource
   Professional Development strategy of RWD, which would include training of RWD staff & contractors;
   procurement of equipment for RWD labs, offices, and training facilities; digitalizing RWD business


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BRRP (P155522)



  processes; development of the long-term rural roads strategy; updating technical guidelines and manuals;
  and identifying measures to make the rural transport service in Bihar more effective.

  • Sub-Component 2.3: Road safety management. Training RWD staff, the local police and transport
  departments, designing road safety measures, undertaking road safety audits of priority roads, raising
  awareness among contractor staff, and development of the road safety module in AMS.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The actual total project cost was US$213,572,220. The project had five restructurings in its
  7-year implementation period with a total approved disbursement for the project at closing of
  US$147,972,220.

  The Project was restructured five times, as summarized below:

  a. Restructuring 1: September 22, 2020 – Cancellation of US$50 million from International Development
  Association (IDA) financing as part of the overall COVID-19 response strategy to make funds available
  immediately for pandemic response measures. The remaining funds were expected to be adequate to
  complete the remaining activities, given the exchange rate gains from the depreciation of the Indian Rupee
  against the United States Dollar and savings in the cost of civil works.

  b. Restructuring 2: March 21, 2022 – Cancellation of US$27 million from IDA financing and revisions to
  the project scope and indicators due to slow progress and low disbursements. The Project faced more than
  a three-year delay in implementing activities under Component 2 and reported little progress in activities
  under Sub-Component 1.3. The pandemic, and flash floods which occurred in several districts also
  contributed to the slow progress in Project activities. The restructuring was carried out to address these
  issues following the mid-term review (MTR). The scope of Sub-Component 1.1 was reduced from 2,500 km
  to 2,000 km, as it was estimated that only about 2,000 km of roads could be completed by the original credit
  closing, and Sub-Component 1.3 was dropped due to lack of sufficient time in the Project to complete the
  original scope. The activity to develop an AMS was dropped at the request of GoB that the AMS was no
  longer required as a state-wide rural road maintenance policy was introduced. Consequently, the target
  “Improved asset management ‐ number of districts that have developed and are using asset management
  system” was dropped. The removal of the key outcome target of introducing an AMS, which was the only
  substantial change made to Project outcomes, was replaced by a new target to pilot an Artificial Intelligence
  (AI) system to monitor performance on at least 100 km of project roads. The corresponding new indicator
  was defined as “Pilot Artificial Intelligence (AI) based system in districts within the state (number)” with a
  target of 1. These changes did not have a substantial impact on the original Theory of Change.

  c. Restructuring 3: December 21, 2022 – Extension of the credit closing date by six months from
  December 31, 2022, to June 30, 2023, to enable the completion of the remaining works.

  d. Restructuring 4: June 27, 2023 – Extension of the credit closing date by six months from June 30,
  2023, to December 31, 2023, to enable the completion of the remaining works and identification of potential
  savings for cancellation under the Project.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



   e. Restructuring 5: December 26, 2023 – Cancellation of US$5 million of savings from IDA
   financing.

   Financing. The World Bank financed US$147,972,220 with IDA credits.

   Borrower contribution. The Government of India, through the Bihar Rural Works Department, financed
   US$65,600,000.

   Dates. The project was approved on December 21, 2016, and became effective on August 31, 2017. The
   Mid-Term Review took place on January 29, 2021. The original closing date was December 31, 2022, and
   the actual closing date was December 31, 2023.

   A split rating is applied in the evaluation of project efficacy due to the reduction in scope and PDO targets
   related to the road connectivity and asset management under Restructuring 2.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at appraisal. At appraisal, Bihar was one of the faster growing low-income states in India, with 34
percent of its population living below the poverty line compared to a national average of 22 percent. About
90 percent of its population of 104 million was rural and about 76 percent of the population in north Bihar
was subject to the recurring threat of floods. Bihar’s potential for growth in agriculture and agro‐based
industries, tourism, handicrafts, and cottage industries was underutilized due to inadequate road
infrastructure and market linkages. About 60 percent of Bihar’s rural road network was unpaved and had
several deficiencies, such as missing links, dilapidated bridges or absence of bridges, inadequate
geometry, poor drainage, weak pavements, and missing road safety measures. The network had also
suffered severe damages due to floods, lack of maintenance, inadequate quality of initial construction, and
overloading in some parts of the state. Inefficient sector management was also identified as a key
challenge.

Relevance to Government Strategies. At appraisal, the Project was aligned with the objective to support
the Government of Bihar (GoB) in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): rural roads are
proven poverty reducers (Goal 1: Ending Poverty); enable flow of agriculture inputs and farm produce (Goal
2: Food Security and Sustainable Agriculture); allow quicker access to health care and education facilities,
specifically for women/girls (Goal 3: Health and well‐being, and Goal 4: Inclusive, Equitable and Quality
Education); facilitate mobility of labor and increase employment opportunities (Goal 8: sustainable and
inclusive economic growth and employment); and connect remote and inaccessible areas with economic
opportunities (Goal 10: Reduce Inequality). As part of GoB’s priority of “Road connectivity to each
habitation”, about 60,000 km of rural roads (50 percent of the total rural road network in the state) were
constructed in the preceding decade leading to 2016, providing road access to 51 percent of its habitations.
Several country and state level road development programs were in place to rehabilitate the remaining road
network and provide access to all habitations in the state. The key programs were: (i) Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), the Government of India (GOI) funded program to provide all‐weather road
access to all habitations with a population above 500; (ii) Mukhya Mantri Gram Sampark Yojana (MMGSY),
the GoB funded program to provide road connectivity to habitations with population in the 250‐499 range,

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       BRRP (P155522)



which were not covered under PMGSY; and (iii) Grameen Tola Sampark Nischaya Yojana (GTSNY), to
connect habitations with a population below 250. The GoB’s rural roads program was organized around
three key priorities: (i) Priority One: All‐weather-road access to the remaining 49 percent habitations, (ii)
Priority Two: Preserving existing road assets and upgrading them to acceptable standards, and (iii) Priority
Three: Improved institutional effectiveness.

At Project completion, the PDO is still aligned with the development priorities of the Government of India
(GoI). GoI’s Strategy for New India@75 notes that increasing the coverage and quality of roads and
highways is critical to enhance connectivity and internal and external trade. It identifies increasing
connectivity by expanding the road network, improving road maintenance and safety, skill development in
the road sector, and increasing emphasis on research and development as key priorities for the road
sector. Furthermore, MMGSY, which the Project supported, was launched in 2013 by GoB with the aim of
providing all-weather connectivity to rural habitations with population more than 250. This program was built
around the three key priorities above, which involved not only infrastructure improvement, but also
improving institutional efficiencies in the road sector.

Relevance to Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the Project was fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s
goal of reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity, and with India’s Country Partnership Strategy
2013‐2017 priority of supporting low‐income states and its three themes: integration, transformation, and
inclusion. The project would better integrate the rural population, businesses and industries in Bihar’s
remote and poorer districts with the national and state economy through better transport connectivity, as
well as through improved integration with the strategic transport corridors passing through Bihar. Improved
road access would have a transformational impact on rural poverty through its effect on improved
agricultural productivity, higher non‐farm employment opportunities and increased rural wages. It would
facilitate better inclusion of the poorer and marginalized communities in the growth process through better
access to markets, jobs, growth opportunities, and services. The World Bank had been engaged with
PMGSY since its inception, through dialogue, technical assistance (TA), and a series of lending operations.

At completion, the PDO is still aligned with the priorities identified in the World Bank’s India Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY18 – FY222. The PDO directly contributes to the achievement of
Objectives 1.1 and 2.3 under Focus Areas 1 and 2 of the CPF: Objective 1.1 – promote more resource-
efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector; and Objective 2.3 – improve connectivity and
logistics. Objective 2.3 specifically highlights the Bank’s commitment to support climate and disaster
resilient roads. The PDO is also consistent with the Bank’s engagement approach of strengthening public
sector institutions through increasing their capability and strengthening core government systems.

This objective was pitched at an appropriate level of ambition and is clearly aligned with the Government of
India and Bihar's priorities of improving rural connectivity and institutional efficiencies in the road sector, as
well as with the World Bank’s strategies.

Based on the above rationale, the relevance of the PDOs is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                        Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  BRRP (P155522)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               PDO 1 - Improve rural road connectivity in project districts - Original Project

               Rationale
               The Theory of Change for PDO1 was that the activities to (i) build 2,500 km of rural roads, including
               standalone bridges, (ii) provide design, implementation and management support, and (iii) implement pilots
               on innovative bridge construction, retrofitting road safety and climate resilience measures in existing rural
               road network, would have the following outputs: (i) 2,500 km of rural roads constructed, (ii) cost-effective and
               climate resilient road design adopted, and (iii) selected bridges constructed using innovative methods,
               selected roads retrofitted with road safety and climate resilience measures. In terms of outcome, these
               outputs were to result in increased all-weather road connectivity to habitations.

               The Theory of Change for PDO2 was that the activities to (i) implement an asset management program
               through development of an Asset Management System (AMS), (ii) implement maintenance contracts for 20%
               of the core network, carry out a climate vulnerability assessment, and develop low-cost, innovative
               environmentally friendly road and bridge designs, (iii) improve institutional effectiveness through
               implementation of the Human Resources strategy, digitalizing, long-term rural roads strategy, updating
               technical guidelines, and identifying measures to improve rural transport, and (iv) improve road safety
               management through training, designing road safety measures, undertaking road safety audits, development
               of road safety module in AMS, would have the following outputs: (i) AMS operationalized, GIS-based road
               inventory and condition database developed, maintenance contracts adopted for 20% of the core network,
               network level climate vulnerability assessment undertaken, (ii) RWD staff trained on latest industry practices,
               RWD business processes fully digitalized, technical guidelines developed, and (iii) RWD staff trained on road
               safety practices, and road safety audits conducted on priority roads. In terms of outcome, these outputs were
               to result in (i) improved road assets management, (ii) improved road safety, (iii) improved effectiveness of
               project expenditures by using cost-effective measures in road design, and (iv) improved RWD capacity to
               manage the road network.

               For both PDOs taken together, the longer-term outcomes would then include (i) better integration of the rural
               population, business and industries in Bihar’s remote and poorer districts with the national and state economy
               through better transport connectivity, as well as through improved integration with the strategic transport
               corridors passing through Bihar, (ii) reduced rural poverty through improved access for better agricultural
               productivity, higher non-farm employment opportunities, and increased rural wages, (iii) better inclusion of the
               poorer and marginalized communities through better access to markets, jobs, growth opportunities and
               services, and (iv) efficient and resilient management of the road network.

               The critical assumptions were: (i) political commitment to implement institutional reforms under Component 2,
               and (ii) availability of adequate resources for infrastructure development.




                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BRRP (P155522)



Based on this logical sequence, it is indeed plausible that the effective implementation of outputs will lead to
the achievement of the desired outcomes, and potentially of the anticipated longer-term outcomes further
down the road.

Outputs

The Project rehabilitated 2200kms of rural roads in Bihar falling short of the target of 2500kms.

Project roads delivered with satisfactory quality certified through independent quality reviews was 85% and
met the target.

All project contracts included provisions for five-year routine maintenance to ensure uninterrupted
connectivity. On completion of the five-year routine maintenance period, these roads will then be maintained
under the GoB funded performance-based maintenance contracts as per GoB’s Rural Roads Maintenance
Policy.

Outcomes

The project improved the connectivity of 61,476 habitations compared to the target of 62,000.

The project directly benefited 838,240 people, falling short of the target of 1,200,000 people.

The ICR further provides additional outcomes but without supporting evidence. It notes that public
consultations revealed that the roads now provide local farmers improved direct access to markets, which
helps them to bypass intermediaries and thereby reduce costs. The improved quality of the road pavements
also ensures uninterrupted access to critical social services, such as health care and schools, which was
earlier restricted during the rainy season as the roads became either muddy or were damaged. The improved
roads have increased school attendance of students (of female students in particular) in some areas and
have improved access to healthcare facilities due to the availability of different transport modes (e.g.,
ambulances, private vehicles). Also, the practice of adding five-year routine maintenance provisions to road
rehabilitation contracts, which is supported by a state level policy, will help the long-term sustainability of the
road network, as well as reduce the fiscal impact of road rehabilitation costs to the state in the long run.
However, it remains worth underscoring that a more systematic approach is required for the prioritization of
roads for maintenance, based on road condition and other technical criteria, as opposed to a blanket time-
based maintenance policy.

Achievement of PDO indicators. The Project substantially achieved PDO indicator 1.1 (Increased road
connectivity to habitations). However, the Project did not achieve the original targets for the length of roads
and the number of beneficiaries. Considering the above, the achievement of PDO 1 is rated as Substantial
with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BRRP (P155522)




Revised Objective
PDO 1 - Improve rural road connectivity in project districts - Restructured Project

Revised Rationale
The original objective remained the same, only the project scope was reduced. The rationale is unchanged.

Achievement of PDO indicators.

The project improved the connectivity of 61,476 habitations exceeding the target of 61,200.

The project directly benefited 838,240 people, exceeding the revised target of 7,44,499 people.

Since the project exceeded the revised targets, the achievement of PDO 1 is therefore rated “High”.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2 - Enhance management of roads in Bihar. Original Project

Rationale
Theory of Change - The combined theory of change is described under Objective 1.

Outputs

415 RWD staff were trained on road management compared to the original target of 400. However, the ICR
notes that the structured approach to strengthening institutional capacities through the adoption of the Human
Resources Professional Development Strategy did not materialize as envisioned by the Project, which could
weaken the impact of these training activities in the long run.

A network level climate vulnerability assessment was carried out under the Project for 500 km of rural roads
(falling short of the target of 2000kms) in 10 flood prone districts to identify the climate vulnerability of each
road section based on the exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity of each road to the projected climate
hazards for the period 2020-2039. The recommendations of the assessment are yet to be implemented but
are being considered by RWD.

A Rural Road Safety Action Plan was developed identifying interventions required to improve road safety. The
project also developed Road Safety Audit Checklists for different stages of road works in line with the Rural
Road Safety Manual 2016 and the Manual on Road Safety Audit and provided training to DPR consultants on
incorporating road safety measures in DPRs.

GIS based road and bridge inventory and condition database (including videography) established in project
districts - Target 50%. This indicator was not achieved and dropped.


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BRRP (P155522)



Length of roads subject to planned maintenance contracting - the actual was 45,000kms compared to target
of 10,000 kms.

Road Safety improvement scheme related audits undertaken on priority roads (Km). The actual achievement
was only 204 kms compared to a target of 2000kms (10% achieved)

Outcomes

Number of districts that have developed and are using asset management system - The original target was
10 and this was dropped. It was replaced by an indicator on Pilot AI based system in districts within the state

The project introduced two innovative road paving methods to reduce costs: (i) use of waste plastic in flexible
pavements; and (ii) use of panel concrete in rigid pavements. The innovative road paving methods, was used
in 52% percent of the roads improved under the Project (exceeding the target of 50%), and saved around
US$4.8 million (INR40.34 crores or approximately about 2 percent of the total cost) in road rehabilitation
costs. The ICR notes that this is now also being used in the MMGSY program.

Achievement of PDO indicators. The Project met the targets of introducing cost efficiencies in road
improvement through innovative practices, and the number of RWD staff receiving training exceeded the
original target. The network level vulnerability assessment was substantially underachieved. The Project did
not implement the AMS, which was a key institutional improvement envisaged under the Project. Considering
the above, the achievement of PDO 2 is rated “Modest”.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 2 - Enhance management of roads in Bihar. Restructured Project

Revised Rationale
The original objective remained the same, only the project scope was reduced. The rationale is unchanged.

Outputs

A network level climate vulnerability assessment was carried out under the Project for 500 km of rural roads
(meeting the target of 500kms) in 10 flood prone districts. Even though the project achieved the reduced
targets for completing network level vulnerability assessments, the corresponding recommendations are yet
to be implemented.

Outcome

The AMP developed under the Project helped RWD identify the levels of service to be maintained for each
road asset.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BRRP (P155522)



                              The original indicator on number of districts that have developed and are using asset management system
                              (target of 10) was dropped and replaced by an indicator on Pilot AI based system in districts within the state.
                              Compared to the original Project, the AMS was dropped due to the state’s maintenance policy and the
                              introduction of the AI tool which was expected to support RWD’s asset management practices. While the
                              indicator was achieved, it was funded by the state and cannot be attributed to the project. The tool enables
                              RWD to capture and digitally record road conditions and take measures to rectify defects. However, the tool
                              falls short of a comprehensive AMS since it only captures road condition data and does not consider other
                              important criteria required for asset management such as traffic and crash data, connectivity, road structures
                              etc. Also, while the state’s maintenance policy is actually being implemented, it only prescribes a basis for
                              budget allocations for maintenance on a time-based methodology without considering a broader range of
                              road conditions and key technical criteria to systematically prioritize road investments. Thus, the Project’s
                              expected outcomes on this topic were not fully realized.

                              The achievement of PDO 2 is therefore rated “Modest”.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For the Original Project, the achievements of PDO 1 is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings and of
                            PDO2 is rated weak Modest. Consequently, the efficacy of the Original Project is rated Modest.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            For the Restructured Project, the achievements of PDO 1 is rated High and of PDO2 is rated
                            Modest. Consequently, the efficacy of the Restructured Project is rated Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BRRP (P155522)




5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

At appraisal, economic analysis was carried out for the project with the coverage of 2,500 km with flexible
pavement improvement option within the roads. The primary benefits considered for the economic analysis
included: (a) reduction in vehicle operating costs (VOCs) and travel time savings for vehicle users and (b)
reduction in carbon emissions from vehicles using the improved roads. Based on estimates of economic costs
and benefits over a period of 20 years, including 4 years of implementation, the economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of the project was 15.1 percent.

At completion, economic evaluation was carried out for completed upgrading of gravel roads to paved roads
with necessary cross-drainage works covering 2,200 km length. The results of the economic analysis conducted
are based on: (i) final completion costs, (ii) implementation period; and (iii) observed traffic growth rate during
the implementation period. The ex-post economic analysis found that the Project remained economically viable
at completion, with an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) slightly above the rate at appraisal, the rate at
completion being 15.9 percent. The Net Present Value (NPV) discounted at 6 percent is positive for the project.
Reduction in per km cost of road improvements was a key driver of efficiency of the Project. As discussed in the
efficacy section the low-cost paving methods introduced in the Project led to substantial cost savings. This also
enabled the Project to improve around 200km of additional roads beyond the expected target of 2000km at
Restructuring 2, despite the cancellation of US$27 million from the credit. Around US$5 million of funds
remained unutilized at the end of the Project and were duly cancelled.

Cost Effectiveness, Administrative and Operational Efficiency

Project activities took 12 months longer to complete than the originally expected timeline, despite the reductions
in scope. The Project closing date was extended twice to enable the completion of civil works that were delayed
as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, flash floods, and the procurement delays during early years of
implementation. Initiation of activities under Component 2 was delayed by over three years, due to capacity
constraints, staff turnovers and prioritization of civil works. However, the end-of-project EIRR of 15.9 percent
indicates that the completed project is still economically viable with decreased construction cost, despite lower
traffic growth and project coverage, and longer implementation period.

Even though the Project faced some implementation delays, considering the economic benefits created and the
substantial cost efficiencies generated, efficiency of the Project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BRRP (P155522)



                                                                                      100.00
Appraisal                                                  15.10
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      100.00
ICR Estimate                                               15.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's relevance of objectives is rated High. The efficacy of the original Project is rated Modest, whereas
the efficacy of the restructured Project is rated Substantial. The project’s efficiency is rated Substantial. Based
on these findings, the outcome of the original Project is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory, while the outcome of
the restructured Project is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

The overall outcome rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory based on the split evaluation below.

                                                 Original                         Revised
Relevance of PDO                                 High
Efficacy of PDO                                  Modest                           Substantial
PDO 1 - Improved rural road connectivity         Substantial                      High
PDO 2 - Enhanced management of roads             Modest                           Modest
Efficiency                                       Substantial
1 Outcome ratings                                Moderately Unsatisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory
2 Numerical value of the outcome ratings*        3                                4
3 Disbursement (US$ million)                     101.26                           46.64
4 Share of disbursement (Percent)                68.5%                            31.5%
5 Weighted value of the outcome rating (2*4)     2.06                             1.26
                                                 Moderately Unsatisfactory
6 Final Outcome rating
                                                 (2.06+1.26=3.32 rounding to 3)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

It appears possible that the development outcomes of the Project be sustained, although there are some
significant risks. On the positive side, GoB’s commitment to carrying forward the key infrastructure and
operational improvements supported by the Project is demonstrated by the following: (i) the plan to expand
the AI maintenance system to the entire network, potentially with more features on asset management; (ii)
the introduction of the Bihar Rural Roads Maintenance Policy in 2018 mandating performance-based
maintenance for roads completing five-year routine maintenance; (iii) the state policy on Road Safety, which
mandates road safety audits for every road section that is longer than five kms; and (iv) the adoption of
innovative, low cost pavement methods in the state’s MMGSY program. However, on the negative side, the


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BRRP (P155522)



fact remains that at this point the AI maintenance system remains much less comprehensive than the full-
fledged AMS the Project initially considered, with no clear visibility on future developments. Another key risk
to the sustainability of these outcomes stems from the low institutional capacity in the road sector agencies in
terms of staffing and skills. Further strengthening the skills and the staffing in these agencies will be critical to
sustain these outcomes and further enhance road sector management in the state.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was strategically relevant and government commitment was secured at entry. The Project
  built on the ongoing activities in the state under the GoB’s broader MMGSY program and existing sector
  development plans, with an aim to bring in value from the Bank’s experience in the sector in India and
  globally as well as in the country. The development objectives were strategically aligned with the sector
  requirements and the government’s development plans. The key plans for asset management, human
  resource development and road safety improvement were developed and approved by GoB during
  preparation.

  Risks were adequately identified; however, the mitigation measures were not sufficient. The Project
  identified technical design and institutional capacity as substantial risks. Although mitigation measures
  were put in place to address staffing gaps through the engagement of a Project Management Consultant
  (PMC) and technical skills through capacity enhancements provided by local and international experts,
  they were not adequate. The capacity of the construction industry was adequately assessed as being
  less developed. The Project would have benefitted from including targeted capacity enhancement
  activities in the design and with better contract packaging (i.e., larger package sizes) to make contract
  management more efficient.

  Capacity enhancement of implementing agencies was given adequate consideration during preparation,
  including workshops and trainings by international experts on innovative technologies and on the use of
  local materials in rural road construction, support from consultants on the rehabilitation of bridges, and
  study tours to Japan and UK on climate resilience and disaster risk management in the road sector. A
  procurement capacity assessment was carried out and the required trainings were provided at appraisal.
  Also, an institutional assessment was carried out to inform the activities under Component 2 of the
  Project. The study identified actions required to improve business practices of the implementing agency
  in areas such as planning and project preparation, funding, procurement, and project monitoring. It also
  assessed the Online Management, Monitoring and Accounting System (OMMAS) used by the Bihar Rural
  Roads Development Agency (BRRDA) and provided recommendations to further improve the system.

  Owing to the fact that the limited adequacy of the institutional risk mitigation measures proved critical
  when delivering Component 2 of the Project, the Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

                                                                                                         Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)




b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation support was provided through regular missions, support from technical consultants, and
 workshops/trainings. The Bank supported project implementation through eight missions, complemented
 by technical visits and virtual discussions. The Bank provided substantial support to improve the quality of
 the DPRs for the road packages. Procurement support was provided to familiarize the implementing
 agency with the Bank’s procurement procedures and handholding support was provided to the
 implementing agencies on safeguards management. Furthermore, efforts were made by the Bank to
 introduce and mainstream the concepts and good practices of asset management in the road sector and to
 retain the original activities around asset management to ensure the achievement of the expected
 development outcome. Overall, implementation and disbursement progress was closely monitored, issues
 were candidly discussed and agreed actions were closely followed up. Close monitoring of the
 achievement of results and disbursements appropriately informed the cancellations and restructurings. The
 Bank team consisted of a mix of staff and consultants based in the country office, in Washington, and in the
 region. This enabled close follow-up and quick response to implementation challenges.

 However, the Bank could have been more proactive in addressing the long implementation delays in
 Component 2. The long delay in Component 2 implementation largely stemmed from inadequate capacity
 and a lack of strong commitment/ownership from the implementing agency which resulted in prioritization
 of civil works. While increased efforts by the Bank to provide more support through technical consultants
 and close follow-ups helped expedite implementation in the latter part of the Project, the Bank could have
 been more proactive in providing more support to the implementing agency at an earlier stage or to
 restructure the Project earlier to change the scope as appropriate.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The retrofitted Theory of Change developed at the second restructuring clearly identifies the Project’s
 causal chain to achieve expected outcomes and the indicators are mostly relevant to the scope with some
 gaps. The indicators introduced in the original project are well defined, the baselines were clearly identified,
 and the targets were clearly defined. The methodologies for monitoring and data collection were simple and
 utilized the existing Management Information System (MIS) of the RWD. Responsibilities for reporting on
 progress towards achieving indicator targets were clearly identified. However, the indicators displayed the
 following weaknesses: (i) measurability: the PDO indicator “Roads in good and fair condition as a share of
 total classified roads” was difficult to measure due to the difficulties in collecting data given the different

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



 institutions responsible for managing roads in Bihar and challenged in defining the applicable geographical
 area; (ii) attributability: the above PDO indicator and the intermediate indicator “Length of roads subject to
 planned maintenance contracting” were defined to consider roads in the entire state, while the project was
 only implemented in selected road sections; and (iii) assessing Project impact: the M&E design included
 indicators that adequately captures achievement of PDO 1, but the Project would have benefited by
 including a beneficiary satisfaction indicator to assess the impact of the improved roads based on
 beneficiary feedback. The original and post-restructuring PDO indicators to assess PDO 2 were output
 oriented and did not adequately capture impacts envisioned by PDO 2: (i) the original PDO indicator
 “Improved asset management” measured the number of districts that had developed and were using an
 asset management system, while the PDO indicator introduced at the second restructuring “Pilot AI based
 system in districts within the state” assessed the number of districts, and not their impact; and (ii) the PDO
 indicator “Improved effectiveness of project expenditures” assessed the percentage of Project roads
 designed using cost‐effective measures, but not cost savings.



b. M&E Implementation
  Progress in achieving indicator targets was reported through quarterly progress reports submitted by
  RWD and progress reviews during missions. The Management Information System of the RWD was
  utilized for reporting on progress, as envisioned; however, quarterly progress reports were not provided
  regularly. An excel sheet-based monitoring mechanism was used to monitor progress of civil works and
  disbursements. The RWD submitted the Mid-Term Review (MTR) report with a detailed review of the
  progress of Component 1 and status of activities under Component 2.

  There were some deficiencies in the reporting of a few indicators. The intermediate indicator “Road
  Safety improvement scheme related audits undertaken on priority roads” was reported on state roads
  where safety audits were carried out, rather than on project roads. The intermediate indicator “Improved
  quality of built Infrastructure ‐ Project roads delivered with satisfactory quality certified through
  independent quality reviews” was measured through the state’s own quality monitoring system, rather
  than through independent reviews. However, a separate technical audit was later carried out to assess
  the quality of road works under the first batch of contracts.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data were utilized to inform Project progress monitoring, and in determining the changes
  needed to the scope, as part of the various restructurings. These included the savings in the credit to be
  addressed through cancellations, extensions to the credit closing date to complete the project and
  changes to the scope of Component 2.1 on asset management.

  Based on the above discussion of M&E Design, Implementation and Utilization, which delineated the
  shortcomings in some of the outcome indicators and reporting deficiencies, the overall quality of M&E is
  rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)




10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The Project was classified as Category B and triggered the
   following Bank safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11); Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Safeguards
   management was guided by the Environmental Management Framework (EMF), Environmental Codes of
   Practices (ECoPs), Social Management Framework (SMF), and a Vulnerability Framework (VF), which were
   prepared and disclosed by the Project.

   The Project reported several shortcomings in environmental management during the first half of
   implementation: (i) delays in reporting environmental screening data for the roads; (ii) inadequate
   monitoring and reporting of implementation of environmental management aspects; (iii) capacity constraints
   in managing environmental safeguards. These issues were addressed in the latter half of the Project and
   the management and compliance of environmental safeguards improved with the mobilization of an
   environmental safeguards specialist to the Project.

   The Project did not involve any land acquisition or involuntary resettlement. Social risks and adverse
   impacts were largely temporary, site-specific, and manageable through the instruments developed during
   preparation. However, safeguards management remained weak during the first half of the Project due to the
   lack of adequately skilled and experienced staff. The hiring of a firm to support E&S activities helped
   improve safeguards management in the latter half of the Project. The Project reported instances of OP 4.12
   non-compliance in two sub-projects; road alignments (culverts and small bridges) in these two sub-projects
   inadvertently passed through small linear parcels of private land. These were addressed by the Project
   under the guidance of the Bank, through consultations with villagers and subsequent changes in alignments
   to avoid encroachment on private lands. The Project also faced issues in reporting on grievances in the
   early stages, which were later resolved following the introduction of Janta Darbars.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The Project complied with the Bank’s Financial Management (FM) guidelines and procedures. The FM
   performance ratings were mostly Moderately Satisfactory during project implementation. Annual project
   budgets were adequately and timely provided by GoB and there were no substantial delays in the flow of
   funds. Bihar Rural Road Development Agency (BRRDA), through which RWD implemented the Project,
   used a computerized accounting software to account for project expenditures and submitted Interim
   Financial reports (IFRs) regularly. BRRDA engaged a consultant under the project to operationalize a
   newer version of the accounting software in all district PIUs to efficiently manage FM functions, including
   timely consolidation of accounts and preparation of year-end entity financial statements. This activity could
   not be completed during the project period, and BRRDA has agreed to utilize GoB funds to complete this
   activity after project closure. There were delays in conducting internal audits of the project due to delays in
   the appointment of internal auditors. The Project external audits were submitted to the Bank within the due
   date of December 31 every year. The audit opinions were ‘unmodified’ and no significant accountability or
   internal control issues were noted by the auditor. The external audit report for the final year of the Project


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



   (i.e., FY23-24 for the period April 01, 2023, to December 31, 2023) is required to be submitted by BRRDA
   to the Bank by December 31, 2024.

   Procurement under the Project consisted mainly of civil works, with a few consultancies and a small
   number of goods/non-consultancy services contracts. A Procurement Plan was created in STEP and was
   updated regularly. Bank procedures were duly followed, and Bank documents were used for all
   procurements. At times there were delays in procurement and there were some cases of rebidding;
   however, almost all planned procurements were completed during the first three years of the Project.
   There was a delay in the completion of most civil work contracts due to the COVID-19 pandemic; however,
   all packages were completed during the extended project period. There were some delays in updating
   STEP because of the numerous implementing offices in the state. Overall, the Project managed
   procurements in line with Bank systems and procedures.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately           Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                    Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Strengthening institutions requires long term engagement and strong government
commitment, and thus, a programmatic approach may be better suited for such projects. The
lack of strong commitment from the implementing agencies along with changing political priorities
can also hinder the process; this often leads to prioritizing infrastructure improvement, which are
more straightforward, over institutional improvements that can be time consuming to implement and
often requires strong ownerships and champions to execute. A programmatic approach, which goes
beyond a typical project lifecycle, could help maintain continuous consultations and engagement
with the government agencies to sensitize them to the benefits of institutional improvements and to
build strong commitment over time to implement them.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BRRP (P155522)



Strong and flexible Bank support is required where the implementing agency and the sector
has significant capacity gaps. The flexibility in the level of Bank support in response to emerging
capacity shortfalls proves important for the successful implementation of Project activities. In
instances where significant capacity gaps are identified in the implementing agencies, such support
can be built into the Project design at the beginning and options such as Hands-on Expanded
Implementation Support (HEIS) can be explored for both procurement and technical support.

Innovative road rehabilitation methods can bring benefits, but their sustainability need to be
monitored over time. In particular, they need to be supported by a comprehensive Assets
Management System to ensure that local climatic conditions are properly factored in lifecycle costs,
including routine and periodic maintenance.

Building trust through close consultations with communities can improve efficiencies in
project implementation. As demonstrated by the experiences from the Janata Durbars initiative, it
is clear that regular consultations with project communities play a key role in fostering trust towards
the project and the implementing agencies. Engaging community members in project activities,
promptly addressing their feedback and concerns, and incorporating their suggestions are essential
strategies that not only build trust but also facilitate smoother and more efficient project
implementation. Such participatory approaches can be integrated into the design of future projects to
enhance their effectiveness and community acceptance.

The adequacy and appropriateness of technology should be assessed against the specific
contexts and environments in which it is used. A key lesson from the Project’s experience with
the use of an app to record grievances is that when technology is used, particularly involving
communities with poor literacy and inadequate access to technological devices, it is important to
ensure that (i) the technology used is tailored to address the specific requirements of the users, (ii)
users are aware and educated in how to use the technological solution, and (iii) the appropriateness
of the use of technology is assessed in the specific context. As was evident from the Project’s
experience with Janta Darbars which promoted more person-person interaction, at times, more
human-oriented solutions can create better results compared to technological solutions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is largely in line with the ICR guidelines. It is well-written and internally consistent. It contains detailed
descriptions of the project context, implementation, and achievements. The theory of change is logically
presented, and the document is clearly results-oriented. The ICR adequately reports on the achievement of the
targets and provides additional information on project impacts.




                                                                                                        Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BRRP (P155522)



In particular, the ICR is candid about the shortcomings of both the Borrower and the Bank during the first years
of implementation, which led to the reduction in project scope for both the infrastructure and the institutional
development components, and ultimately resulted in a mid-range outcome rating.

The ICR provides adequate information on the project’s fiduciary compliance and performance.

The lessons are important, based on evidence, and include valuable forward-looking pointers.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
