     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



                                                                                   Report Number : ICRR0024196

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Program Name
 P164686                                      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                    Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88840,TF-A7565,TF-C0907                 30-Apr-2022                                        422,436,578.64

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Jun-2018                                  30-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             420,000,000.00                                   24,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              423,000,000.00                                   22,436,578.64

 Actual                                          422,589,798.48                                   22,436,578.64




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Janice R. Meerman            Salim J. Habayeb              Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program's objective, as stated in the Financing Agreement (p.6) and the Program Appraisal Document
   (PAD, p.16), was "to increase the simultaneous utilization of nutrition interventions by 1,000‐day households
   in priority districts.” Per both the PAD (p.17) and the ICR (p.13), “simultaneous utilization” referred to the
   concurrent delivery of multiple nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions to the same priority
   households.



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



   The Program underwent five restructurings during implementation which affected the targets of the first and
   second PDO indicators. The target for the first PDO indicator (“Public commitments of Priority District leaders
   to accelerate stunting prevention”) was revised upwards to include more districts than originally planned, the
   second, (“Priority Districts implementation of locally adapted interpersonal communication (IPC) activities”),
   was reduced. But since both original and revised outcome targets were exceeded, a split rating would be
   inconsequential for deriving the overall efficacy and outcome ratings, and is therefore not applied.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (INEY) was designed to support the government’s national strategy to
   accelerate stunting reduction. Commonly referred to as “NatStrat Stunting” or “NatStrat”, this government
   strategy was developed with support from the Bank and aims to i) strengthen the quality of multisectoral
   nutrition interventions in relevant sectors (health; water and sanitation (WASH); early childhood education;
   social protection; and food security) and ii) coordinate delivery of those interventions at community and
   household level. As such, NatStrat is predicated on a “convergence approach” which requires multiple
   sectors to jointly target priority geographical areas and beneficiaries, thus providing concurrent access to
   the full spectrum of nutrition specific and nutrition sensitive interventions required for stunting reduction.

   NatStrat was initiated in 2018, and INEY was designed to support it from its outset, primarily by providing
   incentives for quality improvement and convergence. Four Results Areas (RAs) were designated to achieve
   these goals at national, district and village level, as follows:

         RA1 - Strengthening national leadership supported coordination, accountability and learning
          mechanisms at central level. Activities included i) Annual Stunting Summits to secure annual
          commitments by subnational leaders (district heads and mayors), ii) guidelines for and
          implementation of National Expenditure Tagging and Performance Reviews for improved monitoring
          and evaluation of national spending on nutrition interventions, and iii) introduction of an annually
          conducted anthropometric survey module in the National Semiannual Socioeconomic Survey.
         RA2 - Strengthening delivery of national sector programs supported increasing the nutrition
          sensitivity of key sector programs. Activities included i) reform of the national Early Childhood
          Education and Development (ECED) curriculum to include a nutrition module, and rollout of a
          professional development program in Priority Districts to improve ECED counseling services; ii)
          widening the scope of the national food assistance program (BPNT) to include more nutrient dense
          foods and increase the number of BPNT distribution kiosks in Priority Districts; iii) launch of a
          national Behavior Change Communication (BCC)/ Interpersonal Communication (IPC) Strategy in
          conjunction with capacity building initiatives at district and sub-district level to encourage the design
          and delivery of locally adapted BCC activities.

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



      RA3 - Strengthening convergence of district activities supported management and
       implementation of nutrition activities at the district level, with a focus on overcoming fragmentation
       and unpredictability in financing and increasing alignment of district development plans and budgets
       with NatStrat Stunting objectives. Activities included i) fiscal transfer reform at central level in
       conjunction with assistance to districts on applying for special allocation funds (DAK) to support
       prioritized nutrition interventions, ii) issuance of guidelines on district convergence to clarify local
       governments' roles, and iii) introduction of an annual performance assessment exercise to evaluate
       district implementation of convergence programs and to encourage evidence- and results-based
       budgeting.
      RA4 - Converging village service delivery supported concurrent delivery of nutrition-specific and
       nutrition-sensitive interventions to households with children under two. Activities included i) social
       mapping to identify eligible households, ii) deployment of Multisectoral Human Development
       Workers (HDWs) to support village governments in implementing and monitoring priority nutrition
       interventions across health, education, social protection, and WASH, and iii) introduction of Village
       Convergence Scorecards and child growth mats to track performance and facilitate community-
       based growth monitoring.

INEY consisted of a Program for Results (PforR) component linking Program funds directly to the
achievement of activities, outputs, and intermediate outcomes, in line with the RAs described above, and an
Investment Project Financing (IPF) component for specific expenditures designed to strengthen government
capacity to monitor, coordinate and implement NatStrat Stunting.

With respect to the main PforR, periodic disbursements were triggered by achievement of the following
disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs):

RA1 - Strengthening national leadership
DLI 1: Public commitment of priority district leaders to accelerate stunting prevention
DLI 2: Tracking and performance evaluation of national spending on priority nutrition interventions
DLI 3: Timely publication of annual national and district stunting rates

RA2 - Strengthening delivery of national sector programs
DLI 4: Priority districts delivery of nutrition‐sensitive professional development program for ECED teachers
DLI 5: Nutrition‐sensitivity of the food assistance program
DLI 6: Priority districts implementation of locally adapted IPC activities

RA3 - Strengthening convergence of district activities
DLI 7: Predictability and results orientation of fiscal transfers that support convergence
DLI 8: Performance of districts in targeting priority nutrition interventions to 1,000‐day households

RA4 - Converging village service delivery
DLI 9: Villages empowered to identify 1,000‐day households and converge intervention delivery
DLI 10: Village convergence of nutrition interventions on 1,000‐day households

Per the PAD (p. 37), these DLIs were based on the goals of i) ensuring that government at all levels had the
systems, data, and tools to address management challenges undermining efforts to reduce stunting, and ii)
improving the delivery and convergence of priority nutrition interventions. They were designed to be
interlinked and phased such that achievements in the Program’s third and fourth years were dependent
upon establishment of systems, processes, and procedures in the start-up phase. In terms of verification, a

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 26
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



detailed annual protocol was jointly endorsed by the Secretariat of the Vice President (SoVP) and the World
Bank, with the BPKP serving as designated verification agent (VA).

With respect to the IPF, financing was initially decomposed into support for national leadership, and support
at district level, as follows:

IPF1: Institutional Strengthening for National Leadership and Delivery (US$16 million at Appraisal, of
which US$ 1.5 million was re-allocated to IPF2 under the second restructuring) This component consisted
of three subcomponents.

      Subcomponent 1A: Strengthen Coordination, Nutrition Program Delivery Monitoring and
       Debottlenecking Capacity of the Secretariat of the Vice President (SoVP)/ National Team for
       Accelerating Poverty Reduction. This IPF subcomponent aimed to support the leadership capacity
       of SoVP, which served as the national-level lead agency for INEY, hosting the PIU and annual
       Stunting Summits. Activities included i) establishment of a communication and advocacy team to
       support a national awareness campaign and subnational advocacy, ii) strengthening government
       performance monitoring and verification systems, including via establishment of a results monitoring
       team, a centralized monitoring dashboard, and introduction of regular performance reviews,(iii)
       establishment of an evaluation and innovation team to conduct implementation research to facilitate
       course correction and evaluation studies to evaluate impact and effectiveness; and (iv) conducting
       pilots and testing innovations on new interventions, including the strengthening of integrated data
       systems and the enhancement of public-private partnership in nutrition service delivery.
      Subcomponent 1B: Strengthen Capacity of Implementation Agencies. This IPF subcomponent
       aimed to strengthen the capacity of line ministries implementing the Program – Ministry of Health
       (MoH), Ministry of Education (MoEC), Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA), Ministry of Villages,
       Disadvantaged Areas and Transmigration (MoV) and Ministry of Finance (MoF)—as well as other
       line ministries implementing NatStrat Stunting. Activities included support to (i) MoH on improving
       the quality of cascade training and incorporating the use of an ICT‐based platform for the BCC/IPC
       Strategy (ii) MoSA in improving the nutrition‐sensitivity of the BNPT by improving the mix of foods
       offered, targeting methods, and monitoring systems; (iii) MoEC to improve the quality of training and
       nutrition content for ECED frontline services; (iv) MoV to support HDWs and to facilitate Village
       Allocation Fund (Dana Desa) spending on ECED training; and (v) overall implementation support for
       NatStrat program delivery as identified and agreed by the Program Steering Committee
      Subcomponent 1C: Strengthen Results‐based Synchronized Planning, Budgeting and
       Technical Convening. This IPF subcomponent aimed to support the National Development
       Planning Agency (Bappenas) and MoF to implement synchronized planning and budgeting.
       Activities included (i) improving the quality of the DAK reporting systems by standardizing categories
       of activities and strengthening the Collaborative Planning and Budget Performance Information
       system; (ii) building capacity to conduct performance expenditure reviews; (iii) strengthening district
       performance assessment systems in collaboration with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA); (iv)
       strengthening the Scaling Up Nutrition Secretariat’s technical convening role in collaboration with
       SoVP; (v) ratifying the BCC/IPC Strategy in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and other
       relevant implementing agencies; (vi) commissioning technical reviews of programs and policies
       related to NatStrat and maternal and child health more broadly, in collaboration with SoVP; and (vii)
       supporting learning and knowledge sharing as the integrated programs are being scaled up.

IPF2: Strengthen Capacity for District Convergence (US$4 million allocated at Appraisal; US$5.5
Actual. This component, to be delivered by MoHA via a provincial level Technical Assistance Pool, aimed to

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



  (i) strengthen the capacity of provincial and district governments to diagnose local drivers of stunting,
  develop local solutions, and converge priority nutrition intervention delivery at district level; (ii) providing
  technical assistance to subdistrict and village levels in utilizing Dana Desa funds for stunting reduction; (iii)
  strengthen the capacity of MoHA to develop performance benchmarking for convergence programs across
  districts; and (iv) facilitate peer‐to‐peer learning and sharing of best practices across districts.

  As above, INAY was restructured five times during implementation, with most revisions attributable to
  financial and operational hurdles created by COVID-19 and modifications to NatStrat itself (see “Dates”,
  below). Although none of the restructurings resulted in changes to the PDO or Theory of Change, two
  alternations were made to PDO-level indicators, as above, and DLIs for intermediate outcomes were
  adjusted (see “Dates”, below). With respect to any actual changes to Components, an IPF sub-component
  on “Strengthening Capacity for Village Convergence” was added during the second restructuring. This
  revision reallocated funding for direct dispersal by the MoV, who was added as an Implementing Agent to
  the Grant Agreement. The rationale was to increase frontline support to villages via introduction of “e-HDW”,
  a digital application designed to assist HDWs in data collection and analysis. During the fourth restructuring,
  the National Population and Family Planning Board (BKKBN) was added as an additional IPF implementing
  agency to provide further support to village convergence.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost, Financing and Borrower Contribution
  At appraisal, INAY was expected to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$400 million through the PforR
  instrument and US$20 million through the IPF instrument, financed by the Global Financing Facility (GFF)
  multidonor trust fund. At closing, the amount disbursed through the PforR was US$400 million and the
  amount through the IPF was US$22.47 million (see details under restructurings, in Dates section, below).

  Borrower contribution was estimated at appraisal at US$6.19 billion, with actual contribution at closing being
  US$32.67 billion.The ICR notes that the “substantial difference between estimate and actual of borrower
  financing is primarily due to the expansion of the government strategy [NatStrat Stunting]” (ICR, p.61).

  Dates
  INAY was approved on June 21, 2018, and was declared effective on September 27, 2018. A Mid-Term
  Review (MTR) was held on April 12, 2021, and the Program closed on 30 December 2023, eight months
  after the original closing date. As above, the Program was restructured five times, with most revisions
  attributable to financial and operational hurdles created by COVID-19 and modifications to NatStrat itself.
  Dates and details on each restructuring are as follows:

        The first restructuring, approved May 2020, added an Advance Disbursement option to mitigate the
         operational and fiscal impacts of COVID-19 on Program implementation. These impacts included
         restrictions on face-to-face data collection which led to delays in field verification of 2019 DLIs, and
         compromised government capacity to finance NatStrat due to pandemic-related budget cuts. As the
         latter also posed a risk to future spending, INEY’s Macroeconomic Risk Rating was increased from
         low to moderate. A minor change to DLI 3 on annual publication of national and district stunting rates
         was also made, namely delaying publication from September to December to adjust the
         implementation timeframe to COVID-19 and assure adequate sample size and data quality.



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



         As above, the second restructuring, approved February 2021, reallocated IPF funds – without
          changing the total amount of grant funding - to permit creation of a new sub-component focused on
          increasing support to HDWs at village level. The MoV was added as an implementing agency and
          Section 2.01 of the Grant Agreement (GA) was amended.

         The MTR in April, 2021 identified a need for Program extension and a third restructuring, approved
          in September 2021, based on the following factors: (i) extension of NatStrat to 2024, including
          deceleration of the rollout of priority districts, requiring re-alignment of INEY’s timeline (as the
          Program served as a support system for NatStrat and as such needed to move at equal pace), (ii)
          impact of COVID-19 related slowdowns in implementation, service delivery interruptions, and
          restricted travel; and (iii) anticipation of the need to adjust INEY’s design with emerging
          implementation experience. As a result, multiple adjustments to the DLI target matrix were made,
          including minor changes to DLRs and introduction of partial achievement levels for DLIs 3,4,6 and 9
          (see “Relevance of DLIs”). Additionally, US$2 million was reallocated from IPF1 to IPF2 to maximize
          support at district and village level; and the loan and grant closing dates were extended to
          December 30, 2023.

         The fourth restructuring, in March - April 2023, was accompanied by an AF for US$6 million from the
          GFF to the IPF. This restructuring further revised the results framework to accommodate the
          extended closing dates and course corrections initiated under the third restructuring, added the
          National Population and Family Planning Board (BKKBN) as an implementing agency for the
          Program’s IPF component, addressed a financing gap in the PIU related to pandemic-related
          setbacks and modifications in NatStrat implementation, and provided grant financing to support
          investments aligned with the Program's original scope, along with continued technical assistance,
          capacity building, and monitoring support.

         The fifth restructuring, in October 2023, adjusted DLR targets and allocations for 2022, in line with
          the extended closing date, and added new DLRs to utilize the remaining Program balance and
          achieve the PDO. It also cancelled US$1 million of the US$4 million AF financing from GFF, and the
          outstanding US$2 million, for which the Grant Agreement had not yet been signed.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives     New




  Rationale
  Relevance to country context and government strategy
  Despite recent growth and sustained investments in health and education, Indonesia’s stunting prevalence
  has remained stubbornly high since 2007, with dire implications for child development and human capital
  formation. The persistence of the challenge is partially attributable to nationwide gaps in the provision of
  basic nutrition and early learning services. Although these resources exist, access to certain key
  interventions remains low, including basic immunizations, iron supplementation, and deworming. Additionally,
  although participation in community growth promotion activities is high in the first six months (77 percent);
  exclusive breastfeeding remains low (60 percent), and only 33 percent of children aged 6‐24 months are fed

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



a minimum acceptable diet. Access to ECED services is also low, at around 8 and 46 percent for children
aged 0‐2‐ and 3‐6‐years, respectively (PAD, pp.11-16).

Exacerbating these fundamental access problems is the fact that convergence of priority nutrition‐specific
and nutrition‐sensitive interventions in households with pregnant mothers and children under two is
extremely weak. This means that even though there are eligible households receiving some essential
nutrition services, there are very few with concurrent access to the full gamut of nutrition specific and nutrition
sensitive interventions required for stunting reduction. Per the PAD, less than 0.1 percent of 1,000-day
households in Indonesia have access to the complete spectrum of multisectoral interventions which have
been repeatedly demonstrated as critical to stunting reduction (PAD, p.17).

The primary responsibility for the delivery of most nutrition interventions lies with Indonesia’s mayors and its
514 districts. The central Government retains an important role, however, with respect to provision of
vaccines and other inputs as well as in terms of capacity development and oversight. Indonesia’s 75,000
villages also play an important role in frontline service delivery. As such, convergence in Indonesia requires
coordinated actions at central, district, and village levels, each of which have been plagued by management
and accountability challenges since decentralization (PAD, p.18)

As above, NatStrat was designed to accelerate Indonesia’s stunting reduction by addressing precisely these
management and accountability challenges, first by strengthening the execution and quality of programs
across health; WASH; early childhood education; social protection; and food security, and second by
improving convergence of these sectoral interventions in national, regional, and community programs. INEY
was designed to support these goals from NatStrat's outset by providing incentives for quality improvement
and more efficient and coordinated service delivery.

Alignment with World Bank Strategy
INEY's PDO was well aligned with the objectives of the 2021-2025 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Indonesia (Report No. 157221-ID). First and foremost, it contributed directly to CPF Engagement Area III on
Nurturing Human Capital, most explicitly via Objective 3.2 to strengthen quality and equity in nutrition and
health. Additionally, it contributed to several of the CPF’s cross-cutting areas, namely improved gender parity
(intermediate outcome indicators on narrowing gender gaps and outcome indicators on reducing adolescent
pregnancy and improving maternal health), digitalization (rollout of e-HDW), and climate change (multiple
interventions reduced the vulnerability of targeted households to climate sensitive diseases such as malaria
and diarrhea).

With respect to historical experience, the Program built on previous Bank support to the Government of
Indonesia’s (GoI) health and nutrition agendas, and indeed was tightly aligned with the 2016-2020 CPF at
appraisal, which included objectives to improve local service delivery (Engagement Area 4, Objective 7 of
CPF 2016-2020), improve access to quality education and health-related services (Engagement Area 4,
Objective 9), and to implement a National Stunting Reduction Coordination mechanism and annual
anthropometric survey (Engagement Area 4, Objective 9). The Program also built on previous Bank support
to the GoI’s decentralization agenda, including ASA and lending to streamline fiscal transfers from central to
district level, improve DAK reporting and verification mechanisms, strengthen the focus on recurrent health
transfers, and improve budget practices (CPF 2016-2020, p. 81).

Appropriateness of the PforR instrument
INEY was entirely predicated on supporting NatStrat by strengthening existing government systems to
converge delivery of nutrition interventions at local level. As such, the Program’s use of DLIs was designed to


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 26
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



                       incentivize the Government to continue to improve coordination across sectors and levels of government by
                       taking a programmatic approach to fiscal transfers, thus overcoming persistent fragmentation of district
                       financing for nutrition interventions. This strategy was in line with the Program’s Technical Assessment,
                       which concluded that although the basic institutional and implementation arrangements for multisectoral and
                       multilevel programming were in place, “system adjustments, capacity improvements, and stronger incentives
                       are required to ensure that GoI achieves the stated objectives of NatStrat Stunting” (PAD, p.62).

                       The ICR described the choice of instrument as “apt, given that the majority of the World Bank's portfolio in
                       Indonesia at the time [of appraisal] consisted of PforRs, making it a suitable choice for INEY to ensure
                       alignment with broader strategic priorities and operational frameworks” (ICR, p.10). This statement is
                       corroborated in the CPF, which includes multiple references to PforR operations across sectors as well as a
                       statement highlighting PforRs as a principal aspect of the Bank’s approach in Indonesia (CPF 2021-2025,
                       p.73). However, there are also statements to the contrary in the ICR, which twice refers to the PforR as a
                       “novel instrument for the country” or similar (ICR, pp. 28 and 30). Additionally, the ICR notes that
                       implementation arrangements for NatStrat were not finalized at appraisal, leading to risks regarding
                       institutional roles, implementation arrangements, and adequacy of monitoring systems, especially with
                       respect to ensuring accountability of key implementers at district level and below (see “Quality-at-Entry” and
                       “M&E Design”).

                       Appropriateness of the IPF. The IPF component was highly relevant for financing technical assistance and
                       capacity building activities that were complementary to the PforR. Namely, targeted “bespoke” support to the
                       key GoI counterparts involved in convergent stunting reduction efforts at national, district and local levels.
                       These activities appear to have been critical to Program effectiveness at all tiers of the implementation chain.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                            New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI Public commitment of priority district leaders to accelerate stunting prevention

                Rationale
                This DLI contributed to strengthening national leadership (RA1) by incentivizing central government to secure
                the commitment of local government to explicit targets and action during high level Stunting Summits.
                Stipulated under NatStrat’s Pillar 1, these Summits were intended to build top-to-bottom leadership by holding
                ministers, governors, district heads, and mayors to account for meeting service delivery and stunting
                reduction goals. As such, this DLI supported a fundamental link of the results chain: building dedication to
                improved convergence at all levels of government. Achievement was based on the required number of
                district‐level government leaders signing compacts at the annual Summits. These compacts comprised
                commitments by districts to implement pro-convergence actions, including holding a district stunting summit
                of departmental heads, facilitating village participation in stunting response, and increasing the collection and


                                                                                                                         Page 8 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



use of data on stunting prevalence and intervention delivery. The verification protocol for this DLI was simple
and technically sound, consisting of submission of a report by SoVP on the annual Stunting Summits detailing
the number and profiles of districts signing Compacts, and subsequent spot-checking by the Independent
Verification Agency (IVA). Annual targets for this DLI specified the minimum number of districts required to
sign compacts and the allocation was non‐scalable.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Tracking and performance evaluation of national spending on priority nutrition interventions

Rationale
The purpose of this DLI was to incentivize both preparation of annual NatStrat performance and expenditure
review reports, and use of those reports to inform budget allocations for the following year (RA1). As such, it
was directly relevant to INEY’s goals of improving intervention performance and holding implementing
agencies accountable using results-based programming. Achievement was phased, with initial disbursements
requiring development of a budgetary tagging and tracking system and issuance of biannual performance
reports. Disbursements thereafter required issuance of biannual performance reports as well as a statement
on how the MoF had used the previous year’s report to inform resource allocation for priority nutrition
interventions in the next FY’s budget. The verification protocol was straightforward, appearing to consist
primarily of confirmation that the respective reports and budget verifications had been released in full and on
time.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Timely publication of annual national and district stunting rates

Rationale
Prior to INEY, stunting surveys were carried out only every 5 years. Requiring annual publication of stunting
rates, timed to occur prior to finalization of central and district government budgets, was intended to i)
address this issue of data paucity and ii) assist the central government in holding district leaders to account
regarding their commitments to stunting reduction (DLI 1). It was also expected to accelerate the cycle of
learning and underpin the findings of performance reports (DLIs 2 and 8). Achievement was initially
predicated on the National Statistics Agency (BPS) issuing guidelines for inclusion of an anthropometric
module in the March 2019 National Socioeconomic Survey (SUSENAS). Achievement thereafter was based
on annual publication of district stunting rates by September of the survey year. The verification protocol was
simple and technically sound, consisting first of provision by BPS to the World Bank of the 2019 SUSENAS
implementation and analysis guidelines, and thereafter by provision of a list of district stunting rates and

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



evidence that both national and district rates were published by September on a publicly accessible website.
A partial achievement level was introduced for this DLI under the third restructuring, and the publication date
for the first survey results was extended from September to December 2019 due to COVID-19.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Priority districts delivery of nutrition‐sensitive professional development program for ECED teachers

Rationale
This DLI aimed to increase the nutrition sensitivity of the GoI’s national ECED program, and to improve its
delivery at district level (RA2). As such it was consistent with the PDO’s focus on increasing access to a wider
spectrum of nutrition-oriented interventions for 1,000-day households. Achievement in the first year required
incorporation of stunting and early stimulation curricula (consistent with NatStrat) into the Professional
Development Program for ECED Teachers, including publication of a Supplementary Handbook with
information on men’s roles. Achievement thereafter was based on rollout of the program in priority districts
and subsequent implementation at village level using cascade training. The verification protocol for “Step 1”
was straightforward, consisting of corroboration by the IVA that the required information had been
incorporated into official ECED program modules, that the Handbook included exercises on the role of men in
child stimulation, and that meaningful consultations had been held with relevant agencies. For “Step 2”, the
verification protocol was predicated entirely on the number of Priority Districts with trainers that had
successfully completed the revised Professional Development Program, and the number of Priority Districts
delivering the program to ECED teachers in a minimum number of villages (with “minimum number”
increasing according to year of implementation). There appears to have been insufficient attention paid to
incentivizing improved coordination between local offices despite the fact that poor horizontal and vertical
integration posed known challenges to ECED, as well as insufficient attention to ensure provision of effective
training. Per the ICR “continued coordination issues between local offices posed challenges in providing
ECED teacher training [including] challenges in the financing of PAUD teacher training at the village level”
(ICR, p.67). The ICR also notes that the complex achievement formula for this DLI required revision through
implementation (ICR, p. 67). A partial achievement level was introduced under the third restructuring.




Rating
Modest

DLI 5
DLI
Nutrition‐sensitivity of the food assistance program (BPNT)

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



This DLI aimed to increase the nutrition sensitivity of the GoI’s national food assistance program, and to
improve its delivery at district level (RA2). As such, like DLI4, it was consistent with the PDO’s focus on
increasing access to a wider spectrum of nutrition-oriented interventions for 1,000-day
households. Achievement in the first two years of the Program was based on the percentage of households
in priority districts receiving BPNT benefits; in the last two years, achievement was based on the percentage
of BPNT kiosks in priority districts that had all eligible, high-nutrient food items available. The verification
protocol for this DLI was technically sound and included scalable DLRs designed to promote i) a critical shift
from the national in-kind rice distribution program (Rastra) to BPNT and ii) reliable access to all eligible food
items covered by BPNT at village level. Additional, non-scalable DLRs rewarded i) addition of a
complementary food item for children under two to the list of eligible foods (verified by the IVA in year 2 of the
Program), and ii) introduction of a protein or fortified food (verified year 3).



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
Priority districts’ implementation of locally adapted IPC activities

Rationale
As with DLIs 4 and 5, this DLI focused on strengthening the design and implementation of a key
nutrition‐sensitive intervention area (RA2). In this case, the purpose was to i) incentivize development of a
national BCC strategy that included a strong focus on IPC and ii) support districts in adapting and
implementing local IPC activities, primarily via strengthening the supervision capacity of District Health and
sub-district health center staff. Achievement in the first year was based on verification of the number of
priority districts issuing community health regulations that included a local BCC strategy and related IPC
activities. Thereafter, verification was based on the number of priority districts with IPC activities implemented
in at least 70% of villages. All allocations were scalable and there was no limited number for Priority Districts.
As with DLI4, the ICR notes that there were again coordination issues between local level offices that were
not addressed in the design of this DLI. It also notes that the complex achievement formula required revision
during implementation (ICR, p. 67). A partial achievement level was introduced under the third restructuring.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
Predictability and results orientation of fiscal transfers that support convergence

Rationale
This DLI was explicitly tied to the results chain output “timely announcement of indicative allocations,
financing gaps filled, and low volatility”, as it provided an incentive for fiscal transfer reform at central level in
conjunction with assistance to districts on applying for special allocation funds (DAK) to support nutrition

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



(RA3). As such, it supported DLIs 4,5 and 6 as well as 8, 9 and 10. Achievement requirements were phased
and consisted of i) the release of NatStrat convergence guidelines specifying the role of district‐level
governments in implementing convergence actions, ii) a Presidential Decree on guidelines for the use of
existing DAK to support multi‐sectoral nutrition interventions and district convergence actions, (iii) guidelines
for districts applying for new DAK to support NatStrat Stunting, and (iv) implementation of an annual index-
based performance assessment of Priority Districts (IKPS) designed to furnish evidence on the link between
increasing DAK nutrition allocations and progress on convergence. Although the scope of this DLI was
appropriate and most of the achievement requirements were technically sound, the ICR noted that “the
design of the district performance index was not thorough, leading to shortcomings in monitoring” (ICR, p.27).
The ICR goes on to state that the index relied too much on “an academic approach using survey data for
programmatic purposes”, and that questions regarding its validity persisted across the Program's duration.”
That said, given that the IKPS was only one aspect of this multifactorial DLI, relevance is rated substantial
given overall performance.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
Performance of districts in targeting priority nutrition interventions to 1,000‐day households

Rationale
This DLI incentivized achievement of the Program’s objective at district level (RA3) and is appropriately listed
as an Outcome in the results chain, predicated on multiple prior achievements including results under DLI 7
as well as under DLIs from RAs 1 and 2. The primary results indicator for this DLI was a weighted index - the
“nutrition service targeting index” - of the percentage change in the number of 1,000 day households
receiving one or more of the five packages of priority nutrition interventions that districts are responsible for
delivering under NatStrat. Delivery of each of the five service packages was measured using the National
Semiannual Socioeconomic Survey. Although the theoretical underpinnings of this indicator were sound, its
technical relevance was compromised due to its design at appraisal, which relied on administrative survey
data (ICR, p.68). This shortfall was addressed during implementation, there was only limited improvement
which led to low disbursement (ICR, p.68)




Rating
Modest

DLI 9
DLI
DLI Villages empowered to identify 1,000‐day households and converge intervention delivery

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 26
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



            The purpose of this DLI was to support RA4 on converging village service delivery, specifically by increasing
            the capacity of villages to target households, map needs, and monitor convergence. As such, achievements
            in the first year were contingent on policy and system reforms accomplished via other DLIs, as well as
            publication of General Guidelines on HDWs and Village Convergence Scorecards. An additional preliminary
            DLR under this DLI was revision by the MoF of Fiscal Transfer Reporting to require villages in Priority
            Districts to submit summary beneficiary, convergence scorecard and stunting expenditure data as part of their
            year-end Dana Desa realization and use reports. Achievements thereafter built on these initial requirements
            (the Dana Desa revisions were not made a disbursement requirement until 2021) and required a high level of
            coordination between multiple line ministries and district governments to ensure villages received the support
            they needed to identify 1,000‐day households, map their priority stunting needs and systematically report data
            on village convergence. The ICR notes that the initial definition of this DLI did not foresee “certain
            coordination and implementation challenges” at the district and community levels where lack of alignment
            between different services “resulted in notable difficulties” (ICR, p. 11). These difficulties presumably refer,
            again, to feasibility issues, attributable to challenges of vertical and horizontal coordination between and
            within government agencies and resulted in the addition of a level on partial achievement being added under
            the third restructuring.



            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 10
            DLI
            DLI Village convergence of nutrition interventions on 1,000‐day households

            Rationale
            This DLI, furthest to the right in the Program results chain, lagged all other DLIs, with achievement based on
            whether there was an actual improvement in the convergence of priority nutrition interventions on 1,000 day
            households, as recorded by Village Convergence Scorecards. The verification protocol for this final DLI was
            objectively sound, consisting of IVA corroboration of data provided by the MoF and SoVP on the number of
            Priority Districts where 80% of villages increased intervention convergence by 20% from baseline (defined as
            the year the district was included in NatStrat), based on results of the Village Scorecards.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            The PDO was strongly relevant to the country context and Bank strategy, and the Program's design emerged
            logically from previous Bank experience in nutrition, aiming to address both known management challenges
            (e.g. financial fragmentation, resource misallocation and lack of a performance orientation) and identified


                                                                                                              Page 13 of 26
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



               gaps in key sector programs (i.e. lack of ECED services for 1,000‐day households, low nutrition benefits of
               the main national food assistance program, and limited scale and intensity of BCC programs).

               Overall, the DLIs were well articulated and clearly under government’s influence, each had a clear definition
               and protocol to evaluate achievement. They were also appropriately phased, aiming first to create an
               enabling environment by improving policies and procedures to address the management challenges cited
               above, and second to support outcomes via improved concurrent delivery of nutrition-sensitive and nutrition-
               specific interventions.

               The DLI matrix maintained its relevance throughout implementation. The restructurings adjusted timeframes
               and targets to accommodate implementation delays caused by COVID-19 and the rollout of NatStrat, but did
               not alter the goal of achieving the three RAs or the Program’s PDO. Additionally, the multiple moderate
               design shortcomings for some of the district and village level disbursement requirements were addressed
               during implementation. Overall, the DLIs provided strong incentives to achieve the PDO via institutional
               reform and improved outcomes.

               In sum, there were no shortcomings in the relevance of the PDO and moderate shortcomings in the
               relevance of the DLIs, indicative of a substantial rating for overall relevance.



               Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Increase the simultaneous utilization of nutrition interventions by 1,000‐day households in priority districts.

               Rationale
               The Theory of Change envisaged that leadership strengthening and reform of sectoral policies at central
               level, combined with support to management and implementation of nutrition activities at district and village
               level, would lead to improved village capacity for concurrent delivery of nutrition-specific and nutrition-
               sensitive interventions to 1,000-day households. As such, the Program’s results chain focused explicitly on
               three tiers of activity: Incentives and support to convergence at national level, incentives and support to
               convergence at district level, and incentives and support to convergence at village level, as follows:

               Incentives and support to convergence at national level
               Inputs under this activity tier consisted of support to the leadership capacity of SoVP, including introduction of
               budget tagging and performance reviews, and reforms to the national sectoral strategies for ECED, food
               assistance and BCC. Outputs consisted of Annual Stunting Summits to secure regular commitments by
               subnational leaders, publication of quarterly and semester NatStrat performance reports to hold the SoVP to


                                                                                                                   Page 14 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



account, and publication of national and district stunting data. With respect to outcomes, achievements
towards the objective were as follows:

Intermediate Outcomes

      The ICR reported that the target for tracking and evaluation of national spending on priority nutrition
       interventions – defined as: “performance report issued and budget reviewed” - was met (ICR, p.17).
       Although there are no details regarding the number or type of reports in the text or results framework,
       details on several “budget marking” reports are provided in the October 2023 Restructuring Report
       (RES47813). In line with this documentation, the ICR did state that this activity “received additional
       funding through reallocation to continue annual budget tagging and annual and semester expenditures
       and performance reviews” (ICR, p.17), implying that reporting was proceeding as defined under the
       associated DLI. The results framework shows that the publication date for “Actual Achieved at
       Completion” was December 22, 2023, relative to the original target of April 30, 2022. This delay was
       presumably attributable to COVID-19, which as above created significant implementation delays
       during the first two years of the Program.
      The ICR stated that “publication of annual national and district stunting rates initially suffered from
       data issues linked to equipment, data quality, and COVID-19 restrictions, [however] these challenges
       were eventually addressed” and by December 2022 [the revised target date], both national and district
       stunting rates had been released” (ICR, p.17). Although no details are provided regarding progress
       towards publication of similar survey results for 2023, the Task Team confirmed that 2023 survey
       results are available, and 2024 data collection is underway.
      The final intermediate outcome achievement for national level progress was the successful addition of
       women’s empowerment to NatStrat’s list of priority nutrition-sensitive interventions. (Note that because
       gender parity is cross-cutting and thus difficult to address via sector-specific reforms, it was
       appropriate to assess it separately from the sector specific reforms to improve nutrition sensitivity.
       These were preliminary requirements under DLIs 4, 5 and 6 and not evaluated by intermediate
       outcome indicators.)

PDO-level Outcome

      Five hundred and fourteen Priority Districts made “public commitments to accelerate stunting
       prevention”, achieving the target which was also set at 514. As above, this outcome supported a
       fundamental link of the results chain: building dedication to improved convergence at all levels of
       government.

Incentives and support to convergence at district level
Inputs under this activity tier consisted of fiscal transfer reform at central level to reduce fragmentation of
financing downstream, as well as establishment of Provincial Technical Assistance Pools whose function was
to assist district governments across the array of convergence-promoting activities. Outputs consisted of
delivery of the technical assistance, utilization of the rehabilitated fiscal transfer mechanisms to increase use
of DAK for district level nutrition budgeting, and rollout of the improved ECDE, food assistance, and BCC
strategies. With respect to outcomes, achievements towards the objective were as follows:

Intermediate Outcomes




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 26
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




      The operation met the target for improved predictability and results-orientation of fiscal transfers
       aimed at supporting convergence, including establishment of a consolidated program and financing
       guidelines stipulating annual performance assessments and publication of the associated
       performance report. These achievements constituted a notable improvement to the pre-PforR
       situation, which had been characterized by fragmented district guidelines and financing, as well as a
       lack of performance orientation.
      Forty-one Priority Districts succeeded in delivering the nutrition‐sensitive professional development
       program for ECED teachers. Although this number was an improvement over baseline (0 districts), it
       fell far short of the target of 300.The ICR attributes the shortfall to limited horizontal and vertical
       coordination between stakeholders, low institutional capacity of the implementing local agencies, and
       delayed release of funds (ICR, p. 20). It also notes that the Mid Term Review identified these
       challenges and attempted to address them via stepped up technical assistance and adjustment of the
       achievement formula (see DLI 4, above).
      The number of BPNT food assistance kiosks disbursing all eligible food items reached 99.95 by
       closing, exceeding the target of 80 (baseline 0). The subtext of this outcome is important, as it
       indicated a fundamental shift from the national in-kind rice distribution program to a far more flexible
       option that improved 1,000-day households’ access to a variety of nutrient dense foods (DLI 5).

PDO-level Outcomes

      The number of Priority Districts implementing locally adapted IPC activities reached 390 by closing,
       exceeding both the original target of 380 and the revised target of 130 districts. The ICR noted that
       despite substantial activity on the part of the MoH to support the issuance and implementation of local
       BCC regulations with IPC activities down to the village level, the original targets for this result indicator
       were seen as too ambitious at first, resulting in the decrease. However, by the end of the Program,
       both adjusted target and original target were surpassed with most of the progress achieved in the final
       year of implementation. Although the ICR did not speculate on this acceleration, progress was likely
       facilitated by relaxed restrictions on social distancing as well as improved implementation
       arrangements following finalization of NatStrat.
      The performance of districts targeting priority nutrition interventions to 1,000-day households was
       assessed via weighted index of the percentage change in the number of 1,000-day households
       receiving one or more of the five packages of priority nutrition interventions that districts are
       responsible for delivering under NatStrat (see DLI8). At closing, this number was 72.4 percent, relative
       to the target of 77 percent, and indicative of a substantial increase from the baseline of 55 percent.

Incentives and support to convergence at village level
This activity tier leveraged all the policy and system reforms accomplished at central and district level. It also
included village-specific inputs consisting of the publication of General Guidelines on HDWs and use of
Village Convergence Scorecards, and revisions by the MoF to Dan Desa reporting and use requirements
designed to increase the use of village funds for stunting prevention, reward convergence and strengthen
performance orientation. Outputs included deployment of HDWs to support village mapping exercises and to
coordinate and monitor intervention delivery and nutrition outcomes, as well as technical assistance to local
governments on the use of scorecards for utilizing Dana Desa funds for stunting reduction. With respect to
outcomes, achievements towards the objective were as follows:

Intermediate Outcomes


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




      One hundred and eighty-five villages were empowered to identify 1,000-day households and converge
       intervention delivery, short of the 308-village target but still indicative of progress (baseline was 0).
       The ICR cites COVID-19 related challenges as well as issues related to convergence scorecard data
       quality and HDW capacity as limiting factors, and also notes that although the DLI associated with this
       outcome was revised to include partial achievement, the end target was not modified accordingly.
       With respect to the latter, the Report rightly states “It's essential to recognize that even partial
       achievement in such complex contexts is noteworthy and indicative of progress, particularly as this
       indicator was further along in the results chain, which can present additional challenges in achieving
       full outcomes” (ICR, p.22).
      Forty-two percent of Priority Districts reported men's participation in village nutrition counselling,
       slightly exceeding the target of 40 percent and indicating a two-fold increase from baseline (20
       percent).
      Ninety-five percent of Priority Districts reported beneficiaries receiving BNPT assistance, exceeding
       the target of 90 percent and indicating an impressive increase from baseline (0 percent).


PDO-level Outcomes

      The percentage of Priority Districts reporting convergence of nutrition interventions for 1,000-day
       households was 56.67% at closing, exceeding the target of 45% and indicating marked progress from
       baseline (5 percent).
      Approximately forty-four percent of women in Priority Districts were reported to be consuming prenatal
       IFA supplements at closing, short of the target of 60 percent but indicative of substantial progress from
       baseline (5 percent). The ICR proposes several explanations for the shortfall, including the fact that
       the target may have been too high (the Report cites similar results indicators with lower targets in the
       Indonesia CPF and a Development Policy Loan), and pandemic related disruptions to both BCC
       counseling services and the supplement supply chain (see “Unintended impacts”). It also rightly
       distinguishes between consumption of IFA and receipt of IFA tablets, noting that the former frequently
       requires BCC to foster compliance, which is a long-term venture. The Report posits that, as the
       operation’s BCC/IPC activities saw most progress towards the end of the Program, it may be that the
       full impact on IFA consumption was not captured by closing (ICR, p.22).



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
At national level, the operation met or exceeded all outcome indicator targets, strengthening national
leadership and the enabling environment for nutrition action, and catalyzing needed reforms in results-based
planning and budgeting, as well as in national sectoral strategies to improve nutrition sensitivity and to make



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 26
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



women’s empowerment an explicit focus in NatStrat. Given the changes in these specific outcomes, each of
which was flagged by objectives, the case for plausible causality is quite strong.

At district level, targets were met or exceeded for fiscal transfer reform, implementation of locally adapted IPC
activities, and presence of BPNT food assistance kiosks, and were almost met for performance of districts
targeting priority nutrition interventions to 1,000-day households. In addition to this achievement data, the ICR
provides supplementary data pointing towards progress in district level convergence between 2019 and 2023,
further strengthening the case for attribution. The only notable shortfall at this activity level was for ECDE,
which as above faced challenges with respect to limited horizontal and vertical coordination between
stakeholders, low institutional capacity of the implementing local agencies, and delayed release of funds. One
question which goes unanswered by the ICR is why these challenges, which were acknowledged in the PAD
as fundamental, and which appear to have been somewhat successfully addressed by the operation’s work
on BCC and food assistance, were so difficult to manage in ECED (See “M&E Design”.)

At village level, although the actual percentage of women consuming IFA supplements was lower than the
target, this indicator may be misleading with respect to the operation’s actual impact. As above, the shortfalls
in meeting the IFA target may also be attributable to an overly high target, masking actual impact.
Additionally, as a proxy indicator for delivery of nutrition specific interventions, i.e. the end of INEY’s results
chain, consumption of IFA may have been too narrow, first because it is inadequate to capture the full
spectrum of nutrition specific interventions (which include pre and post-natal care and growth monitoring) and
second because improved consumption of IFA tablets requires improved beneficiary compliance, an
accomplishment which is particularly difficult to assess. Although the ICR does not provide any information on
why IFA consumption was chosen as a key “endline” outcome indicator, the Bank team clarified that the
decision may have been due the fact that, at appraisal, the GoI was not collecting data on growth monitoring
promotion, which would have been an appropriate alternative indicator.

The operation fell short on meeting the target for identification of 1,000-day households. However, it is
important to note that while this outcome indicator was revised for partial achievement during the third
restructuring, the results framework does not adequately reflect achievements calibrated to this more
sensitive measure. When these caveats are weighed against the fact that targets were met or exceeded for
the very critical outcome on convergence of interventions at household level, improved delivery of gender
aware BCC counseling and access to nutrition sensitive food assistance, the case for positive impact at
village level is strong.

With respect to plausible attribution, although the GoI, UNICEF, and WFP were also providing critical support
to NatStrat across the period in question, the degree of support provided by INEY to results-based planning
and budgeting for convergence at decentralized levels was unparalleled. Given that the operation combined
this support with very specific reforms to food assistance, BCC programming and ECED counseling, it is
reasonable to attribute observed outcomes in large part to the PforR's investments.

In terms of improving institutional capacity, INEY improved integration of nutrition and early childhood
development priorities in district and sub-district development plans via support to supportive legal and
regulatory frameworks. The Program also strengthened the capacity of government institutions and other
stakeholders to deliver effective nutrition and early childhood development services, through training and the
establishment of data collection and analysis tools and reporting systems to track progress and identify areas
for improvement.



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



 Given the strengthened capacities and positive outcomes achieved under the Program, weighed against the
 mixed results on some outcome indicators as well as underlying issues regarding overly ambitious
 achievement formulas and the definition of several outcome indicators, overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The PDO was relevant to country context and Bank strategy at appraisal, throughout implementation, and at
Program closing, adhering to government strategy and finalization of NatStrat. As above, the project's design
emerged logically from previous Bank experience in nutrition, aiming to address both known management
challenges and identified gaps in key sector programs.

The DLIs were well articulated, appropriately phased, and under government’s influence, each had a clear
definition and protocol to evaluate achievement. Restructurings adjusted timeframes and targets to
accommodate implementation delays and to address moderate design shortcomings for some of the district and
village level disbursement requirements. Overall, the DLIs provided strong incentives to achieve the PDO via
institutional reform and improved outcomes.

With respect to efficacy, all national level outcome targets were reached, indicating improvements in national
leadership capacity, results-based planning and budgeting, and nutrition sensitive sectoral strategies. At district
level, targets were met or exceeded for fiscal transfer reform, implementation of locally adapted IPC activities,
and presence of nutrition sensitive food assistance kiosks, and were almost met for performance of districts
targeting priority nutrition interventions to 1,000-day households. As above, the only notable shortfall at this
activity level was for ECED, which remained stymied by limited horizontal and vertical coordination between
stakeholders, low institutional capacity and delayed release of funds. At village level, targets were met or
exceeded for convergence of interventions at household level, improved delivery of gender aware BCC
counseling and access to nutrition sensitive food assistance, and fell short for IFA supplementation during
pregnancy and identification of 1,000-day households.

With Substantial relevance and Substantial Efficacy based on Substantial achievement of the Program's single
objective, overall Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

By 2023, the GoI had demonstrated very strong institutional commitment to convergence, including system-
wide reforms designed to increase and regularize subnational budget allocations for nutrition sensitive
programming, and deployment of performance monitoring and assessment tools holding all tiers of

                                                                                                     Page 19 of 26
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



government to account. Although the ICR rates risk to development outcome as “low” based on these
commitments and the fact that Phase 2 of INEY is now underway, it also notes that “it is important to
recognize that while the government's commitment is a favorable factor, risks to development outcomes can
arise from various sources, including changes in political will, economic fluctuations, and implementation
challenges” (ICR, p.31). While all of these are indeed viable risks, perhaps the most immediate (and
controllable) is the challenge of implementation, which as above, remains substantial with respect to
connecting the links between sectors as well as within individual intervention areas. Efforts are underway to
address precisely these issues under INEY2 (see “M&E Utilization”, below).

While mentioned only fleetingly in the ICR, an additional and major risk is climate change, which directly
threatens food security and human health via multiple pathways. Given its topography, Indonesia is
extremely vulnerable to climate change and as such is highly susceptible to experiencing a reversal in
progress on nutrition, given current climate scenarios.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  INEY’s strategic approach was strong, building on previous Bank support to the GoI’s health and nutrition
  agendas, as well as the international evidence base for convergence as key to reducing stunting. The
  Program Assessment involved extensive policy and technical engagement with central government,
  including 82 consultations with implementing agencies (PAD, p. 67), and deliberations with district, sub-
  district and village government, civil society organizations, development partners, and the private sector
  (PAD, p. 68).

  Although the basic institutional and implementation arrangements for convergence were in place at
  appraisal, the Program aimed to address multiple ingrained deterrents to its achievement, including
  fragmented financing arrangements, weak diagnostic and planning capacities, low accountability
  regarding performance, and a lack of multisectoral coordination mechanisms. As such, the choice of
  PforR as investment instrument was – in principle - appropriate, as the operation was meant to improve
  outcomes of existing activities by introducing incentives for more effective, efficient, and coordinated
  service delivery.

  However, as above, two readiness issues complicate assessment of the choice to use PforR. First,
  because NatStrat was not fully finalized at appraisal, there was uncertainty regarding implementation
  arrangements for the government strategy, and hence for INEY. Per the ICR, “the fact that NatStrat was
  not fully finalized at the time of preparation meant that the Program was being designed based on a
  moving target (ICR, p. 27). Second, it is unclear whether, at appraisal, there was sufficient evidence of
  district and local governments’ capacity to implement the required interventions, given the
  aforementioned lack of subnational coordination mechanisms, weak performance orientation and
  fragmentation in financial arrangements. Although INEY aimed to address all three of these challenges,
  when they are considered en masse and in conjunction with the complexity of Indonesia’s decentralized
  context, questions arise regarding the level of ambition at subnational level.

  Both institutional and implementation arrangements were detailed in the PAD, with activities
  disaggregated by level and type of ministry. Overall, the Program consisted of the Program Executing

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



  Agency (the SoVP), two enabling agencies (Bappenas and the MoF), six implementing agencies (MoH,
  MoEC, MoSA, MoV, MoHA, and BPS) and district and village governments (PAD, p. 58).

  The overall risk rating was high, in line with precisely the institutional capacity challenges cited above, as
  well as the complex design of the Program itself and related fiduciary risks. With respect to institutional
  capacity, the PAD noted the SoVP, the BPKP (the IVA), and the IAs had minimal to zero experience
  implementing a PforR, and also pointed out that capacity for management of multisectoral programs was
  constrained and would require significant support (PAD, p. 71). The proposed mitigating measures
  consisted of providing PforR training to central government staff during Program preparation and the first
  stage of implementation, technical capacity building for the BPKP for Year 2 and thereafter (to facilitate
  verification of subnational achievements), and TA at national and sub-national levels via the IPF
  Components (PAD, p.71). With respect to mitigating risks posed by the complex Program design, the
  PAD was somewhat vague, citing capacity building provided by the IPF components to the Steering
  Committee at central level and the MoHA at subnational level, and stating that “the Program will build and
  institutionalize mechanisms to create national and subnational commitment to tackle stunting”. (PAD, p.
  71) With respect to fiduciary risk, the PAD proposed assignment of additional dedicated staff at SoVP,
  adoption of a Program Operations Manual including clear protocols for how to carry out fiduciary
  functions, and technical assistance to strengthen SoVP fiduciary capacity “particularly in monitoring and
  reporting procurement and financial performance of the overall Program, and Program audit
  arrangements” (PAD, p. 71).

  These measures appear to have proved sufficient except with respect to adequate support for horizontal
  and vertical coordination at subnational levels, given low institutional capacity. Although a less ambitious
  approach to this fundamental implementation challenge might have improved results, the shortcomings
  were considered to be relatively minor, and overall preparation and Quality-at-Entry for this extensive and
  complex Program were satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The fact that INAY was restructured five times during implementation is indicative of the Bank Team’s
 resolve to keep the Program aligned with its goals, despite hurdles posed by the pandemic
 and modifications to NatStrat. With respect to fiduciary aspects, the ICR reports that supervision was
 “stringent” (ICR, p.30) ensuring adherence to policies and in line with the substantial mitigating measures
 cited above (see also “Fiduciary Compliance”, below). Supervisory inputs and processes appear to have
 been strong, including remote monitoring and virtual meetings during COVID-19, a Mid Term Review in
 2021 which was instrumental in making needed revisions to the Results framework (see Third
 Restructuring, under “Dates”), and a high level of TA provided throughout the Program cycle, bolstered by
 complementary analytical and advisory services funded through Bank-executed Trust Funds (ICR, p.31).
 Ten Implementation Status Reports were released over the course of the operation, described as
 “informative and offering clarity on the Program's progress, challenges encountered, and the specific
 impacts of the pandemic” (ICR, p.30). With respect to transition arrangements, Phase 2 of INEY was



                                                                                                     Page 21 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



 approved in June 2023, and is expected to provide continued support to the goals promoted under Phase
 1, in line with the now finalized NatStrat “whole of government” approach to stunting reduction.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 INEY’s theory of change was straightforward and provided a logical underpinning for the results framework.
 Intermediate results indicators were adequate to capture the contribution of the Program’s activities and
 outputs, and although the outcome indicator on IFA consumption may have been too narrow to serve as an
 adequate proxy for the full spectrum of nutrition-specific interventions supported by the Program, all other
 PDO-level indicators were topically appropriate.

 Although many DLIs were appropriately phased, clearly defined and well-aligned with outcomes, there
 were several (4 and 6 on delivery of nutrition sensitive ECED and IPC services, as well as 9 on village level
 convergence) that perhaps could have been more effective at incentivizing coordination at sub-national
 level. That these issues persisted despite impressive efforts on the part of the Program to facilitate
 convergence testifies to the challenges of multisectoral coordination on the frontlines. The ICR noted that
 the Program underestimated this aspect of the results chain, stating that the M&E framework “did not
 foresee certain coordination and implementation challenges [at district and community levels] during
 preparation” (ICR, p. 28). It also cited related technical weaknesses in the design of certain subnational
 disbursement requirements- namely complicated achievement formulas for the District Performance Index
 (DLI7) and the Nutrition Service Targeting Index (DLI8), as well as overly ambitious requirements for
 Village Scorecards (DLIs 9 and 10).

 With respect to monitoring arrangements and protocol, the operation was predicated wholly on NatStrat
 which was itself reliant on existing data collection, budget monitoring, and planning systems. Per the PAD,
 data for national level indicators in the results framework were expected to be drawn from a combination of
 BPS surveys; Program implementation records and extant budget monitoring systems; district level
 indicators would draw on SUSENAS survey data, Program implementation records, and DAK reports, and
 village level indicators would draw on extant sector-specific data collection systems and Village
 Convergence Scorecards. The PAD also noted that NatStrat included a description of M&E arrangements,
 a detailed results framework, and an implementation plan, and stated that a comprehensive M&E Manual
 was underway (PAD, p.58).

 Regarding verification of DLIs, as above, a detailed annual protocol was jointly endorsed by SoVP and the
 World Bank, with the BPKP serving as designated verification agent. Although there is no rationale
 provided in the PAD or ICR regarding this choice, the Bank team clarified that BPKP is an independent
 institution which i) stands completely separate from line ministries, ii) serves as de facto internal auditor for

                                                                                                       Page 22 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



 the entire GoI, iii) has district level presence throughout Indonesia, and iv) is the verification agent for the
 entire PforR portfolio. No other VA option held this comparative advantage.



b. M&E Implementation
  Although COVID-19 delayed initial data collection and monitoring efforts, implementation of the M&E
  framework accelerated as the pandemic receded. Routine monitoring proceeded as designed, annual
  reporting followed the DLI and results framework matrices, and BPKP performed smoothly as verification
  agent. With respect to correcting weaknesses in M&E design, each of the Program’s five restructurings
  resulted in multiple methodological and target-oriented recalibrations to DLIs and DLRs, including as
  above the introduction of partial achievement levels for several DLIs, the upwards revision of the PDO
  indicator target on public commitments of Priority District leaders to accelerate stunting prevention, the
  downward revision of the PDO indicator target on Priority Districts’ implementation of locally adapted IPC
  (an adjustment which proved unnecessary given that the original target was eventually surpassed), and
  the revamping of the IKPS to improve data quality and expand its coverage of stunting determinants. The
  Program’s introduction of e-HDW is also of note, as this innovation facilitated community-based data
  collection and analysis.

  With respect to the district and community-level coordination challenges cited by the ICR (see M&E
  Design), details provided to IEG by the Bank team helped clarify. These included the observation that
  ECED teachers at village level felt hamstrung due to a lack of designated funding for nutrition sensitive
  curriculum, the fact that there were not enough qualified trainers at subnational level to complete the ToT
  cascade, and the fact that districts’ human and financial resources were often insufficient to support the
  labor-intensive, multi-phase requirements of the IPC approach. The Bank team also clarified that
  subnational shortfalls were frequently associated with a lack of support from central government, both
  with respect to convergence and in term of sector-specific support. This finding implies the Program likely
  fell short on strengthening implementation pathways between central and district level, and district to
  village level.



c. M&E Utilization
  Utilization was constrained during the first years of the Program due to COVID-19, which slowed
  implementation and reduced data availability. Post-pandemic, M&E data and analysis were used
  continuously to inform and adjust the Program at multiple levels of government. Examples include the
  addition of the IPF sub-component to support HDWs, as well as the afore-mentioned introduction of
  partial achievement levels and other DLI recalibrations. With respect to utilization by stakeholders,
  SoVP, MOF, and Bappenas convened regular progress review meetings with participating sectors and
  government representatives; data were also used by individual line ministries and by district and village
  governments to track inputs, outputs, expenditures, and outcomes.

  Regarding the degree to which M&E data informed subsequent interventions, INEY 2 was approved in
  June 2023 and builds on lessons learned by its predecessor, including addressing weak links in the
  implementation pathways cited above. For example, fostering a dual focus on district and village
  convergence actions in conjunction with improved quality of sector-specific services.




                                                                                                        Page 23 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment was conducted for the Program during its preparation
   phase. The assessment assigned a moderate risk rating for environmental impacts, related to
   pharmaceutical waste disposal, and proposed measures to strengthen management accordingly. The ICR
   reported regular monitoring of environmental and social were implemented throughout the Program. The
   Program was expected to contribute positively to equity and as such received a low-risk rating for social
   impact. Grievance mechanisms were put in place and although some issues regarding consolidating
   grievance records and assessing effectiveness occurred during implementation, no major issues were
   reported.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Per the ICR, the fiduciary systems assessment initially rated overall risk as High due to the Program’s
   complex design, which was expected to pose challenges to the SoVP’s ability to effectively monitor and
   report on budget preparation, procurement, and execution. To mitigate these risks, as above, an additional
   dedicated staff person was assigned to the SoVP’s PIU, a Program Operations Manual with clear
   procedures and defined roles and responsibilities was prepared, and technical assistance to strengthen
   SoVP's fiduciary capacity was provided. These measures demonstrated effectiveness as audit reports
   were received by the Bank on time with clean opinions; the overall fiduciary risk rating was reduced to
   substantial prior to the Mid Term Review.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
    ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 24 of 26
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


11. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 31-33) offered multiple lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
re-stated by IEG Review:

Convincing central government to commit to convergence is imperative. The Bank leveraged
its global knowledge of nutrition best practices in conjunction with its experience of Indonesia’s
governance structures to support a high-level coalition that was effective in fostering political will and
driving reforms. The cultivation of high-level engagement also served to legitimize the Program,
ensuring that the results framework and PDO were fully aligned with national priorities, and creating
an enabling environment for change at all levels.

When underpinned by strong analytical work, consecutive and informed changes to an
operation’s indicators are an effective way of ensuring relevance. Over the course of the
Program, multiple opportunities for improvement were identified, prompting discussions and
negotiations with stakeholders and consequent restructurings. This process of successive revision
underscores the balance that a PforR’s M&E framework must strike: On one hand, targets and
definitions cannot be adjusted to the point that the original development objective is compromised;
on the other, flexibility is critical to course correction, given inevitable changes in government
programs, implementation challenges, and unforeseen events.

An IPF can provide indispensable value-added to a PforR. The comprehensive technical
assistance provided via IPF1 and 2 proved pivotal to facilitating implementation; bolstering the
capacity of PIUs for planning and budgeting and building ownership for the convergence
mechanisms that extended beyond the scope of INEY.

Successful convergence can be facilitated by simultaneous deployment of a coordinated
suite of policy instruments at different levels of government. INEY provides an excellent case
study of how a complex mix of policy innovations and instruments, including (but not limited to) a
high-level coordinating platform, fiscal transfer and budget reforms, new mechanisms for
performance monitoring and assessment, and deployment of community level “convergence
facilitators” (i.e. HDWs) can move the needle in delivering interventions and reducing stunting. While
the latter is not reported on in this ICRR due to its (appropriate) exclusion from the results chain, it is
very much worth noting that between 2018 and 2023, stunting prevalence in Indonesia fell from 30.8
to 21.5 percent, nearly double the average annual rate from 2007. While degree of attribution is
impossible given that several factors external to INEY almost surely contributed to this progress, at
the very least, it is inarguable that the Program elevated the discussion around stunting, mobilized
political commitment and improved implementation with its innovative approach.




                                                                                                       Page 25 of 26
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Investing in Nutrition and Early Years (P164686)



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR’s narrative generally supported the overall ICR ratings. It followed the guidelines, was internally
consistent for the most part, candid, and provided a clear and detailed accounting of DLI revisions at each
restructuring. It was also strongly evidence-based, drawing data not only from the Program's formal results
framework but also from other sources of outcome data.

That said, there were a few moderate shortcomings. First and foremost, there was a lack of information on
certain critical aspects of implementation, combined with a tendency to repeat vague assertions. This posed a
problem throughout the validation as it was challenging in several sections to unpack findings regarding key
challenges to Program performance. The most serious omission was with respect to the nature of ECED and
IPC coordination challenges at subnational level; these issues were repeatedly cited in the ICR, but never
explained. Additionally, the choice of BPKP – a government entity - as verification agent, while well-explained
by the Bank team, was not addressed in the ICR. Finally, based on data provided in a communication from the
region dated November 17, 2024, there were inaccuracies in actual DLI-specific disbursement amounts
reported in the ICR (pp.41-50).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 26 of 26
