     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024143

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146319                                     Development Finance Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nigeria                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84410                                  31-Dec-2021                                        490,377,751.84

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Sep-2014                                 30-Jun-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            490,377,751.84                                               0.00

 Actual                                        490,377,751.84                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA) on page 7, "the project development objective is to increase the availability
   and access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises through eligible financial intermediaries with
   the support of a new wholesale development finance institution". The Project Development Objective (PDO)
   statement on page 16 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) was identical and remained unchanged
   throughout the period of project implementation.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  31-May-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
    The project components and financing level as delineated in the LA, the PAD and restructuring papers are
   summarized below:

   Component 1: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (Amount at approval of US$12 million,
   actual amount of US$7.78 million): The project was to fund tailored technical assistance to the
   Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs). The project would coordinate with the International Finance
   Corporation (IFC) during implementation of the technical assistance components in order to benefit from its
   experience in this field, both in Nigeria and internationally. The project, and potentially other donors, were to
   finance provision of operational support to the new DFI. By strengthening the institutional and human
   resource capacity of PFIs, the tailored technical assistance (TA) was to lay the foundation for nationwide
   scaling-up of commercially sustainable micro and small and medium enterprises (MSME) finance. To
   benefit from the credit and guarantee facilities, the PFIs would be required to enter into Technical
   Cooperation Agreements (TCA) with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). This component was also to
   support establishment of specific financial consumer protection measures, such as disclosure requirements,
   to be adopted by all PFIs to facilitate competition and thereby enhance responsible finance and
   affordability.

   Component 2: Line of Credit Facility (Amount at approval of US$445.0 million, actual amount of
   US$395.00 million): This component was to provide US$445 million to the new Development Financial
   Institution (DFI) designated for lines of credit to eligible PFIs for on-lending to eligible enterprises and
   subprojects. The PFIs would receive funding from the DFI upon submission of internally approved sub-loans
   in line with eligibility criteria.

   Component 3: Credit Guarantee Facility (Amount at approval of US$35.0 million, actual amount of
   US$85.00 million): This component aimed to provide US$35 million for a Credit Guarantee Facility (CGF)
   to be established as the DFI wholly owned subsidiary and housed within the DFI. The credit guarantee
   facility was to provide a 50 percent guarantee on PFI loans made to eligible MSMEs; it is also expected to
   guarantee bank loans to Microfinance Banks (MFBs) for on-lending to their target market.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Development Finance Project (P146319)



  Component 4: Project Management (Amount at approval of US$6.75 million, actual amount of
  US$2.60 million): This component intended to fund the project management functions supporting overall
  project implementation. This component was to pilot and test various mechanisms for reducing the cost of
  MSME credit, including auctioning of credit line funds, an incentives-based first-loss facility, and other such
  initiatives to be implemented by the DFI with the assistance of qualified external providers, as
  appropriate. The project was to support the development of mechanisms putting pressure on banking
  spreads using auctions of funds provided under the Line of Credit Facility. With a view to expanding PFI
  lending to the MSME segment, a first-loss facility was to be tested to encourage PFIs to reduce the spreads
  they charge to their MSME clients.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: The total project cost was estimated at U$500 million equivalent at appraisal. Because of
  implementation challenges (ICR, para 90), there was a 2019 partial cancellation of undisbursed
  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) funds amounting to US$8,9 million. The
  actual disbursement amount totaled US$490,4 million equivalent. Actual disbursements stood at
  91.1 percent of the total project commitments.

  Project Financing: The project was financed entirely through an IBRD loan.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no planned contribution from the borrower at appraisal, and there was
  none during implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on September 25, 2014, made effective on May 08, 2015, and the
  Medium-Term Review (MTR) Review took place in June 2019. The project’s initial closing date was set on
  December 31, 2016, but the operation was closed on June 30, 2023, 66 months (i.e., 5.5 years) after the
  original closing date.

  Restructurings: The project was restructured four times (all level 2) as delineated below:

        The first restructuring took place on August 21, 2018, and aimed to assign the Development Bank
         of Nigeria (DBN) with full fiduciary responsibility to manage US$12 million allocated to project
         Component 1: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. The scope of the TA activities aimed
         directly at strengthening DBN’s capacity and other financial institutions in support of downscaling
         their operations to successfully cater to underserved or unserved MSME sector.
        The second restructuring occurred on March 29, 2019, with the key change being the amendment to
         Loan Agreement to correct the mistaken language of Development-Linked Indicator (DLIs) V and
         VI in the way they were drafted. Specifically, DLIs V and VI refer to targets which needed to be
         achieved in a period “starting on the day immediately following Tranche IV/V disbursement”.
        The third restructuring was completed on May 31, 2021, and modifications included the following:
         (i) the existing Performance-Based Conditions (PBC) tied to the last disbursement under the project
         (Tranche VI) was changed and three new tranches (VII, VIII and IX) were added, (ii) the
         restructuring added an intermediate results indicator to reflect the actual growth of Lines of Credit
         (LoC) with maturity of more than 36 months, using end-2020 portfolio as the baseline, and finally
         (iii) the restructuring added an additional intermediate results indicator on citizen engagement, (iv)
         the loan closing date was extended until June 30, 2023, to provide the ability of DBN to contribute
         substantially to the COVID-19 recovery and assist viable MSMEs to survive the crisis, and finally

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



          (v) the proposed restructuring reallocated resources from component 2 (LoC) to component 3 (credit
          guarantee).
         The fourth restructuring took place on June 26, 2023. The purpose of this restructuring was to
          cancel US$8,9 million in project funds available, as requested by the Borrower to ensure that funds
          that were undisbursed are adequately redirected to the Nigeria IBRD pool.

   Assessment methodology:

   The results framework was revised twice in August 2019 and in May 2021. The 2018 restructuring aimed to
   refine the statement of the performance indicators and targets. However, there were significant changes in
   the 2021 results framework, particularly as regard to the PDO targets related to
   the guarantees provision. Therefore, this review will conduct a split assessment and will assess the project
   efficacy performance based on the PDO indicators at appraisal, and against the PDO indicators and targets
   adopted in May 2021.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At appraisal, access to finance was identified as the second biggest obstacle to firm
growth after access to electricity. Only 9.5 percent of surveyed firms had access to credit and even fewer
(4.0 percent) had outstanding loans. Moreover, MSME access to finance was identified as a significant
constraint to economic growth. Given the potential role of smaller businesses as one of Nigeria’s most
powerful sources of economic growth and employment, this project focused on supporting the creation of a
new Development Bank of Nigeria (DBN) that would promote more diversified and inclusive growth and
contribute to sustained poverty alleviation.

The World Bank and the borrower, in partnership with other donors, set the stage for this
project. The DFI operation was to benefit from previous and ongoing Bank operations, including the
Growth and Employment (GEM) Project-(P103499). The GEM project had supported the construction of a
national business platform to facilitate access to MSME training support. Moreover, the World Bank and
DFID had jointly worked from the outset on data gathering and analytical work that informed the project
design, and in parallel, the African Development Bank (AfDB) had committed to providing both debt and
equity, significantly contributing to the capacity of the DFI. Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KFW) and
Agence Française pour le Dévelopement (AFD) had conducted their initial project assessments and
were considering provision of parallel debt financing and screening that may result in access to GEM-
funded grant support for business plans that make MSMEs more bankable.

Alignment with Government strategy. The Nigeria 2014 Development Policy stated that since 2009
the FGN focused on enhancing financial inclusion. The FGN intended to establish a self-sustaining,
wholesale development finance institution (DFI) to alleviate financing constraints faced by MSMEs. The
new DFI would focus on providing support to participating financial intermediaries on a market-conforming

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Development Finance Project (P146319)



               and fully sustainable basis. It was envisaged that the new wholesale DFl would provide credit lines and
               partial credit guarantees to financial intermediaries, predominantly banks and microfinance banks. The
               PDO was in line with the policy priorities of the Nigerian authorities toward expanding MSMEs access to
               finance. Recognizing that MSMEs remain a major springboard to growth in the Nigerian economy,
               catalyzing private sector financing of MSMEs was recognized as a critical need. The project explicitly called
               for the DBN and the Impact Credit Guarantee Limited (ICGL) to be financially sustainable and scalable to
               adequately address the financing gap. Additional private sector mobilization and more time were required
               for the completion of a robust framework to meet the MSME finance needs in Nigeria. MSMEs in all sectors
               were a main driver for employment, particularly youth employment. Access to finance was one of the key
               constraints that hinder further firm-level and more employment growth. The provision of long-term finance in
               local currency would enable institutions to expand lending based on the local currency rather than having to
               entertain foreign currency risks, thus reducing external vulnerabilities, as seen in many IDA countries.

               Alignment with Bank strategy. The PDO was consistent with the WB strategies for Nigeria. The FY21-25
               Country Partnership Framework (CPF) includes a core objective of ‘financial deepening and inclusion’, as
               part of the pillar on ‘Promoting jobs and economic transformation’. At completion, the PDO remained highly
               relevant to Nigeria’s policy objectives. The CPF highlighted that “surveys indicate limited access to finance
               was a key constraint for investment and accelerating private-sector-led growth, especially for MSMEs” and
               noted additional constraints for women entrepreneurs. The CPF further committed that the World Bank
               Group program would “integrate previous project-level interventions more closely with a broader, and more
               upstream, policy dialogue on macro-financial policy.”

               In substance, the PDO relevance drew from the fact it aimed to achieve a high-level goal of country’s
               economic growth and employment through the creation of a financial institution and associated activities
               that would ensure improved wholesale lending and promote MSMEs access to finance.

               Overall, the relevance of objectives was high, on account of (i) prior engagement by the World Bank and
               other external partners in supporting access to finance by MSMEs in Nigeria, and (ii) an alignment between
               the PDO and the Borrower policy priorities and the WB strategies throughout the period of project
               implementation.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the availability and access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises through eligible
                             financial intermediaries with the support of a new wholesale development finance institution.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Development Finance Project (P146319)



The assessment of the project efficacy draws from the material provided in the ICR on pages 6-7 (theory of
change) and pages 5-22 (efficacy) and actual results presented in Annex 1. Below is the assessment of
project efficacy based on the PDO indicators and targets adopted at project appraisal in 2014.

Theory of change

      There was no explicit theory of change in the PAD or in the restructuring papers outlining the linkage
       between the project activities and the PDO. The ICR reconstructed a theory of change (Figure 1 on
       page 7), which summarized the logical chain by which original and revised activities of the project
       were to be transformed into outputs and outcomes. This review summarizes the results chain
       underlying the process of achieving the project development objective.
      Toward increasing the availability and access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises
       (MSMEs), critical activities identified in the PAD and restructuring papers were as follows: (i) the
       provision of TA to the new DFI and the strengthening of the institutional and human resource capacity
       of PFIs aimed to lay the foundation for nationwide scaling-up of commercially sustainable MSME
       finance, (ii) the provision of lines of credit by the DFI to eligible PFIs for on-lending to eligible
       enterprises and subprojects upon submission of internally approved sub-loans in line with eligibility
       criteria, and (iii) the provision of the credit guarantee facility which was to provide a 50 percent
       guarantee on PFI loans made to eligible MSMEs.
      Key expected outputs included (i) an improved ability of PFIs and ICGL to support microfinance banks
       and conduct improved MSME lending operations, and (ii) the operationalizing of the DBN and Impact
       Credit Guarantee Limited (ICGL). The main expected outcome was an increased availability and
       access to finance by MSMEs and an improved investor confidence to support MSMEs as well.
      Overall, there was a logical chain linking the identified activities and expected outputs and
       outcomes. However, the reconstructed theory of change had weaknesses as follows: (i) the result
       chain did not show explicitly the expected outputs, (ii) it did not discuss the key assumptions that
       had to be met for the results chain to be feasible, and (iii) it did not discuss the attribution of achieved
       outcome, especially that this project was implemented in complement to the traditional work of the
       financial and banking institutions supporting access to finance by MSMEs, and that other donors were
       involved in supporting the MSMEs access to finance.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

 Achieved outputs aimed at strengthening the technical capacity of the MSMEs sector and operationalizing
the DBN and the ICGL, as summarized below.

 Enhanced technical capacity to support the MSMEs sector

These outputs were generated by the project but were not part of the results framework, and hence did not
have target values.

      An institutional assessment of PFIs to identify areas for improvement was carried out on 10 PFIs, with
       over 300 staff provided with relevant training. The focus was on SME finance strategy, SME lending
       process, product development and refinement, and green finance and agricultural lending.
      Improvement of PFIs’ abilities to incorporate nonfinancial services into their sales and relationship
       management to provide SMEs with additional value, which resulted in significant growth in the SME
       portfolio, for instance for Union Bank, Wema Bank and Access Bank.

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Development Finance Project (P146319)




      Improvement of the Impact Credit Guarantee Limited (ICGL) ability to uptake credit guarantee
       products. An institutional assessment was also carried out at five banks and training focused on
       technology and product development.
      Improved capacity building for microfinance banks led to enhanced MSME lending operations. TA was
       provided to 10 banks and focused on organizational and governance structure, client-focused
       business strategy, lending products, and performance and financial performance.
      Stepped up environmental and social risk management through training targeted at loan officers,
       senior business and risk managers, environmental and social risk coordinators, and all allied roles
       across PFIs, to ensure compliance with the DFI’s environmental and social policy and procedures.
      3,000 MSMEs enhanced their ability to improve their access to credit, funds utilization, and market
       access through the DBN various capacity-building initiatives and partnerships, and equipped MSMEs
       with skills and competencies to defend sound and viable business propositions.

Operationalizing the DBN and the Impact Credit Guarantee Limited (ICGL)

      The target for the number of PFIs reporting on lending to women sub-borrowers was exceeded,
       reaching the number of 26 against a revised target of 6, and a baseline of 0.
      The target for the number of PFIs implementing GRM, with mechanism in place for tracking how
       issues are resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant and DBN within the stipulated time was
       exceeded, amounting to 18 against a target of 13, and a baseline of 0.

The following intermediate outcomes were generated by the project but were not part of the results
framework, and hence did not have target values.

      The DBN and ICGL became operational to provide access to financing on market terms, and a
       wholesale DFI with a corporate governance framework.
      There was an increase in the number of the PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by Line of Credit Facility
       (for instance, the number of PFIs lending to women sub-borrowers reached 26), but there was no
       output target for this indicator.
      There was an increase in the number of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by ICGL, and similarly there
       was no output target for this indicator.
      There was an increase in the number of guarantees, but there was no output target for this indicator.

Outcomes

Fully Achieved or Exceeded

      The target for the PFIs' eligible sub-loan portfolio quality (Nonperforming Loans) was largely
       exceeded, because the PFI’s MSME sub-loan portfolio at risk (30 days) was nil, against a target of 5
       percent.
      The target for the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by Line of Credit Facility was largely
       exceeded, amounting to US$1,406 million, against a target of US$445 million and a baseline of 0.
      The target for the DFI Return on Assets (ROA) was exceeded as the performance was 5.5 percent
       against a target of 5.0 percent




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Development Finance Project (P146319)




      The target for the growth of DBN’s line of credit funding to PFIs with a maturity of more than 36
       months was fully achieved, reaching 15 percent, in line with the target and a baseline of 0.

The following outcomes were generated by the project, but were not part of the results framework, and hence
did not have target values.

      The DBN and ICGL have mobilized over US$1.6 billion of financing to about 321,867 MSMEs.
      The MSME financing landscape in Nigeria has broadened, as the DBN, operating at a wholesale level,
       has mobilized US$1.4 billion in lending through the PFIs.
      The DBN’s eligibility criteria and monitoring system allowed the DBN and PFIs to ascertain
       underserved geographic areas, sectors, and segments. PFIs reported increases in their MSME loan
       portfolios in feedback to the DBN.

Partially Achieved:

      The target for the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by ICGL was partially
       achieved, reaching US$302 million, against an original target ofUS$651 million, and a baseline of 0.
      The target for the volume of guarantees issued was partially achieved, reaching US$159 million,
       against an original target of US$325 million, and a baseline of 0.

In summary, four PDO indicators were fully achieved or exceeded as follows: (i) the quality of PFIs' eligible
sub-loan portfolio quality (Nonperforming Loans) (ii) the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by Line
of Credit Facility (iii) the DFI Return on Assets (ROA), and (iv) the growth of DBN’s line of credit funding to
PFIs with a maturity of more than 36 months. However, the two PDO indicators were partially achieved: (i)
the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by ICGL, and (ii) the volume of guarantees issued by ICGL.

On balance, the efficacy of the original project is assessed as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase the availability and access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises through eligible
financial intermediaries with the support of a new wholesale development finance institution.

Revised Rationale
Below is the assessment of project efficacy based on the PDO indicators and targets adopted during the 2021
restructuring.

Theory of change

The theory of change described under Objective 1 holds for the Objective 1-Revision 1



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Development Finance Project (P146319)



Outputs

The outputs and intermediate outcomes described under Objective 1 hold for the Objective 1 Revision 1

Outcomes

Performance related to the indicators for which targets were unchanged throughout project implementation
were provided under Objective 1

Performance related to the indicators for which targets were revised during the 2021 restructuring were fully
achieved or exceeded as detailed below:

      The target for the volume of PFI’s MSME sub-loans facilitated by CGF was exceeded, reaching
         US$302 million against a target of US$133.0 million
        The target for the volume of guarantees issued was exceeded, amounting to US$159.70 million
         against a target of US$US$88.37 million
        The target for the percentage growth of DBN’s LoC funding to PFIs with a maturity of more than 36
         months was fully achieved, reaching targeted level of 15 percent.
        The target for the number of PFIs implementing GRM, with mechanism in place for tracking how
         issues are resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant and DBN within the stipulated time was
         exceeded, reaching the number of 18, against a target of 17.
        The target for the number of PFIs reporting on lending to women sub-borrowers was exceeded,
         reaching the number of 26 against a target of 25.

Below are additional achievements not covered in the results framework and hence without target values:

      Immediate impact of achieved outcome was the rise in investors’ confidence which led to easier
         issuance of corporate bond on the local market, and in transforming the DBN and the ICGL in
         channels for funding for MFIs in providing them efficient long-term funding and allowing asset owners
         to support MFIs. The rise in investors’ confidence was illustrated by the issuance of a corporate bond
         on the local market in 2023, in the amount of Nigerian Naira (NGN) 20 billion which was
         oversubscribed by NGN 23 billion.
        The DBN became a channel for funding for MFIs in their activity of sourcing efficient long-term funding
         and allowing asset owners, such as the pension funds, to support MFIs.
        The ICGL currently offers partial credit guarantee coverage in local currency, which was previously
         only viable in foreign currency.
        Building on achieved outcome, the DFI improved and diversified the financial instruments, products
         and services to fund MSMEs, including (i) the long-term finance product, (ii) the finance-2-finance
         product, (iii) the non-interest banking product, and (iv) the Interest Draw Back Program.
        PFIs reported increases in their MSME loan portfolios in feedback to the DBN, and MSMEs also
         reported penetrating formal markets for their products and services and applying commercial
         documentation.
        Nearly 52.14 percent of sampled businesses in 2020 agreed that their organizations had access to
         appropriate financial products and services, although affordability of the loans remained a major issue.
         On improved access to and increased usage of funds, most of the respondents reported having
         access to capital and improved business services.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Development Finance Project (P146319)




                                      A 2022 impact evaluation survey reported that 100 percent of the sampled MSMEs reported that they
                                       secured the DFI’s funds to grow and scale up their businesses. A large proportion of the sampled
                                       MSMEs reported improvements in key business performance indicators, especially in terms of
                                       employment generation, as reflected in the reported new jobs created, revenue generation, business
                                       diversification and expansion, and inventory expansion.
                                      The DBN has also maintained its collaboration with the EIB and KfW, in the amount of US$32 million
                                       and US$112.48 million, respectively, both of which are new to the Nigerian MSME lending market.
                                       With sound corporate governance, including accountability and transparency, the DBN has
                                       demonstrated an exceptional track record in establishing these foundational elements.
                                      The entry of the DBN and ICGL enabled the ecosystem to access reliable long-term financing in local
                                       currency.
                                      The DBN furthermore deepened and expanded access to finance by acting as a financial sector
                                       incubator for various funding models at the bottom of the market.

                              In summary, project activities generated outputs and outcomes delineated in the theory of change. The four
                              PDO indicators with unchanged targets were fully achieved or exceeded as detailed under the original
                              project. Similarly, the PDO indicators for which targets were revised during the 2021 restructuring were fully
                              achieved or exceeded as presented above. Overall, the efficacy of the revised project is assessed as High.



                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Efficacy of the original project is rated as Substantial

                            Toward increasing the availability and access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises, key
                            achievements included: (i) a pickup in the quality of PFIs' eligible sub-loan portfolio and the volume of
                            guarantees issued, (ii) a respective expansion of the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by Line of
                            Credit Facility and that of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by the CGF, (iii) an increase in the DFI ROA and
                            the growth of DBN’s line of credit funding to PFIs with a maturity of more than 36 months. However, the
                            following targets were partially achieved: (i) the volume of PFIs' eligible sub-loans facilitated by CGF and
                            (ii) the volume of guarantees issued.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1

                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Development Finance Project (P146319)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
  Efficacy of the revised project is rated as High.

  Efficacy of the 2021 restructured project is rated as High, because in addition to the achieved results
  described under the original project, the indicators for which targets were revised during the 2021
  restructuring were fully achieved or exceeded and were related to: (i) the volume of PFI’s MSME sub-
  loans facilitated by CGF, (ii) the volume of guarantees issued, (iii) the percentage growth of DBN’s LoC
  funding to PFIs with a maturity of more than 36 months, (iv) the number of PFIs implementing GRM, with
  mechanism in place for tracking how issues are resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant and DBN
  within the stipulated time, and (v) the number of PFIs reporting on lending to women sub-borrowers.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  High



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, a financial and economic analysis was conducted, and a similar exercise was undertaken at project
closure (ICR, pages 22-23 and Annex 4), although using slightly different methods. Below is an assessment of
the performance of both the financial/economic and operational efficiency of the project implementation.

Financial efficiency.

At appraisal, a CAMELS ("Capital adequacy, Asset quality, Management, Earnings, Liquidity and Sensitivity to
Market Risk") analysis of the base case concluded that the DFI was profitable and well capitalized. After project
implementation, the DFI was to have a high capital-adequacy ratio (CAR) due to its large capital base. The CAR
was expected to remain well above the minimum regulatory capital requirement of 15 percent. The profitability
and the CAR of the DFI would decrease with the increasing size of its loan book, because the DFI increasingly
would need to fund itself through bond issuance.

At project closure, the DBN total assets recorded a five-year compound annual growth rate of 17 percent,
closing the financial position on NGN 520.3 billion from NGN 278.8 billion position in the 2018 financial year.
The loan portfolio, starting at NGN 200 million as of November 2017, constituted over 70 percent of the total
assets of the DFI as of December 31, 2022. The DFI’s capital adequacy ratio stood at 64 percent as of
December 31, 2022, above the minimum regulatory requirement of 10 percent set for DFIs by the regulatory
body. The DBN recorded a 24 percent year-on-year growth in revenue from NGN 37.73 billion in the previous
year to NGN 46.92 billion in FY22, and interest from loans and advances accounted for about 67 percent of the
DFI’s revenue for the year.

Relative to the 2022 financial year budget, the DBN kept costs low with a cost-to-income ratio of 14.45 percent
against a budget of 17.32 percent. Also, the cost-to-income ratio on loans was 16.35 percent against a budgeted
ratio of 18.97 percent as of the report date. The DFI exceeded the budget on both ROA and return on equity at
5.80 percent and 14.21 percent, respectively, against budget numbers of 5.26 percent and 13.06 percent. The
profit margin as of the report date was also better than the budget at 62.70 percent.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Development Finance Project (P146319)



Economic efficiency.

During the project’s lifecycle, significant delays were accumulated due to various factors including (i) constraints
within the PIU, which experienced a change in directorship (ii) political and administrative transitions in the
Government of Nigeria, and (iii) further disruptions caused by COVID-19. These factors led to a 66-month
extension from the original closing date. Once the political and administrative framework was favorable, the
project remained a priority, and project implementation was accelerated. Consequently, out of the committed
amount of US$500 million, disbursed amount reached US$490.38 million and generated US$395 million in LoC
and US$85 million in partial credit guarantee, surpassing the set targets. Moreover, the project’s cost in relation
to the budget (Component 4) remained under control as only 50 percent of the approved budget was utilized for
project supervision. On balance, considering the high level of economic and financial benefits, and the relative
negative impact of implementation delays, the project efficiency performance is rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  26.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               31.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Overall, the project weighted outcome is rated as Satisfactory as indicated in Table 1 below.

The relevance of objectives is assessed as high, reflecting significant previous World Bank and Borrower
engagement in the country's MSMEs sector, and alignment of the PDO with the country's policy priorities and
the WB strategies in Nigeria.

Efficacy of the original project is assessed as substantial as four PDO indicators were fully achieved or
exceeded while two PDO indicators were partially achieved. Efficacy of the revised project is assessed as high,
as PDO indicators with unchanged targets and those for which targets were revised during the 2021 were either
fully achieved or exceeded.

Efficiency was substantial, based on positive ERRs and NPVs and good business results of the DBN and the
ICGL, though there were implementation delays.



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



                                       Table 1: Overall Weighted Outcome

                                                                    Assessed against the
                               Assessed against the 2014
                                                                     2021 PDO Revised                 Overall Rating
                               PDO Indicators and Targets
                                                                   Indicators and Targets
1. Relevance                  High                              High
2. Efficacy                   Substantial                       High
3. Efficiency                 Substantial                       Substantial
4. Outcome                    Satisfactory                      Highly Satisfactory
5. Rating value               5                                 6
6. Weight (% disbursed
                              0.8                               0.2
amount)
7. Weighted value             4.0                               1.2                                5.2, rounded to 5
8. Overall outcome rating                                                                          Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The discussion of the risk to development outcome in the ICR stressed macroeconomic and regulatory
risks presented below:

      Macroeconomic risks: The key risk to development outcome lies with the volatile macroeconomic
       environment with high inflation, slowing GDP growth, and high interest rates limiting loan growth
       overall and pushing banks to take refuge in government bonds. Also, foreign exchange scarcity has
       been affecting the financial condition of the banking sector overall, and risk aversion remained high.
       The above risks of economic nature might limit the performance and sustainability of achieved
       outcome.

      Institutional and regulatory risk: The DBN is a new firm, and might risk being penalized by the
       following regulations still in place: (i) the capping of the pricing of the IGCL which limits its ability to
       reach unbanked MSMEs, and (ii) the restriction put on the combination of both wholesale financing
       and credit guarantee.

      Governance and political risks: The ICR did not pinpoint this risk, but given the fact the DBN was
       created relying on strong support from the Government and its entities within a context of challenging
       political and economic environment, there is a risk that political support might wane away with the
       coming to power of a different wing of the political establishment. This change in the political
       leadership might affect the performance and the sustainability of the newly wholesale financial
       institution.


                                                                                                          Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to address critical issues of sustainable access to finance by
  MSMEs. The project was fully aligned with the priorities set out in the FY14-17 Country Partnership
  Strategy (CPS) that explicitly called for focusing on “increasing access to finance, including long-term
  financing, for key sectors such as housing, SMEs, agriculture, and infrastructure, through various
  mechanisms involving both private sector and public-private partnerships (PPPs), and potentially through
  a state-owned wholesale financing mechanism.” The proposed operation addressed the provision of
  finance, including term finance, through eligible PFIs, to expand outreach to urban and rural MSMEs. To
  ensure sustainable impact and scale, the mandate, governance, and operations of the new DFI was
  grounded on internationally recognized good practice principles.

  The project design was underpinned by background analysis and relevant lessons learned. There
  was sufficient analytical underpinning reflecting the MSME financing gap at the time and how a
  development financial institution may help close the gap. Studies on DFIs in other countries (Brazil,
  Türkiye, and South Africa) had been conducted to provide insights on how a new DFI could be best set
  up and implemented in Nigeria. A comprehensive economic analysis was conducted at the time of project
  preparation to quantify the larger economic impact of the project, including the increase in lending to
  MSMEs and the value-added generated by the project. Moreover, the background analysis incorporated
  relevant lessons from previous projects. To ensure sustainable impact and scale, the mandate,
  governance, and operations of the new DFI were grounded on internationally recognized good practice
  principles.

  The project preparation was thorough and participatory. The World Bank team made a significant
  effort to ensure that a sound corporate governance structure would be embedded into the new DFI to
  manage its risk. The project was also designed in partnership with other multilateral and bilateral
  international financial institutions and donors, including the AfDB, KfFW, and AFD, who provided equity
  and debt financing to the DBN. The World Bank also collaborated with the Department for International
  Development (DFID) on data gathering and analytical work to inform the project design. The coordination
  and consultation among these partners were a joint effort to establish the new wholesale DFI at project
  preparation.

  Institutional and managerial arrangements were crafted by a Bank team working in tandem with
  high-level staff from the Borrower Government. To provide the institutional framework that could
  support the growth of Nigeria’s MSME sector, the Government decided to establish a new wholesale DFI.
  The strategy of developing the new DFI rather than reforming an existing DFI was carefully considered,
  and it was concluded that a new DFI was preferable to ensure the shift from a riskier first-tier/retail
  approach in providing development finance to a second-tier and wholesale institution. From the
  beginning, the World Bank team worked in tandem with a high-level team from the Government and local
  institutions. The CBN also developed a draft regulatory framework that provided the framework for
  oversight, regulation, and supervision of the new DFI.

  Critical risks were identified, and mitigation measures were built into the project design. The
  project overall implementation risk was rated High because the project was a new DFI being built from

                                                                                                Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



  scratch in a challenging political and economic environment. However, various mitigation measures were
  put in place against the identified risks during project preparation. At project appraisal, governance was
  identified as the biggest risk to the new DFI, which included potential political capture of the new
  institution, as was the case with other existing DFIs, which incurred significant losses and failed to
  achieve sustainability as a result. However, this risk was mitigated by putting in place an innovative
  governance structure and other multilateral agencies being in partnership with the Government that has a
  majority stake in the DFI.

  There were some shortcomings in the M&E design at appraisal (refer section 9). Overall, the quality at
  entry was Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team exerted flexibility to adapt to the country's challenging macro-economic
 environment. Since the project began in 2014, there have been several macroeconomic headwinds that
 threatened its smooth implementation. This was further exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which
 disrupted the economy and made doing business more challenging.

 Installing the implementation office within the DBN headquarters building facilitated supervision
 and reporting. The establishment of a project implementation office within the DFI’s office enabled
 operations to be seamlessly executed without interference of smaller-scale projects within the DFP. At
 each stage of the performance-based condition, a progress report detailing the achievement of the
 previous tranche disbursement was submitted to the World Bank. Regular field visits by the World Bank to
 the DFI, and the observer representatives on the DFI’s Board facilitated the refinement of intervention
 options. Ad hoc capacity-building events, including overseas and domestic trainings and study tours, were
 organized to enhance understanding of management and staff of the DFI.

 Supervision teams provided timely support to the client on safeguards, procurement, and FM.
 Project supervision reports were compiled during supervision missions, where teams closely worked with
 the PIU and other implementation entities to enhance their capacity in critical areas. Project progress was
 documented in Aide Memoires and ISRs during these missions. These reports served as crucial tools,
 keeping World Bank management well informed about the project’s advancements. Through consistent
 documentation and sharing of updates, the missions ensured that project stakeholders remained informed
 about the project’s trajectory and achieved milestones. The team conducted 18 supervision missions and
 maintained open dialogue with counterparts, enabling robust monitoring across all dimensions;
 governance, objective, technical components, and operational strategy. The hands-on support provided to
 the client enabled the project to advance financial inclusion despite facing considerable head winds.

 The Bank team addressed implementation challenges, including issues within the PIU,
 disbursement delays, and COVID-19 disruptions. The Bank team worked with the counterpart to craft
 solutions. For example, early project implementation on the TA component lagged due to the PIU’s limited
 capacity, so the team orchestrated a project restructuring to shift the PIU from the Federal Ministry of
 Finance (FMoF) to the DBN to manage TA activities. The transfer of the PIU from the FMoF to the DBN

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



 helped streamline project implementation, enhance coordination, and leverage the DBN’s expertise in
 development finance. During COVID-19, the team again restructured the project to remove restrictive
 disbursement conditions and allow funds to flow to impactful credit guarantee activities and empower the
 DBN to play a countercyclical role.

 The Bank team succeeded in limiting the Government's interference in the project implementation.
 Another challenge faced by the DFI in the implementation of the project was the effect of the constant
 intervention from the government in rolling out subsidized or single-digit interventions to MSMEs through
 other existing DFIs and the regulatory body. This action directly or indirectly interferes with the
 competitiveness of the DFI credit facilities.

 The Bank team supported the Borrower in addressing high market volatility and high level of
 informality within the economy. Interest rate volatility had a significant impact on the pricing of loans
 provided by the DFI, and on the cost of funds for PFIs, and ultimately, the interest rates charged to
 MSMEs. The Bank project team provided sustained technical expertise to Government entities to address
 the macroeconomic management challenges affecting the national economy and the effectiveness of the
 newly created DBN (Technical Assistance and Capacity Building).

 Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The DBN was under the oversight of banking supervisory bodies and there was an alignment
 between the theory of change and the results framework of the project. The PDO was clearly stated
 and realistic, and the different project activities were designed to contribute directly to achievement of the
 PDO through a sound results chain. The DBN as a financial institution was required to meet prudential
 requirements with regard to capital adequacy, loan provisioning, recognition of loan losses, and other
 regulations and was subject to the oversight of the financial regulatory bodies. Moreover, as discussed
 in the section describing the operation's efficacy, the project had a clearly defined results chain by which to
 monitor and evaluate progress against the proposed indicators through regular reports. The original and
 revised results frameworks and the reconstructed theory of change were overall consistent.

 PDO indicators and targets were not fully realistic at appraisal, were not precisely formulated and
 had to be revised twice. The performance criteria to which the DBN’s Board of Directors and senior
 management were held responsible were aligned with the business strategy, and the DBN’s mandate
 included high-level indicators reflecting development impact, sustainability/efficiency, and organizational
 capacity. More specifically, measurable outcome indicators included (i) the volume of PFIs’ Eligible Sub-


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



 Loans facilitated by Line of Credit Facility, (ii) the quality of PFIs’ Eligible Sub-Loan Portfolio Quality, and
 (iii) the volume of PFIs’ Eligible Sub-Loans facilitated by the CGF. It is however noticeable that the theory
 of change did not identify any outputs. Moreover, the targets aimed to measure the performance of the
 CGF were overestimated at appraisal and were revised in 2021.

 Institutional and managerial arrangements were appropriate. The M&E system was designed to be a
 three-tiered process involving: (i) internal staff required to conduct periodic visits to PFIs to monitor
 performance and carry out due diligence to confirm that the PFIs continue to meet the DBN’s minimum
 eligibility criteria; (ii) PFIs required to provide some data points on their administration of the lending and TA
 components of the project as well as data on the end-beneficiaries; and (iii) external consultants engaged
 to carry out impact assessments on the project’s activities, PFIs, and MSMEs on an annual
 basis. However, the duration of the creation of a new development financial institution was
 underestimated, as it took about 10 years, instead of the initial 5 years.



b. M&E Implementation
  The assessment of the M&E implementation draws from the ICR material presented on page 30 and is
  summarized below.

  M&E implementation consisted in periodic reporting and surveys to capture project progress and
  impact. The project team submitted quarterly implementation progress reports and annual reports to
  regulators and development partners. To evaluate the outcome perceived by beneficiaries, the project
  financed surveys in 2019, 2020, 2021, and 2022 to assess how the project’s activities contribute to
  ecosystem-level outcomes that improve the enabling environment for MSME lending; and how the project
  empowers the PFIs to sustainably increase their MSME lending portfolio. For instance, the ICR indicates
  (page 50-51) that “the survey carried out in 2022 revealed that 100% of the sampled MSMEs secured the
  DBN’s funds to grow and scaled up their businesses, leading to improvements in key business
  performance indicators and the creation of over 900,000 new jobs, with a majority created by women-
  owned enterprises”.

  ISRs and Aide-memoires were key instruments to report on project progress toward the project
  objective. Thirteen Aide-memoires were prepared after supervision missions, and 18 ISRs were filed in
  the operational portal, and all of them were specific on describing the status of the project progress, and
  the challenges to overcome in order to achieve the project outcome.  In particular, an MTR was
  completed in June 2019, but the ICR was not explicit in its outlining the MTR’s contribution and role to the
  project implementation and monitoring.

  The results framework was revised in 2019 and 2021 for improved formulation and to make PDO
  indicators and targets more realistic respectively. During implementation, the Results Framework
  was revised to include additional indicators to measure the DBN’s performance. While the output of all
  project activities was well monitored, not all outcome indicators in the revised results-based frameworks
  were tracked during the life of the project. For example, data on PFIs’ MSME sub-loan portfolio at risk (30
  days) were not collected because the PFIs measured the performance of their entire loan portfolio and it
  was not specific to a particular fund provider, which made it impossible to isolate the DBN’s sub-loans at
  risk. As a result, the ICR used outcome indicators listed in the revised Results Framework as PDO
  indicators based on data availability.



                                                                                                       Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)




c. M&E Utilization
  Progress reports prepared and submitted by the project team informed the development impact partners
  of the project’s status and achievements, which served as the justification for the continuous release of
  funding. The findings of the positive impact from the project were shared with development partners,
  regulators, and the federal government, making the DBN a reference case for other DFIs and other
  governments in Africa.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was categorized as a Financial Intermediary (FI) project and the appropriate FI category is FI-2,
   implying that the sub-loan portfolio may potentially comprise subprojects that have limited adverse
   environmental or social risks or impacts. The project was fully consistent with World Bank requirements for
   all PFIs whose portfolio and/or proposed business activities present moderate social or environmental
   risks and are operated in a manner consistent with World Bank Performance Standards. The project did not
   trigger other safeguard policies, but three performance standards were adopted: (i) PS 1: Assessment and
   Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, (ii) PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions, and
   (iii) PS 3: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement.

   An Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) was developed and implemented, and regularly
   reviewed to ensure full operationalization of all predefined safeguards. Quarterly reports of the
   environmental and social risk assessment of its portfolio and other activities related to environmental and
   social sustainability were prepared.

   There were revisions and updates to the ESMS and development of a Grievance Redress Mechanism
   (GRM). The GRM was incorporated into the ESMS in 2021 and was automated through a service desk
   platform, which allowed for increased effectiveness in responding to complaints and tracking resolutions. A
   majority of the PFIs now have their GRM published on their websites.

   The environmental and social risk assessment of the project’s portfolio was medium, with over 90 percent of
   subprojects categorized as low risk. The project did not finance subprojects categorized as high on
   environmental and social risk. The project did not record any negative environmental and social incidence in
   its activities. The project did not receive nor finance any transaction on the exclusion list or on the list of
   environmental and social sensitive activities. The ICR overall rating of the compliance with environmental
   and social safeguards at project closure was Satisfactory.




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The assessment of the fiduciary compliance was concise in the ICR material presented on pages 31 and is
   summarized below.

   Procurement. Procurement was carried out in accordance with the World Bank Procurement Regulations.
   The Procurement Plan for each year was prepared on time and submitted for World Bank review.
   The procurement specialist in the PIU ensured successful implementation of good contract management
   practices, despite moderate challenges in the closing of a number of consultant contracts (No mis-
   procurement was declared in the project, and no integrity, corruption, or complaint case was reported.

   Financial management. FM was satisfactorily carried out during implementation. World Bank supervision
   missions regularly reviewed project FM system, including its compliance with World Bank policies. Audit
   reports were submitted on time, and there were no qualified opinions. The project benefited from
   experienced staff recruited by the DBN in the Finance and Audit Units who supported the PIU office at the
   initial stage of project implementation. The final external Audit of Financial Statements of the project
   accounts for the year ended October 31, 2023 was completed in August 2024 and had no qualified
   opinions. The report states that the observation points identified in prior years have been fully addressed
   by management during the current year.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The impacts listed below can directly or indirectly be linked to the project results:

          A DBN subsidiary also regulated by the CBN, has issued partial guarantees amounting to US$159
           million, which supported over 28,000 MSMEs with a loan value of equivalent to US$302 million.
           Nearly 17.9 percent of loans were guaranteed to women, 14.8 percent guaranteed to youth, and
           18.7 percent to first-time borrowers.
          Based on the number of jobs created by the sample from the 2022 evaluation, it was estimated that
           over the five-year period 912,438 new jobs were created by MSMEs, with about 55 percent created
           by women-owned enterprises. Although job creation was not a specific target set under the project,
           the reported job growth is a strong indicator of sustainability and efficiency.
          Another key variable for determining socioeconomic growth is revenue increase. From the 2022
           evaluation, 77.1 percent of sampled businesses reported an increase in revenue of up to US$20.6
           million.
          The majority of the surveyed MSMEs, especially those in the manufacturing, agriculture, and
           healthcare sectors, reported improvements in infrastructure, including renovation, refurbishment,
           and acquisition of equipment/materials needed for business operations.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Development Finance Project (P146319)



                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified a number of relevant lessons. Some of the key lessons are rephrased in the
paragraphs below.

Establishing a wholesale DFI that does not directly engage in retail lending or take on credit
risk can contribute to promoting MSME finance without crowding out private sector lenders.
Overall, the DBN provided liquidity and promoted the development of a robust MSME finance
ecosystem without directly competing with private lenders. The DBN focused on providing wholesale
financing to PFIs for on-lending to MSMEs, allowing the PFIs to take on these credit risks. By
adopting this approach, the DBN played a catalytic role in promoting MSME finance without
crowding out private sector lenders. The DBN avoided the practices of distorting the market through
subsidized or quasi-fiscal support and operated a flexible model that operates on market terms.

Strong and independent corporate governance and controls can contribute to fostering a
DFI’s ability to increase outreach and additionality. The DBN’s founding by-laws underscored
its focus on MSMEs, financial sustainability objectives, and independent corporate governance,
despite the Government being the largest shareholder. Board and executive management positions
were appointed through a competitive selection process based on professional experience, and
independent non-executive directors were always the majority to ensure that decisions rely on their
expertise. This framework ensured that the DBN remain focused on channeling wholesale funds to
eligible PFIs for on-lending to MSMEs. The DBN’s example underscores that strong governance
structures and operational controls are indispensable for DFIs to effectively carry out their mandate.

Sustained support from the Government and its entities can contribute to ensure the success
of a DFI wholesale lending operations, including an efficient pricing strategy. Since its
inception, the DBN received invaluable support from the Nigerian Government, including the
assistance with hedging funds and mitigating exchange rate volatilities. Continuity of such support
was crucial for the de-risking operations and amplifying impact, especially among underserved
market segments. From a regulatory standpoint, the project enjoyed commendable support,
highlighting the significance of a conducive regulatory environment. Furthermore, experience has
shown the need to revisit the pricing philosophy of lending above the inflation rate. In a high-inflation
macroeconomic context where MSMEs operate, adhering to a pricing principle that exceeds the
prevailing inflation rate can make the DBN’s facilities unattractive to PFIs. Consequently, a
reassessment of the pricing strategy is warranted to align with market realities and enhance the
attractiveness of the DBN’s offerings to PFIs, and ultimately, MSMEs.



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Development Finance Project (P146319)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The operationalization of the DBN and the ICGL was a flagship achievement of the IBRD in one of the key
  economies on the African continent. Medium and long-term impact of this project needs to be monitored and
  assessed so that other African countries can draw lessons necessary for addressing MSMEs access to
  finance in similar context of WB clients.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a comprehensive narrative of the project design and implementation and achieved results, and it
is generally evidence-based. The quality of analysis is strong, and the results orientation of the project was a
key feature of the ICR document. Special emphasis on impact of the project results on other segments of the
country's economy is noticeable. The ICR is internally consistent, as all parts are reinforcing each other from
the activities, the implementing arrangements, the achieved outputs and the progress toward the PDO.
Moderate shortcomings of the ICR include (i) the absence of outputs in the theory of change, and (ii) the
incomplete account of the MTR contribution to the project supervision and restructuring. The overall quality of
the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
