     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024203

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P153548                                   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86470                                30-Jun-2022                                         296,699,155.72

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Oct-2016                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           300,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       300,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Ebru Karamete                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (LA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 11), the
   Project Development Objectives (PDOs) of this Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project are “to improve
   access to disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction in select municipalities of
   Sichuan Province and to improve emergency preparedness in Shimian County in Sichuan Province.”

   This review will assess project performance against the above objectives parsed into the following:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



         to improve access to disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction in select
          municipalities of Sichuan Province
         to improve emergency preparedness in Shimian County in Sichuan Province.

   A Level 1 restructuring (see below) revised the PDO to replace Shimian County (a third level local
   government administrative hierarchy) with Ya'an Municipality (a second level local government administrative
   hierarchy). Shimian county is located within Ya'an Municipality.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Upgrading and Risk Reduction of Rural Roads (Total cost at appraisal was US$47.61 million, of which
   US$29.95 million was from IBRD; restructuring reduced the cost to US$39.83 million, of which US$24.3
   million was from IBRD; actual was US$34.21 million, of which US$ US$18.77 million was from IBRD) This
   component was to finance the upgrading and rehabilitation of rural roads in select counties in two
   municipalities – Chengdu and Ya’an – in Sichuan Province. This component was to finance the upgrading
   and rehabilitation of pavements, drainage ditches, bridges, culverts, guardrails, traffic signs, and slope
   protection in these rural roads. In addition, this component was to finance road safety audits for these
   investments to inform design. At restructuring, this component was reduced by dropping the Yinglu rural
   road in Yingjing County. The National Forestry and Grassland Administration planned a new National
   Panda Park that would overlap with the area of the Yinglu Rural Road. The overlap was expected to bring
   uncertain environmental risks and would change the safeguards category from B (partial assessment) to A
   (full assessment). Thus, this contract was dropped so as not to delay the project. Restructuring reallocated
   the US$5.6 million to emergency shelters in the urban area of Yingjing County in component 2 below.

   2. Upgrading of Priority Urban and Emergency Infrastructure (Total cost at appraisal was US$304.19
   million, of which US$245.38 million was from IBRD; restructuring increased this cost to US$370.71 million,
   of which US$235 million was from IBRD; actual was US$313.49 million, of which US$246.80 was from
   IBRD) This component was to finance urban infrastructure investments in select counties and districts in the
   Municipality of Ya’an. Investments were to include reconstruction of urban roads with associated civil works,
   construction of roads with associated civil works, bridges, emergency evacuation shelters with associated
   facilities and equipment, upgrading of river embankments, and construction of a water plant. In addition, this
   component was to finance the conduct of road safety audits for the above-mentioned road infrastructure
   investments to guide design. Restructuring added US$5.6 million to finance emergency shelters in the
   urban area of Yingjing County from the cancelled funds under the first component. Restructuring also added
   government counterpart financing to focus on new investments for stronger flood-resilient infrastructure
   improvements against record-high flood events in Ya’an Municipality in August 2019.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



  3. Technical Assistance for Strengthening of Disaster Management and Preparedness in Shimian
  County, later in Ya'an Municipality (Total cost at appraisal was US$4.50 million, all from IBRD;
  restructuring increased this to US$22.11 million, with US$20.5 million from IBRD; actual was US$18.27
  million, all from IBRD). This component was to finance technical assistance to design and implement a pilot
  disaster risk management (DRM) system for Shimian County and establish a disaster control and command
  center for the county’s emergency response office. This component was to finance hardware and software
  to establish the DRM system, and train and build capacity of system users. A Level 1 restructuring (see
  below) replaced Shimian County (a third level local government administrative hierarchy) with Ya'an
  Municipality (a second level local government administrative hierarchy).

  4. Project Management and Capacity Building (Total cost at appraisal was US$27.02 million, consisting
  of US$19.42 million from IBRD; actual cost was US$12.24 million, all from IBRD). This component was to
  finance surveys and detailed design for project activities. In addition, this component was to finance project
  management, procurement, engineering supervision, consulting services, external environmental and
  resettlement monitoring, and the conduct of training and workshops.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$384.1 million. The actual cost was US$382.2 million.

  Financing: The International Bank for Reconstruction Development (IBRD) provided US$300 in Investment
  Project Financing (IPF), which was 100 percent disbursed at project closing.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed US$84.07 in counterpart funds, increased its
  commitment to US$160.42 million and disbursed US$82.91 million. The Task Team in their October 8, 2024
  email to IEG stated that, the government disbursed only 56 percent of its commitments, as actual amounts
  for land acquisition, project preparation, and administrative costs were lower than estimations. Effective use
  of competitive contract management also helped reduce the costs and therefore borrower contribution.

  Dates: The World Bank Board approved the loan on October 13, 2016 and became effective on March 6,
  2017. The World Bank team conducted the Mid Term Review (MTR) on December 2, 2019. The loan was
  originally scheduled to close on June 30, 2022, but closed on December 31, 2023, after an 18-month
  extension due to prolonged approval processes of the upgraded civil works designs of investments added
  at restructuring; disruptions caused by COVID-19; and the underestimated capacity of county-level project
  implementation units (PIUs, see Sections 5, Efficiency, and 10 Other Issues, Procurement below). There
  were two restructurings:

        On April 7, 2021 (RES41339), a level 1 restructuring revised the PDO statement to expand the
         geographic area covered by the project, replacing ‘Shimian County’ with ‘Ya’an Municipality.’ The
         revised PDO was restated “to improve access to disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk
         reduction in select municipalities of Sichuan Province and improve emergency preparedness in
         Ya’an Municipality in Sichuan Province.” This restructuring included the following changes in targets
         and outcome and output indicators:
              o The outcome indicator ‘Improved capacity of local authorities in Shimian County to prepare
                for multi-hazards’ was expanded to ‘Disaster preparation activities informed by the disaster
                risk management (DRM) system in Ya’an Municipality.’ The target was to measure the


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



                  impact of the new Ya’an Municipality-level DRM system by achieving 100 percent in disaster
                  preparation activities.
               o The end target of ‘Direct project beneficiaries’ increased from 313,000 to 340,000.
               o The end target of ‘Rural roads rehabilitated incorporating landslide risk reduction measures’
                  was reduced from 35.00 km to 29.64 km. The government dropped the Yinglu Rural Road
                  component (Yingjing County) to avoid implementation delays. The National Forestry and
                  Grassland Administration was planning a new National Panda Park that would overlap with
                  the Yinglu Rural Road. The expected uncertain environmental risks would trigger a full
                  environmental assessment (category A).
               o The end target of ‘People in urban areas provided with improved access to roads’ increased
                  from 100,000 to 103,000.
               o The end target of ‘People in urban areas provided with improved drainage conditions’
                  increased from 83,000 to 86,000.
               o The end target of ‘Population with improved access to emergency shelters’ increased from
                  56,000 to 96,000.
         On June 13, 2022 (RES50596), a level 2 restructuring upgraded the output indicator (People with
          improved access to an all-season rural road) to replace an original outcome indicator (Rural roads
          rehabilitated incorporating landslide risk reduction measures). The targets of the indicators in the
          results framework were revised. The loan closing date was extended by 18 months to close on
          December 31, 2023.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. Restructuring expanded the geographic
   scope of the project PDO. The project funds remained unchanged. The project would be assessed against
   the more ambitious expanded objective and revised targets (Guidance Manual, p. 11). One outcome
   indicator and one output target were replaced because of the cancelled rural road in Yingjing County.
   Resources were reallocated to other components; two indicators were added with targets to capture the
   activities in the expanded areas; and targets of other output indicators were increased.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: The Lushan Region in Sichuan Province is prone to earthquakes with significant events that have
occurred in densely populated areas. Lushan County and eight other counties/districts constitute the Ya’an
municipality. Lushan was the epicenter of the April 20, 2013 earthquake that affected 2.2 million people
across several counties, prefectures, and cities in Sichuan Province. The earthquake caused 176 deaths
and over 12,000 injuries. In Qionglai City 350 km of its rural roads network were severely damaged and
economic losses were estimated at US$48.4 million. With the lessons from the past two decades, this
project was to strengthen critical infrastructure, such as roads and emergency infrastructure. The Lushan
Earthquake Reconstruction Master Plan prioritized these investments. This project was to focus on risk
reduction and disaster resilience in infrastructure and multi-hazard planning in Ya’an municipality and in
Qionglai City.

Country Plans: The PDO was relevant to the country plans. China focused on integrating risk reduction
into socioeconomic planning other than just post-disaster recovery and reconstruction. Building codes in
earthquake-prone regions were strengthened since the Wenchuan Earthquake. Enhanced

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



coordination between central and local authorities, using up-to-date disaster risk information was to inform
development planning and investment decisions. Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Master Plan, the
Overall Planning, and Implementation Covering Reconstruction after Lushan Earthquake, Sichuan
Development and Reform Commission Investment No. 315, and relevant sectoral plans identified priority
infrastructure investments that were to be financed under this project. The PDOs were also relevant to the
five-year Economic and Social Development Plans at the national, provincial, and municipal levels. China’s
14th Five-Year Plan (FYP 2021–2025), specified building resilient cities, enhancing the capacity for cities to
respond to emergencies, and improving the emergency response system. Sichuan’s Provincial
Government’s 14th FYP (2021–2025) emphasized strengthening the capacities for disaster preparedness
and disaster risk reduction. The Ya’an Municipal 14th FYP (2021–2025) called for enhancing the efficiency
of social governance, improving its response to natural disasters by adopting disaster-resilient infrastructure
(such as roads), upgrading the disaster resilience of critical infrastructure, constructing emergency shelters,
and developing its municipal-wide disaster risk management system.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDOs were aligned with the World Bank Group’s
China Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2020–2025. The PDOs were relevant to the CPF
Engagement Areas and Objectives. First, under Objective 1 advancing market and fiscal reforms –
supporting the achievement of Objective 1.2. – to achieve a more efficient and sustainable subnational
fiscal management and infrastructure financing. Second, under Objective 2 – promoting greener growth –
supporting the achievement of Objective 2.4 – to strengthen sustainable natural resource management by
providing people in urban areas improved drainage conditions, rehabilitating, and constructing drainage
pipelines, and upgrading the level of disaster resilience of critical infrastructure. The PDOs also contributed
to achieving Objective 2.5: Promoting Low-Carbon Transport and Cities, by developing the DRM system in
Shimian County and Ya’an Municipality.

World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: Over the past two decades, the World Bank
has financed recovery operations in China as part of its disaster response. After the 7.0 magnitude
earthquake on February 3, 1996 in Lijiang (Yunnan Province,) and the 6.2 magnitude earthquake on
January 10, 1998 in Zhangbei (Hebei province,) the World Bank financed the restoration of infrastructure
and facilities (housing, health, education, agriculture and irrigation, water resource management, cultural
heritage conservation and protection) and enhancing income generating activities for vulnerable
populations. The World Bank financed the Wenchuan Emergency Reconstruction Project (WERP P114107)
to restore essential infrastructure, health, and education services. That project also introduced seismic and
flood risk reduction and capacity building for local governments to manage recovery programs. With the
World Bank’s experience in disaster recovery in China and its experience in earthquake reconstruction and
multi-hazard risk reduction elsewhere, the World Bank was well-positioned to contribute to long-term
disaster resilience in Sichuan Province.

The PDO – “to improve access to disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction in select
municipalities of Sichuan Province and to improve emergency preparedness in Shimian County in Sichuan
Province” – was appropriately pitched to address the development problem brought by natural hazards to
local governments of Sichuan province.

Overall, the PDO remained highly relevant to the objectives in the country’s current development plans at
the national, provincial, and municipal levels. The PDO was also relevant to the objectives of the World
Bank country partnership strategy at closing. The relevance of objective is rated High.




                                                                                                     Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to disaster resilient infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction in select municipalities of
                             Sichuan Province

                             Rationale
                             THEORY OF CHANGE: Overall, the Theory of Change (TOC) was logical and established a causal link
                             between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. The critical assumptions adequately framed the conditions
                             that would enhance the achievement of the objectives. A TOC was not required at appraisal. One was
                             created for the ICR using the causal link of the inputs to outputs and expected outcomes in the results
                             framework in the PAD (PAD, Annex 1). The project was to support risk reduction efforts in Ya’an and
                             Chengdu municipalities by rehabilitating and upgrading investments in critical road and emergency
                             infrastructure under the "build back better" principle in select urban and rural municipalities and improving
                             disaster preparedness. Certain structures, like schools, hospitals, police and fire stations, emergency centers,
                             key government buildings and lifeline infrastructure were to be designed to higher than the minimums
                             applicable standards, given their importance and/or additional safety considerations. Roads and bridges
                             served as lifelines for evacuation and access for post-disaster response, and designs were to be sufficiently
                             resilient to ensure key routes remain operational and secondary routes can be quickly restored based on their
                             strategic classification. The Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Master Plan, the Overall Planning, and
                             Implementation Covering Reconstruction after Lushan Earthquake (Sichuan Development and Reform
                             Commission Investment No. 315), and relevant sectoral plans identified these priority infrastructure
                             investments. The outcomes were to be the number of beneficiaries who have access to emergency centers,
                             hospitals, and other infrastructure services in the short term. A long-term outcome was that infrastructure in
                             the project areas in Sichuan Province would be disaster resilient. In the long term, these outputs would
                             contribute to socio-economic development, enhance equal access to urban infrastructure, and integrate risk
                             reduction measures in the county/districts plans. Restructuring expanded the geographic focus from Shimian
                             County to Ya’an Municipality. The targets for the outcome indicators for beneficiaries increased because new
                             urban investments were added.

                             CRITICAL ASSUMPTIONS: The following two assumptions were included in the TOC to enhance the
                             probability of achieving the expected outcomes: (i) infrastructure built or upgraded to higher design standards
                             would be resilient to natural disasters such as earthquakes and floods, and (ii) ongoing operation and
                             maintenance (O&M) of the infrastructure would be supported by adequate funding.

                             OUTPUTS:

                             The following targets were achieved:


                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)




      Constructed 29.64 km of two rural roads incorporating landslide risk reduction measures. The target
       was 29.5 km. These were in Shixin in Tainquan county and Daohuo in Qiongial City in Chengdu
       municipality with facilities for managing geological disasters.
      Completed all targeted19 shelters. Two were in Mingshan, two in Yucheng, five in Lushan, two in
       Shimian, four in Yinjing, and four in Tianquan.
      Completed a water treatment plant, as targeted with a capacity of 2,500 m3/day of water to Baoxing
       County and ensured a clean water supply for all the people in Muping Town, meeting the target.

The following targets were exceeded:

      Rehabilitated 54.38 km of non-rural roads, the target was 53.8 km.
      Rehabilitated and constructed 95.04 km of drainage pipelines, the target was 93 km.
      54 units of critical infrastructure with upgraded level of disaster resilience, the target was 50 units. The
       critical infrastructure included bridges, embankments, floodways, and shelters.

OUTCOMES:

The following outcome targets were achieved:

      131,000 people (target was 131,000) with improved access to an all-season rural road.
      103,000 people (target was 103,000 people) in urban areas were provided with improved access to
       roads. 48.95 percent (target was 45 percent) of them were female.
      86,000 people (target was 86,000) in urban areas provided with improved drainage conditions. 48.95
       percent (target was 45 percent) of them were female.

The following outcome targets were exceeded:

      430,147 direct project beneficiaries (target was 340,000); 48.95 percent (target was 45 percent) of
       them were female gained access to improved rural roads, and other urban infrastructure such as
       roads, emergency shelters, and drainage systems.

The following outcome was not part of the results framework and did not have any target but reported in
pictures in Annex 8 of the ICR:

      The roads benefited residents by reducing their travel time along the safer roads, for example, 10
       minutes shorter along the Lingguan Town, along the reconstructed Yanzi Road has shortened the
       travel time from Shimian Industrial Park to Shimian Urban Area from 20 minutes to 5 minutes; the
       travel time between Caoba Town and Ya’an High-Speed Train Station was reduced from 25 minutes
       to 15 minutes; and unreported minutes in Fuwu Town in Yingjing.
      The Baoxing County embankment protected Muping Town from the August 22, 2019 flooding. The
       Mingshan District embankments protected over 4,000 people in the Pingqiao Sub district and Huaixi
       River Community from the August 2020 flooding. Other upgraded embankments and floodways
       prevented damages from flooding in Luyang Township and Siyan Town.
      After the 6.8 magnitude earthquake in Luding County, Ganzi, Sichuan Province on September 5,
       2022, Shimian County suffered serious damages and losses. However, the main infrastructure—
       roads, bridges, and shelters—was not damaged. The bridge had normal traffic, no damage on

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



       the road surface, and has withstood the disasters. The Lianpowan Dadu Bridge connecting the
       Xiangyang East Sub district and Yonghe Sub district served as the main channel for disaster relief
       after the 2022 Luding Earthquake.
      On June 1, 2022, an earthquake of magnitude 5.9 struck Lushan County, Sichuan. During the
       earthquake, the old water plant broke. The new water plant had been completed and put into
       operation before the earthquake. The new water plant ensured a clean water supply for all the people
       in Muping Town.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective – to improve access to disaster-resilient
infrastructure and strengthen risk reduction – is rated Substantial. The constructed infrastructure benefited
the targeted residents. Even though it was not clear from the ICR if adequate resilience standards were
applied for these investments, the project team subsequently clarified that all infrastructure supported by the
project was resilient to earthquakes and roads built were all season roads. The project team added that the
upgraded design required that the Bank-financed embankments were to protect the project regions from a 1-
in-20-year to 1-in-50-year flood event. However, the ICR also noted that in some instances the county
government prioritized community concerns over adherence to disaster resilient design guidelines. For
example, the county agreed to concerns raised by merchants and residents to reduce the heights of street
curbs in commercial areas, to avoid impeding commercial operations, and adjusted the drainage capacity
standards, but heightened pedestrian safety concerns and risk that urban flash floods may affect adjacent
structures. Moreover, the evidence to support the “strengthened risk reduction” was only provided in terms of
access to disaster-resilient infrastructure. The ICR acknowledges that "resilient infrastructure is only a partial
solution to risk reduction" (para 98) and ‘strengthening risk reduction’ could have been better articulated as
risk reduction can be achieved not only through hard infrastructure but also by soft measures.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve emergency preparedness in Shimian County in Sichuan Province. The PDO was expanded to
include the entire Ya’an Municipality in Sichuan Province, including Shimian County.

Rationale
THEORY OF CHANGE: Overall, the Theory of Change (TOC) was logical and established a causal link
between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. The critical assumptions adequately framed the conditions
that would enhance the achievement of the objectives. A TOC was not required at appraisal. One was
created for the ICR using the causal link of the inputs to outputs and expected outcomes in the results
framework in the PAD (PAD, Annex 1). The project was to promote knowledge transfer and capacity building
at the local level by piloting a multi-hazard risk information platform in Shimian County. The data from DRM
system would be integrated into local socio-economic plans and investments. Knowledge was to be shared
across districts, counties, and municipalities in Sichuan. These investments in risk management would
improve emergency preparedness in the target area. Outcomes included adoption of disaster risk
management systems and achieving scores when using these systems. The target was to achieve 100
percent use of the new Ya’an Municipality-level DRM system in disaster preparation activities. Restructuring
expanded the project’s geographic scope to cover the entire Ya'an Municipality (a second level local

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



government administrative hierarchy) and included Shimian County (a third level local government
administrative hierarchy). Expanding the area scaled up the DRM system. The expanded coverage was to
improve impact and increase efficiency by spreading the maintenance costs across more participants. The
pilot Shimian County DRM system was to be integrated into the Ya’an Municipal DRM system. The expanded
scope was aligned with the goals of the national Ministry of Emergency Management.

The following assumption - enhanced institutional and staff capacities of local government officials would
result in more effective emergency response - was to enhance the probability of achieving the expected
outcomes. The expanded geographic coverage of the PDO took advantage of the economies of scale -
spread the cost of maintenance and upkeep, and a more rational use of the DRM system across the
municipality - to justify a municipal-wide DRM system rather than a county level one within that municipality.

OUTPUTS:

The following targets were achieved:

- Shimian County and Ya’an municipality Disaster Risk Management (DRM) systems were operational by end
of December 2023. The Ya’an Municipality-level DRM system was built upon the Shimian County DRM
system and could access, compile, and analyze data at the county, municipal, provincial, and national levels.
After restructuring, the initial Shimian County DRM system expanded to create a more comprehensive DRM
system for
the entire Ya’an Municipality. This platform supports the interconnection of data, information, and decision ma
king for the improvement of the three
level disaster relief system covering the city, county (district), and disaster sites. The main functions of the
DRM system include disaster monitoring
and early warning, comprehensive risk assessment, command and decision support, rescue and relief optimiz
ation, and risk education and training.

Nine subsystems comprise the Ya'an DRM system, including integrated technologies such as Big Data,
Internet of Things, Video Fusion Network, and Remote Sensing Imaging; the existing monitoring and sensing
equipment and early warning systems from 20 municipal departments (the Ministry of Emergency
Management, the Sichuan Provincial Emergency Management Bureau, the Political and Legal Committee of
Ya'an Municipal Party Committee, the Municipal Public Security Bureau, the Municipal Transportation Bureau,
the Municipal Bureau of Natural Planning, and seven enterprises and public institutions such as the State
Grid Electric Power and the three major communication carriers) to enhance disaster response. This DRM
system air and space sensing network, video sensing network, Internet of Things sensing network, data
resource management platform, information technology (IT) infrastructure support system, application support
system, analytical application system, comprehensive emergency communication system, and integrated
emergency command center. This DRM system used advanced technologies integrated them with existing
monitoring tools and early warning systems

     o The Shimian County DRM system integrated the existing flood, meteorological, seismic, and
       geohazard observation and warning systems piloted in Shimian Town and Caoke Township.
     o The Ya’an DRM system, covered Yucheng District, Mingshan District, Lushan County, Tianquan
       County, Baoxing County, Yingjing County, and Shimian County. The project conducted over 10 on-site
       training courses for 342 people from the municipal and county emergency response bureaus. The



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



       training improved system users’ skills in operating systems, emergency communications equipment,
       and command-site equipment.

The following targets were exceeded:

      388 person hours (target was 360 person hours) of systems training on how to operate the multi-
       hazard system including hardware and software applications, emergency communication, and on-the-
       job training in Shimian county (140 person hours) and Ya’an municipality (248 person-hours).
      In 2023, the Emergency Management Bureaus of Ya’an municipality, Yingjing, Tiangquan, and
       Mingshan conducted 5 field studies and officials and staff from the Shimian hydraulic and weather
       bureaus, and a fire camping company attended a DRM system training on October 8, 2023 (target 4
       events) to share knowledge in setting up the DRM system.

The following outputs were reported but were not part of the results framework and had no targets:

      The Municipal DRM system gathered data that included monitoring and alarm data, data on relief
       material, rescue team data, basic information on key places/spots, and surveillance video. This
       system has aggregated 236 million data records, 1,068 tables, 334 data assets, and access to the
       city’s key monitoring, including public security Skynet and over 6,600 forest fire monitoring video
       channels.
             o From January 1, 2024, to the present, the Ya’an DRM system has completed the following
               activities:
                      2024 Ya’an Earthquake Emergency drill
                      Emergency Rescue Equipment Distribution Ceremony
                      Participated in the DRM Research conducted by the Guangdong Province Emergency
                        Management Department.
                      The State Council Office of the Earthquake Relief Command Working Group visited
                        Ya’an to conduct seminars and exchange information on earthquake disaster
                        preparedness and response guidance services.
                      The first round of inspection of Sichuan Provincial Earthquake Relief Headquarters
                        Office in 2024
                      The Provincial Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference
                        inspected the development of the safety and emergency industry powered by digital
                        and intellectual technology.
                      Examined and inspected by the National Institute of Disaster Prevention and Science
                        and Technology.

OUTCOMES:

      108,740 people (target was 96,000) had access to improved emergency shelters. 48.95 percent
       (target was 45 percent) were female. The construction of the emergency shelters could accommodate
       all residents for emergency evacuation in the event of earthquakes, mudslides, and other disasters.
       The 19 emergency shelters were also utilized for earthquake and emergency drills to enhance
       residents’ awareness of where they can get help when disasters happen. According to the county
       PMOs, after the completion of the emergency shelters in November 2021, the local government of
       project counties held at least two emergency drills every year using these shelters.


                                                                                               Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)




      100 percent of all disaster preparation activities were informed by the DRM systems in Shimian
       County and Ya’an municipality based on a score card indicating improved capacity of local authorities
       in Shimian County to prepare for multi-hazards (The target was 90 percent). The Task Team clarified
       on September 28, 2024 to IEG, that the score card was adopted from the 2016 feasibility study of the
       pilot Shimian County DRM system. Six factors were to be scored: (i) basic data management; (ii) early
       warning capacities; (iii) risk identification capacities; (iv) establishment of a risk assessment model;
       (v) development of an emergency preparedness information system; and (vi) emergency rescue
       capacities. The Shimian County authorities never used the complicated scorecard system. At the Mid-
       Term Review, this indicator was replaced by “The DRM system in Ya’an Municipality informed the
       preparation of Disaster response activities.”
      The original Shimian DRM system was expanded and integrated into the Ya'an Municipal DRM
       system with broader and more comprehensive coverage of natural hazards, and covered early
       warning for earthquakes, geological disasters, floods, meteorological disasters, and forest fires. The
       Shimian DRM system could monitor hydrographic information to mitigate economic loss and
       casualties from hydrographic disasters but did not cover earthquakes below 4.0 magnitude. The
       Shimian County Emergency Management Department installed and commissioned 10 new additional
       accelerator sensor stations and four new wideband seismic sensor stations for the Shimian DRM
       system in October 2022 or a total of 18 stations that collected earthquake signals under magnitude
       4.0.
      The Ya'an DRM system provided maintenance training and resources for the sustainable operation of
       the Shimian DRM system.
      The Task Team provided the following additional information: The Ya’an Municipality and the Shimian
       County DRM Systems were well functioning. There was no official report specifying the number of
       people who received disaster or early warning communication, but WeChat and text messages were
       sent to all Ya’an Municipality residents. For example, (i) in July 2024, a possible landslide warning due
       to heavy rain; (ii) in July 2024, the Ya’an Emergency Management Department using the Ya’an DRM
       System conducted an emergency response operation during the heavy rain-induced landslide in
       Hanyuan County; (iii) in September 2024, early warning from the Shimian County DRM System on a
       heavy rain-induced landslide evacuated villagers and prevented casualties.

The following outcomes were reported but did not include outcome level targets or achievements such as
lives saved, or the value of property loss avoided:

      During the March 22, 2024 Shimian County Wildfire, the Ya’an Municipal Emergency Management
       Department utilized satellite remote sensing to monitor the space-air-ground integrated platform and
       scan fire spots for 24 hours. The command center analyzed the data to assess potential wildfires to
       inform rescuers. The Task Team clarified that there were wildfires on March 22, 2024, at Huilong
       Town near Yaxi Highway in Shimian County (3.22 Shimian Wildfires). The Ya’an DRM System
       detected the wildfires using the World Bank-financed high-resolution camera and the 360-degree
       panoramic infrared fisheye camera. The DRM system pinpointed the accurate location of the wildfires
       and helped the emergency response team prevent the spread of the wildfires.
      The Ya’an Emergency Management Bureau used the Emergency Mobile Communication Command
       Vehicle to secure the emergency communication network at the front line. Various portable
       communication equipment supported rapid communication at the rescue site and ensured safe rescue
       operation.



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



                            Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. The
                            capacity of Ya’an Municipality authorities to respond to multiple hazards, including earthquakes, floods and
                            fires improved based on reported actions following the disasters. The system integrated the existing flood,
                            meteorological, seismic, and geohazard observation and warning systems established in Shimian County.
                            The project discontinued the indicator measuring the effective utilization of the DRM system via the use of a
                            score card incorporating several key factors. The ICR and the task team provided examples on the utilization
                            of the DRM system to justify the strengthened emergency preparedness, but a more robust measurement
                            was necessary. For example, there was no systemic evidence provided in terms of the timeliness of warning
                            system and speed of response, etc. to demonstrate preparedness which was integral to the earlier indicator
                            on measuring the utilization of the DRM system. The ICR (para 98) also notes that even though emergency
                            shelters have been built and the PDO indicator achieved, there have been instances observed of the shelters
                            being misappropriated for alternative uses, such as Government offices or for commercial purposes. For
                            example, the emergency shelter in Lushan County, which was completed in 2021, now includes amusement
                            park facilities that could impede its availability in times of disaster.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy rating is Substantial with minor shortcomings. All PDO-level and intermediate indicator
                            targets were met or exceeded, The ICR notes that results showed that the roads, upgraded critical
                            infrastructures, and two DRM systems contributed to improving disaster preparedness in Ya’an Municipality.
                            The project demonstrated evidence on access to resilient infrastructure however, the risk reduction aspect of
                            the PDO was not explicitly defined or measured. The ICR candidly acknowledges that "resilient infrastructure
                            is only a partial solution to risk reduction" and ‘strengthening risk reduction’ could have been better
                            articulated as risk reduction can be achieved not only through hard infrastructure but also by soft measures.
                            There was need for more robust measurement of the indicator on improving 'emergency preparedness' (e.g.
                            the timeliness, accuracy of response), and the ICR notes instances of shelters being misappropriated for
                            alternative uses, such as Government offices or for commercial purposes.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and Financial Efficiency: At appraisal, all investment activities were subjected to a cost-benefit
   analysis (CBA). Emergency shelters, and public safety measures used cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA)
   because quantifying and monetizing benefits and establishing direct causal links between investments and

                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



benefits proved difficult. Benefits were from savings in travel time and transport costs, productivity increases,
and improved accessibility by residents to public services, estimated avoided or reduced damages from natural
disasters (future floods and earthquakes), and improvements in living conditions, amenities, public health, and
the environment. Economic benefits and costs were valued at 2014 price levels, net of inflation, duties, and
taxes. The discount rate used was 5 percent. The project duration was 30 years of operation including one to
three years of construction. The ICR noted that asset residual values were reflected in the last year of the
benefit stream since most of the assets (roads and pipelines) last beyond 30 years; however, unless these were
concrete roads, 30 years of project life for road infrastructure is rather long. The economic internal rates of
return (EIRRs) for urban roads, drainage, and sewerage pipelines along these roads, ranged from 8.58 to 12.95
percent; for rural roads from 10.42 to 12.33 percent, and for floodwater investments from 10.43 to 10.81
percent. For emergency shelters, CEA or least-cost analysis compared different technical options and selected
the least cost option as the more efficient use of resources. Sensitivity analysis assumed a 10 percent increase
in total costs and a 10 percent decrease in total benefits. This led to EIRRs of 9.71 percent for the road
investment in Lushan County; 8.60 percent for the Shixin Road in Tianquan County; and 9.10 percent for the
flood management investments.

Economic efficiency analysis at closing followed both the Chinese departments guidelines and those of the
World Bank. Analysis used a 5 percent discount rate to be consistent with the rate used at appraisal, used
constant 2023 prices in valuing costs, assumed a 30-year operation period. The economic benefits of urban and
rural road construction or rehabilitation included savings in vehicle operating costs, passenger and cargo travel
time, and reductions in economic loss from accidents. The economic benefits of the urban road investments
were from transportation improvements strengthened earthquake disaster response through better evacuation
routes and increased land values adjacent to the roads. At closing, the economic analysis of the emergency
shelters was not included or fully explored (ICR, paragraph 62 and Annex 4, paragraph 5) but reported on
observed benefits during the ICR preparation such as net revenue benefits from the operating income of the
parking lots in emergency shelters. All subprojects yielded economic internal rates of return (EIRRs) above 5
percent. Sensitivity analysis confirmed the investments would withstand fluctuations and sustain future
economic benefits. EIRR at closing ranged from 13.8 to 17 percent for urban roads; 12.5 to 13.6 percent for
rural roads; and 11.9 to 15.6 percent for floodway embankments. The EIRRs at closing were higher than at
appraisal. The Task Team confirmed that the same sensitivity analysis method used at appraisal was replicated
at closing.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Project implementation was extended by 18 months. The original
investments were implemented on time. The investments after restructuring experienced some delays because
of prolonged approval processes of the upgraded civil works designs; cross-sectoral features of the Ya’an
Municipality DRM system design; travel restrictions and disruptions caused by COVID-19, and the low capacity
of county-level project implementation units (PIUs) that underestimated the complexity of the bidding process
(see Procurement below). The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) approved the
restructuring by October 2021, which delayed the initiation of new investments. The Sichuan Provincial Leading
Group (PLG) developed the project’s institutional strengthening component. Two Provincial-level Project
Management Offices (PPMOs) had prior World Bank-financed project experience and spearheaded the capacity
building implementation. Eight county PMOs, and designated PIUs for each city and county supported the
PPMO. Only three of the eight counties had World Bank-financed project experience. As a result, the project
team delivered targeted training in environmental and social safeguards, procurement, and financial
management (FM). Additionally, various local government departments had to coordinate under the Emergency
Office to establish a risk management system that applied to both Shimian County and Ya’an Municipality. The
operational structure enhanced institutional capacity for disaster preparedness at the county and municipal



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



levels. This claim was supported by the coordination reported following the disasters (see Section 4 Efficacy
above).

The project's efficiency is rated Substantial, albeit marginally. The economic analysis results exceed the 5
percent discount rate used for the analysis and are slightly higher than a more reasonable 12 percent discount
rate. In addition, the ICR acknowledged the inadequate examination of the economic impact of the emergency
shelters at appraisal to compare at closing. Administrative inefficiencies extended the project by 18 months.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    81.80
 Appraisal                                                 11.11
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    83.10
 ICR Estimate                                              15.20
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve both objectives is
rated Substantial with minor shortcomings. While the project demonstrated evidence of improved access to
resilient infrastructure, there were minor shortcomings in measuring the evidence of "strengthened risk
reduction" and "emergency preparedness". Efficiency is rated Substantial. The overall outcome is rated
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks the development outcomes achieved by the project:

       Environmental risks and risks from natural hazards: The area remains vulnerable to natural
        disasters such as earthquakes and floods. Admittedly, the disaster resilient infrastructure completed
        under this project would aid in reducing such risks. The municipality also has in place the DRM


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



        system that would build its disaster resilience and allow for an effective emergency response.
        However, its geographic location continued to affect its vulnerability to natural hazards.
       Technical risk: The DRM systems in place introduced technological innovations, software, and
        hardware, and processes that require periodic updating. To mitigate this risk, the local government
        plans to expand the reach of the system to benefit constituents by linking with other widely used
        social media platforms (ICR, Annex 7). According to this plan, after obtaining the filed domain, the
        Ya’an DRM system will sponsor a WeChat official account for emergency response for residents to
        enhance the public's awareness of disaster risk, knowledge about emergency response, and rescue
        skills through publicity, education, and training. This WeChat official account will have the following
        functions: (i) incident reporting, (ii) emergency response real- time updates, (iii) disaster reduction-
        related publicity and education, and (iv) volunteer sign-up.
       Government ownership or commitment risks: To sustain the development outcomes achieved,
        the World Bank team recommended that each operating agency specified in Table 7 in the ICR
        submit annual budgetary requests to cover O&M costs for the infrastructure assets turned over to
        them. Local governments were expected to allocate budgets for O&M line items to these agencies as
        part of the districts’ annual budgets.
       Social risk: The alternative use of emergency shelters is a risk. Shelters and the surrounding parking
        area were reported and observed to be used for other purposes, such as government offices, for
        blood donation and environmental protection campaigns, or for commercial purposes, such as for
        underground parking to resolve traffic jams, or as an amusement park. During the ICR mission, the
        team observed that parking lots at many shelters were at full capacity. These uses could delay
        access to emergency supply rooms and affect the efficiency and effectiveness of a response to an
        emergency. The ICR had no information on mitigating measures to be undertaken.
       Governance Risk: The World Bank team recommended that Sub-PMOs conduct emergency drills
        before project closing. They also recommended that municipal emergency response plans include the
        conduct of these routine drill exercises. Both the physical structure and maintaining efficient
        emergency operations reduce risks from natural hazards and promote resilience. The Task Team
        clarified that the Ya’an Emergency Management Bureau (YEMB) is responsible for O&M for the Ya’an
        DRM system in close coordination with the Ya’an Housing and Urban-Rural Development. The
        central government contributes to the YEMB annual O&M budget.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team designed this project by considering the developments plan to address disaster
  resilience of the target communities at the national, municipal, and county levels. With China focusing
  more on integrating risk reduction into socioeconomic planning than post-disaster recovery and
  reconstruction, building codes in earthquake-prone regions were strengthened after the 2008 Wenchuan
  Earthquake; and coordination between central and local authorities recognized as an important link to be
  fostered. The project team also considered the World Bank’s focus away from recovery and replacement
  of destroyed infrastructure assets to reducing risk and enhancing resilience of the community. The project
  team designed the project with inputs from stakeholders using surveys, meetings, and consultations. This
  feature was informed by the lessons from previous projects such as those from (i) Turkey ISMEP Project,
  where over 920,300 volunteers were trained to strengthen the coordination of emergency response and

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



  campaigns to reach residents; (ii) Indonesia experience, where communities were engaged in improving
  emergency response systems, evacuation spaces, and emergency facilities to increase resilience and
  helped authorities respond to disasters; (iii) WERP, where communities in the education sector were
  enjoined to sensitize the population and increase their awareness to natural hazard risks and emergency
  response; (iv) Latin America experience, where landslide risk assessment along the alignment of the
  proposed road investments to ensured that the appropriate risk reduction measures were included in the
  investments; and (v) Chile, where technical codes and standards, and risk reduction features – cost-
  effective resilience measures, quality-control, and enforcement mechanism – were included in the design
  of infrastructure investments. The project team conducted technical, financial, and economic aspects of
  the project components using the specified infrastructure investments. The project was to incorporate
  lessons to the investments by building critical infrastructure to higher standard against risks of
  earthquake, flooding, landslide, and rockslide, and relying on landslide assessments where relevant.

  The project team appropriately rated overall implementation risk as ‘Substantial’ because of the risks
  associated with counterpart funding, the borrowing capacity of the participating municipalities, and the
  implementation capacity of the project implementing units (PIUs). The project extended across eight local
  government bodies, with varying levels of implementation capacity, and only three counties had World
  Bank-financing experience. The project team outlined the mitigation measures to be adopted with a clear
  hierarchy for implementation supervision and training and capacity building activities to be conducted to
  address institutional capacity challenges. This design aspect was informed by the experience in China
  where authorities participated in disaster risk management, preparedness, and response to mainstream
  risk reduction into development planning. The project was to build on WERP, by ensuring that critical
  infrastructure was built according to seismic and construction codes. The World Bank team adopted the
  institutional set up under the World Bank-financed Lushan Earthquake Recovery Project. An overall
  provincial policy group to provide policy direction to the lower administrative levels. Provincial project
  management offices (PMOs), sub-PMOs and Project Implementation Units at the city, county, and district
  levels mirrored the institutional set up to reduce implementation risks. This implementation arrangements
  justified readiness to implement. Note that the mitigating measures did not sufficiently address the low
  procurement capacity of county-level PIUs and hence, contributed to procurement delays.

  Overall, the quality of the World Bank team’s performance at entry is rated Satisfactory. The PDOs were
  clearly aligned with the development plans for the target community at the county, municipal, and the
  country levels. The PDOs contributed to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework at the time of
  appraisal and focused on developing resilience and not only recovery or reconstruction. The Theory of
  Change was sound and outlined the causal link between the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes.
  Risks were identified and offset by adequate mitigation measures. A shortcoming was in lack of adequate
  measurement for "risk reduction" and "emergency preparedness" indicators in the results framework (see
  Section 9 M&E below).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 13 supervision missions and several additional short technical missions
 over the seven-year project period, including one virtual mission during the COVID-19 pandemic. The

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



 World Bank team had adequate staff, both globally experienced and Beijing-based experts in DRM,
 disaster recovery, urban development, flood risk management, and water and sanitation services. The
 World Bank team provided the PMOs, Sub-PMOs, and PIAs with timely operational and technical support
 with hands-on training and experience-sharing workshops. Added technical consultancies and targeted
 training mitigated the institutional capacity risks and procurement delays (see Section 10, Other Issues,
 Procurement below). Time-bound corrective measures were implemented to expand outcomes and extend
 the project period to achieve the outcomes. Counterpart funds proved adequate with the central
 government adding resources.

 Loan savings supplemented investment needs. The unforeseen overlap of the National Panda Park with
 the Yinglu Rural Road in Yingjing County dropped this activity at restructuring to avoid further delays. The
 Bank team conducted the Mid Term Review as planned and restructured the project to take advantage of
 added resources to achieve the unchanged PDO. A long domestic review and approval process, and
 disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic led to implementation delays (see Section 5 Efficiency
 above).

 Overall, the quality of the Bank’s team at supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall, the quality of the World Bank’s performance at entry and supervision is rated Satisfactory.
 Lessons were adopted to inform design, consultations provided inputs to design. The PDO was clearly
 stated. A reasonable theory of change showed the causal links that attributed the inputs and outputs to the
 expected outcomes of the project. The World Bank team added smaller sized technical missions to
 supplement its regular supervision support and provided targeted training to address implementation
 challenges. A minor shortcoming was that the lack of indicators noted at design remained unaddressed
 during the opportunity offered by the two restructurings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) was clearly stated, and outcome focused. The results
 framework (PAD, Annex 1) provided the causal link between input, outputs, and expected outcomes. The
 M&E system was based on the results framework. Indicators were to track progress of activities to achieve
 the PDO. Indicators were relevant, measurable, timebound and achievable. These indicators included
 baselines, targets, and data collection methods. However, outcome indicators did not capture the quality of
 infrastructure to show adequate resilience standards were applied, or indicators for ‘strengthening risk
 reduction.’ In addition, the indicator that referred to a score card where improved capacity of local
 authorities in Shimian County to prepare for multi-hazard events was not clearly defined. The Task Team
 clarified that this indicator proved to be too complicated, remained unused by the authorities, and later

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



 replaced at the Mid Term Review by another indicator (i.e., the Ya’an Municipal DRM system informed the
 preparation of Disaster response activities). Constructing disaster resilient-designed infrastructure reduced
 risks from natural hazards but soft infrastructure components such as strengthening resilience in the
 governance structure to reduce risks, enhancing disaster preparedness through targeted communications
 programs, and conducting regular drills, also contributed to reducing risk, which could have been measured
 via outcome indicators, e.g., how effectively the new emergency preparedness system was working via
 testing it thorough emergencies, or various emergency drills. District/county project implementing units
 (PIUs) assisted by the Provincial-level Project Monitoring Office (PPMO) were to monitor the indicators and
 reported to the Ya’an Project Monitoring Office (PMO). Consultants and technical experts were to conduct
 M&E training.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Sichuan Provincial Transportation Department Highway Bureau (TPPMO) of the Sichuan Urban
  Environment Project Office (UPPMO) implemented the M&E system as designed. Management and
  construction supervision consultants assisted in environmental and social safeguard audits. The PMO
  adjusted the indicators in the results framework to add and increase targets but did not provide for
  additional indicators that could strengthen the reporting of outcomes as mentioned above. The Task
  Team acknowledged in their October 8, 2024 email to IEG that the design requirement for
  embankments to protect the project regions from a 1-in-20 year to 1-in-50 year flood event was not listed
  as an indicator of flood resilience. The PMO refined the tourist satisfaction baseline. An M&E system was
  implemented to oversee land acquisition, demolition, and resettlement activities, with internal and
  external monitoring mechanisms. Internal monitoring, in partnership with the resettlement consultant and
  the Ya’an PMO, identified and documented issues across subprojects, and reported separately on
  changes or delays. In February 2018, the Ya’an PMO hired an external agency to conduct annual
  monitoring of the resettlement process, assessed livelihood restoration, and housing for the displaced.
  They completed 12 external monitoring reports.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data informed management and the World Bank team on progress and issues that required
  corrective measures. M&E data informed the use of loan savings, revisions to targets of outcome and
  output indicators in the results framework and informed the restructurings. M&E data was used to
  confirm compliance with the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and World Bank safeguards in land
  acquisition and demolition, compensation against minimum price standards. Resettlement measures
  improved living standards and housing of affected individuals.

  Overall, the M&E is rated Substantial. The indicators were adequately designed with minor
  shortcoming.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards. The project was assigned Category “B” because the expected environmental
   and social impacts were expected to be limited in scale and intensity. The project triggered OP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), and OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). The
   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in English were
   disclosed through the World Bank’s InfoShop on April 13, 2016. Updated versions were disclosed on May
   14, 2020. The project implemented the mitigation measures specified in the EMPs. No environmental,
   health, or safety incident/accident was reported during implementation. At the December 2019 midterm
   review, the government reported that the National Forestry and Grassland Administration was planning a
   new National Panda Park. This government-financed project would pass through the project-financed Yinglu
   Rural Road in Yingjing County. The team dropped the Yinglu Rural Road component at restructuring to
   avoid any implementation delay if the environmental safeguards category were to change – from partial
   (category B) to full assessment (category A) because the rural road through the park heightened
   environmental risks. The project complied with environmental safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph 86).

   The project triggered OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) because several bridges, roads along rivers, river
   embankments, floodways, and a small-scale water treatment plant may have potential impacts on the river
   ecosystem. The project area did not contain any critical habitats, such as nature reserves and endangered
   or rare fauna and flora. The project team conducted ecological surveys and impact assessments and
   concluded limited and temporary impacts on the river ecosystem. The EMP identified mitigation measures.
   The project team implemented these. The external monitoring found no significant conversion or
   degradation of natural habitats (ICR, paragraph 88).

   The project triggered OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) because the project was to finance a hanging
   bridge in Shimian County. This bridge was classified as a city-level cultural relic site and located near a
   pedestrian road. The EMPs included mitigation measures that external environmental monitors reported
   were implemented.

   Social safeguards. The project complied with the World Bank’s social safeguards policies (ICR, paragraph
   90). The project triggered OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) because construction activities expected
   permanent and temporary land acquisition and resettlement activities. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
   outlined corresponding mitigation measures. Residents were consulted and informed about the project. A
   grievance redress mechanism was implemented with local communities provided with contact information at
   different government levels to collect public opinions. At closing, 5,039 people in seven townships and 19
   villages - 940 households or 3,486 people were affected by permanent acquisition; 355 households or
   1,494 people were affected by house demolition; and 16 business entities, or 59 people were affected by
   non-residential house demolition – were compensated and resettled.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The project financial management arrangements and performance complied with
   the World Bank requirements. Project audit reports were submitted to the World Bank with acceptable


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



   quality, with unqualified (clean) audit opinion in a timely manner. All interim financial reports (IFRs) were
   submitted on time.

   Procurement. The construction market conditions in China at the time of bidding, coupled with the World
   Bank’s Procurement Regulations, limited the PIU’s ability to exclude low-capability contractors despite
   thorough evaluations to verify bidder capacities. This led to implementation delays for certain engineering
   and civil works and adherence to international contract management standards. Design documents and
   bills of quantities proved inaccurate and contributed to increased contract costs. Several complaints were
   reported for some works contracts during bidding. All complaints were resolved. After intensive training,
   procurement of works, goods, and consultant complied with the World Bank procurement policy.
   Efficiencies from optimized design, bids for civil works that came in at 30 percent lower than originally
   estimated, foreign exchange gains, and cancelling a rural road work sub-component all contributed to loan
   savings that led to additional investments. All contracts were implemented on time, with satisfactory
   quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Overall efficacy and efficiency
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                  was rated substantial.
                                                                                  Shortcoming in formulating
Bank Performance                 Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               outcome indicators and use of
                                                                                  restructuring to address this.
Quality of M&E                   High                  Substantial                See as above.

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The project offered the following lessons from the operation:

      When projects support disaster resilient infrastructure, it is important to broadly
         define outcomes and relevant indicators to capture broader economic impact and
         livelihoods for a more comprehensive assessment of the project. In this project, design
         focused on reducing physical risk with solutions beyond physical infrastructure design
         solutions. The PDO was achieved. However, the outcomes suggest other aspects of
         resilience could form part of design. For example, the project showed that resilient


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



  infrastructure could spur economic growth. Regions with flood protection standards
  experienced an influx of commercial and residential investments. Public open spaces around
  emergency shelters have enhanced the community's daily experience. Landscaped grounds
  of the emergency shelters contributed to improved daily life. Future disaster resilience
  initiatives highlight envisioning resilient infrastructure not only as a means of risk reduction
  but also as a driver of broader community benefits, contributing to safe and vibrant
  communities. The link between outputs and its broader economic impact, for example, on
  real estate development and waterfront rehabilitation, could be strengthened. A strengthened
  DRM system causes effective disaster response and benefits resilience. Improved
  preparedness could be reflected in activities such as conducting periodic drills. Risk
  reduction then fosters livable habitats for residents of disaster-prone areas. Indicators of a
  more comprehensive economic impact assessment may broaden the outcomes of ‘risk
  reduction’ and 'Building Back Better.'
 If including the construction of emergency shelters to strengthen disaster resilience, it
  is important to have detailed design specifications suitable to address emergencies
  and guidelines for their non-emergency use. In this project, emergency shelters were
  completed in time. These were utilized in crises such as the COVID outbreak, earthquakes,
  and floods. However, certain technical design shortcomings were discovered after
  completion. For example, the underground parking areas were to be overflow shelter areas
  and/or storage for emergency equipment when not in use. Ceiling heights in most were
  restricted to 2.2 m, which impeded the use by emergency vehicles. Emergency supplies
  required transfers to smaller vehicles, affecting time-sensitive emergency responses.
  Another observed shortcoming was the visibility of connections for septic tank to mobile
  toilets, or water supply to tanks. These technical design flaws, while minor, underscore the
  importance of ensuring that detailed specifications match the needs to deliver effective and
  efficient emergency response. When not in use as shelters these structures may serve as
  public open spaces, with potential for social and leisure activities, especially in land-scarce
  regions. Preparing guidelines for non-emergency use of shelters could optimize its utility for
  the community.
 If standards for disaster resilient infrastructure incorporated community concerns to
  design these standards, adherence may be better implemented. In this project, county
  government prioritized community concerns over adherence to disaster resilient design
  guidelines. For example, the county agreed to concerns raised by merchants and residents
  to reduce the heights of street curbs in commercial areas, to avoid impeding commercial
  operations. This design concession adjusted the drainage capacity standards, but
  heightened pedestrian safety concerns and risk that urban flash floods may affect adjacent
  structures. In Mingshan, residents expressed hygiene concerns while county officials
  expressed image issues because the shelter was near the Mengdingshan Scenic Resort
  entrance. As a result, mobile toilet connections were excluded from emergency shelters in
  Mingshan. While the Government and implementing agencies are to be commended for their
  attentiveness to community input, a more concerted effort to gain resident support for design
  standards might have been beneficial. Alternatively, a more creative design solution that
  meets both safety objectives and community preferences could be further explored. These
  instances highlight the need for a balanced approach where the community is enjoined to
  express their preferences while not compromising safety and project goals.




                                                                                              Page 21 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Lushan Earthquake Reconstruction Project (P153548)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a detailed overview of the project. The report follows the guidelines. The narrative follows the
TOC. The TOC allows the reader to follow along on how results were achieved including how the evidence
supported the ratings. The inputs and outputs and expected outcomes were causally linked. The report focused
on results with the annexes providing added information to substantiate the ratings. For example, Annex 8
highlighted project outcomes citing travel times reduced because of the disaster resilient roads that residents of
the municipality used. Lessons were derived from the operation. The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 22 of 22
