     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0024190

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P161387                                    Governance for Enabling Service Delivery

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kenya                                      Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
 IDA-61330                                  31-Dec-2022                                        139,460,039.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Sep-2017                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        139,460,039.08                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Gloria Carolina             Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA) dated September 28, 2017 (FA, p. 5) and the Program Appraisal
   Document (PAD, Annex 1, p. 26), the Program Development Objective (PDO) was:

   “To improve utilization and transparency of resource management in selected service delivery ministries,
   departments, and agencies (MDAs).”



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



   For the purposes of this review, the PDO has been parsed as follows:

         PDO1: To improve utilization of resource management in selected service delivery MDAs
         PDO2: To improve transparency of resource management in selected service delivery MDAs.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   According to the Program description in the PAD (Annex 1), the Program had six (6)
   components (described as Results Areas (RAs)). During restructuring, two new RAs (RA7 and RA8) were
   added.

   RA1: Prioritized public investments: This component aimed to strengthen public investment management
   (PIM) by enhancing planning and oversight over public investment projects by selecting projects based on
   sound appraisal criteria, alignment with economic and strategic priorities, and realistic projections of their
   returns. This was expected to lead to higher returns on public investments with minimal delays and cost
   overruns, higher value-for-money, and strong accountability.

   RA2: Reliable funding for service delivery: This component aimed to support efforts to ensure efficient
   and effective budget utilization, accurate and timely accounting and reporting, and effective control, scrutiny,
   and review of expenditure of public resources.

   RA3: Efficient and transparent procurement: This component aimed to strengthen procurement and
   asset disposal functions in the public sector by ensuring that the e-procurement system and State
   Procurement Portal (SPP) were up to date and included appropriate information on tenders, awards,
   contract implementation, and complaints follow-up by disclosing procurement data and following Open
   Contracting Data Standards (OCDS).

   RA4: Consolidated staff data: This component aimed to support efforts to consolidate staff data and
   strengthen payroll management by enabling sound decision-making on wage-bill and human resource
   management.

   RA5: Timely and quality financial statements and audits. This component aimed to enhance the
   timeliness, quality, and relevance of financial statements and audit reports by ensuring that timely and
   quality audit reports would be presented in a manner that facilitated stakeholders’ ability to understand and
   scrutinize the impact on service delivery.

   RA6: Strengthened fiduciary assurance and transparency: This component aimed to strengthen
   fiduciary assurance and transparency by ensuring that stakeholders inside and outside government would



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 39
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



  have access to appropriate and relevant information on service delivery and that information would be
  timely, reliable, trusted and used in decision-making and accountability processes.

  RA7 (new): Transparency and Oversight of State Corporations: This component was introduced during
  the first restructuring and aimed at developing and introducing a Government Investment Management
  Information System (GIMIS) across State Corporations (SCs) for the preparation and submission of data on
  corporate, budget, and statutory requirements to reduce discrepancies between budget allocations and
  outcomes as well as manual budget management and reporting. Improving the governance of SCs was
  important for Kenya to promote private sector-led growth in line with the country’s aspirations to become a
  middle-income country.

  RA8 (new): eCitizen as an Integrated Platform for Government Service Delivery. This component was
  introduced during the first restructuring and aimed to make eCitizen the medium of choice for citizens and
  businesses to conduct their transactions with the government by supporting the Government Digital
  Payments (GDP) Unit’s ambitious three-year plan to reengineer the portal and substantially increase the
  services it provided. In addition, a new Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI) was to support the formulation
  of a change management and communications strategy, regarding the scope, nature, introduction, and
  rollout of services offered on eCitizen.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program expenditure: The total program cost at appraisal was US$246 million. It comprised of an
  estimated Government of Kenya (GoK) contribution of US$86 million, development partners (DPs)
  contribution of US$10 million, and proposed IDA funding of US$150 million (PAD, Table 10, p. 38). The
  actual program cost at closing for the IDA component was US$139,460,039, equivalent to 92.9 percent of
  the original planned IDA expenditure (ICR, p. 2). The GoK’s contribution was US$86 million; and DP’s
  contribution was US$65 million. The DPs’ contribution was increased to cover the additional costs related
  with the extension of the project (TTL interview).

  The Program Expenditure Summary table in the ICR (Annex 3) reports US$632 million as the total cost
  Estimate at Appraisal. The Region (TTL) clarified that this includes a total allocation of US$472 million by
  the GoK for its larger Public Financial Management Reform Strategy (PFMRS) which included the PforR.
  Only US$86 million of the US$472 million was allocated and disbursed by the GoK for the PforR project.
  The IDA financing amounts are consistent with the Financing Table on page 2 of the ICR.

  Borrower contribution: The GoK committed to and disbursed US$86 million (35 percent of the total
  disbursed).

  Dates: The program was approved by World Bank Group’s (WBG) Board of Executive Directors on
  September 7, 2017, and became effective on January 15, 2018. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted
  on November 30, 2020. The original closing date was December 31, 2022, but the program was extended
  by 12 months and closed on December 31, 2023, with a total duration of six years (ICR, p 2).

  Restructurings: The Program was restructured once on October 29, 2021. The PDO remained the same,
  but there were modifications to selected DLIs, Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs), and associated
  targets; addition of two new RAs (RA7 and RA8) and associated DLIs and DLRs; reallocation of



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 39
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



disbursement amounts; and a no-cost extension of the program date from December 31, 2022, to
December 31, 2023 (Restructuring Report (RES) 46127, para 13).

The changes made during restructuring are reflected in the table below. IEG has assigned the RAs and
DLIs to each PDO and numbered DLI 7 (in new RA7) as DLI 5.3 under RA5. All RAs and DLI names are
consistent with Annex 3 of the PD, and new areas/ DLIs are presented in the RES (RES46127). Original
amounts are the same in the PAD and the RES. Revised and Disbursed amounts are from the ICR, Annex
1B, Revised amounts matched the RES and are labeled “allocated amount” in the ICR.

                                Changes made during Restructuring
PDO      DLI #   DLI
                                (RES46127, Section III)
RA 1: Prioritized Public Investments

       Original allocation of US$25 million reduced to US$20 million. Actual: US$20 million.

PDO 1 1          Prioritized          “Public Investment Management (PIM) Manual” replaced with
and              Public                “PIM Guidelines” that had already been disseminated across
PDO 2            Investments           MDAs, and were the foundation for the draft PIM Regulations,
                                       whose approval is a Prior Action under the ongoing DPF series.
                                      New activities to complete the inventory of public investment
                                       projects to address challenges regarding nonperforming and
                                       stalled projects in the development budget that became a priority
                                       for fiscal consolidation.
                                      References to e-ProMIS (Electronic Project Monitoring
                                       Information System) deleted as the platform for the automation of
                                       the PIM process because the GoK opted for a more advanced
                                       and suitable technology.
                                      New DLRs were introduced and associated disbursement
                                       allocations.

                                By December 2021:

                                 DLR 1.5(a): At least 10 projects that have been approved for inclusion in
                                the public investment project pipeline comply with the project concept
                                note (PCN), pre-feasibility and feasibility provisions outlined in the PIM
                                Guidelines.

                                 DLR 1.5(b): Automation of the PCN, pre-feasibility and feasibility phases
                                of the public investment project cycle enabled through the completion of
                                the pre-investment module in the Public Investment Management
                                Information System (PIMIS).

                                 DLR 1.5(c): PIM Manuals completed for (i) economic appraisal of
                                projects, (ii) national parameters and commodity-specific conversion
                                factors to be used in project preparation, and (ii) monitoring and
                                evaluation of projects.


                                                                                                Page 4 of 39
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                                 DLR 1.5(d): Project stock-take exercise completed for all ongoing and
                                new projects and project inventory up to date in Hyperion for at least10
                                service delivery MDAs in the infrastructure, health, and education
                                sectors, with information regarding the status of the projects and multi-
                                year commitments.

                                By December 2022:

                                DLR 1.6(a): At least 30 projects that have been approved for inclusion in
                                the public investment project pipeline comply with the PCN, pre-feasibility
                                and feasibility provisions outlined in the PIM Guidelines.

                                 DLR 1.6(b): Automation of budgeting, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E),
                                and reporting phases of the public investment project cycle enabled
                                through the completion of these modules in PIMIS.

                                 DLR 1.6(c): Sector-specific PIM methodologies developed for
                                infrastructure, health, and education sectors at the national level.

                                 DLR 1.6(d): Project stock-take exercise completed for all ongoing and
                                new projects and project inventory up to date in Hyperion for at least 20
                                service delivery MDAs, with information regarding the status of the
                                projects and multiyear commitments

                                      Allocation of US$25 million decreased by US$5 million to US$
                                       20million.

RA 2: Reliable Funding for Service Delivery and Public Investment Projects

      Original allocation of US$37 million reduced to US$18.5 million. Actual: US$16.5 million.

PDO 1 2.1       Reliable              Modified for alignment of activities to the new Cash Management
                Funding for            Framework developed by the National Treasury (NT), as part of
                Service                the PFMRS, with support from the Program.
                Delivery and          New DLRs under DLI 2.1 introduced to leverage the power of
                Investment             automation to consolidate the gains achieved and institutionalize
                Projects               a more efficient process for cash planning and approval decisions
                                       within the NT.

                                By December 2021:

                                DLR 2.1a.5(a): Guidelines adopted by NT which require that revised
                                MDA cash plans protect service delivery and infrastructure budget
                                priorities

                                 DLR 2.1a.5(b): The cash management system strengthened in Hyperion
                                and Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), with (i) MDA
                                cash allocations set using category limits from the annual aggregate

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 39
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                                including in-year cash plans; (ii) MDA cash plans preparation within cash
                                allocations and consolidated using Hyperion; (iii) exchequer register
                                functionality prepared; (iv) requests within limits are processed within the
                                expenditure category limits subject to unforeseen contingencies; and (v)
                                exchequer reports and cash management reports generated.

                                 DLR 2.1a.5(c): Automation of the approval process workflow for (i)
                                annual and revised aggregate cash plans in Hyperion and (ii) receivers of
                                revenue and exchequer releases in line with the cash management
                                framework categories in IFMIS.

                                By December 2022:

                                DLR 2.1a.6; Percentage of approvals for (i) annual and revised
                                aggregate cash plans processed using Hyperion and (ii) receivers of
                                revenue and exchequer releases processed using IFMIS (target: 100
                                percent for (i) and (ii)).

                                      Allocation of US$19 million reduced to US$18.5 million.

                                      Deleted due to difficulties in revenue forecasting in an uncertain
                                       fiscal environment. It was not achieved in 3 consecutive years
                                       due to multiple factors, including inefficiencies in the institutional
               Improved
                                       arrangements for budget formulation, as the legislature would
               Revenue
                                       alter the proposed revenue mobilization measures, and the
        2.2    Projections
                                       pandemic. However, its essence was incorporated in the
                                       International Monetary Fund (IMF) program and the Inclusive
                                       Growth and Fiscal Management DPF (P168204).
                                      Allocation of US$8 million reallocated.

                                      Deleted due to difficulties in revenue forecasting in an uncertain
               Reliability of
                                       fiscal environment. However, its essence was incorporated in the
               Domestic
                                       International Monetary Fund (IMF) program and the Inclusive
        2.3    Financing
                                       Growth and Fiscal Management DPF (P168204).
                                      Allocation of US$10 million reallocated.

RA3: Efficient and Transparent Procurement

     Original allocation of US$21 million reduced to US$13 million. Actual: US$8 million.

PDO 1 3        Efficient and          Target was revised from 20 to 5 MDAs.
and            Transparent            Timeline adjusted to allow time for MDAs to use a full-fledged e-
PDO 2                                  procurement system and to address delays in the formulation of
               Procurement             the e-procurement roadmap and the procurement process for the
                                       development of the new e-GP platform.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 39
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                                     New DLRs and associated disbursement amounts were
                                      introduced.

                               By December 2021:

                               DLR3.5(a): Roadmap agreed for upgrading e- Government Procurement
                               (e-GP) system including the state procurement portal, aligned to
                               requirements of the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act
                               (PPADA) and attendant regulations.

                                DLR3.5(b): e-GP Project Implementation Unit established,
                               developer/contractor in place, and System Requirement Specification
                               (SRS) and System Design Document (SDD) approved.

                               By December 2022:

                                     DLR3.6: At least 5 MDAs have piloted the e-GP System modules
                                      on registration, procurement planning, and contract management
                                      through invoicing.
                                     Allocation of US$21 million decreased by US$8 million to US$13
                                      million.

RA4: Consolidated Staff Data

     The original allocation of US$20 million was reduced to US$12 million. Actual: US$12 million.

PDO 1 4        Consolidated          Target was revised from 20 to 10 MDAs.
               Staff Data
                                     Timeline adjusted for MDAs whose payroll data had been
                                      uploaded to Government Human Resource Information System
                                      (GHRIS) and to address delays experienced in the formulation
                                      and implementation of roadmap for the development of GHRIS.
                                     New DLRs were introduced and associated disbursement
                                      amounts.

                               By December 2021:

                               DLR 4.5: Upgraded GHRIS is operational, including use of UPN, HR data
                               warehouse, and Payroll module operational, as well as payroll data for
                               teachers and one other MDA uploaded into GHRIS.

                               By December 2022:

                               DLR 4.6: Payroll data for 10 MDAs uploaded into GHRIS.




                                                                                             Page 7 of 39
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                                      Allocation of US$20 million decreased by US$8 million to US$12
                                       million.

RA5: Timely &, Quality Financial Statements and Audits

      Original allocation of US$27 million increased to US$27.5 million. Actual: US$27.5 million.

                                      Targets on percentage of MDAs for which the NT had reviewed
                                       the quality of annual financial statements generated from IFMIS
                                       and submitted to the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) within
                                       four months, increased from 30 percent to 40 percent for 2021,
                                       and 50 percent for 2022.
                                      New DLR introduced for special audits to be undertaken by the
                                       OAG on the use of funds disbursed to MDAs to address the
                                       COVID-19 crisis.

                Timely,         By December 2021:
                Quality
                Assured,        DLR 5.1.5; The percentage of MDAs for which the NT has reviewed the
        5.1
                                quality of Annual Financial Statements generated from IFMIS and has
                Financial       submitted to the OAG within 4 months (target: 40 percent).
                Statements
                                By December 2022:

                                DLR 5.1.6; The percentage of MDAs for which the NT has reviewed the
                                quality of Annual Financial Statements generated from IFMIS and has
PDO 1                           submitted to the OAG within 4 months (target: 50 percent).
and
PDO 2
                                      Allocation of US$9 million decreased by US$0.5 million to US$8.5
                                       million.

        5.2     Timely,        a) % of MDAs whose financial statement audits have been completed
                Efficient,     within 3 months after OAG receipt of final financial statements using an
                Quality Audits improved methodology, undergone quality assurance.

                                b) Months between receipt of final consolidated financial reports by OAG
                                and submission of the audited financial statements to Parliament Funds
                                for this DLI fully disbursed.

                                      Timeline adjusted to allow receipt of consolidated financial
                                       statements and submission to Parliament in seven months in
                                       2021 and five months in 2022, from four months and three
                                       months, respectively.
                                      New DLR introduced for special audits to be undertaken by the
                                       OAG on the use of funds disbursed to MDAs to address the
                                       COVID-19 crisis.



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 39
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                               By December 2021:

                               DLR 5.2a.5: Special COVID expenditure audits Completed.

                               DLR 5.2b.5: Months between receipt of final consolidated financial
                               reports by OAG and submission of the audited financial statements to
                               Parliament (target: seven months).

                               By December 2022:

                               DLR 5.2a.6: Percentage of MDAs whose financial statement audits have
                               been completed within 3 months after OAG receipt of final financial
                               statements using an improved methodology, undergone quality
                               assurance (target: 50 percent).

                               DLR 5.2b.6: Months between receipt of final consolidated financial
                               reports by OAG and submission of the audited financial statements to
                               Parliament (target: five months).

                                     Allocation of US$ 18 million increased by US$1 million to US$19
                                      million.

                               RA7: Transparency and Oversight of State Corporations (New)

                                     Allocation of US$17 million

      5.3      Transparency          New area introduced to strengthen the governance of State
      (DLI 7   and Oversight          Corporations (SCs) which was critical for Kenya’s goals of private
      in the   of State               sector-led growth and provision of quality public services to
      ICR)     Corporations           citizens and businesses.
               (New)                 New DLI to introduce a Government Investment Management
                                      Information System (GIMIS) across SCs for the preparation and
                                      submission of data on corporate, budget, and statutory
                                      requirements of SCs.
                                     New DLRs were introduced and associated disbursement
                                      amounts.

                               By December 2021:

                               DLR 7.5(a): Approved user requirements for GIMIS.

                               DLR 7.5(b): Approved User Acceptance Testing (UAT) for GIMIS.

                               DLR 7.5(c): Number of State Corporations submitting data on corporate,
                               budget, and statutory requirements using a MIS (target: 30 agencies).

                               By December 2022:


                                                                                              Page 9 of 39
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                               DLR 7.6: Investment module developed in GIMIS.

                                     Allocation of US$17 million.

RA6: Strengthened Fiduciary Assurance and Transparency

     Original allocation of US$20 million increased to US$27 million. Actual US$27 million.

                                     Revised to require information publicly available online in
                                      searchable form on program expenditure; sub-program
                                      expenditures for all MDAs, as well as information for at least one
                                      MDA transfers to service delivery units.
                                     Timeline adjusted in DLRs under DLI 6.1 for the development of
                                      the citizen budget portal due to delays experienced in the
                                      development of the technical specifications for the platform.

                               By December 2021:

                               DLR 6.1.5: MDAs can access the Analytical Repository for multi-year
               Transparent     budget data in searchable form by program and sub-program through the
               Institutions    budget module in IFMIS.
        6.1
                               By December 2022:

                               DLR 6.1.6(a): UAT for the Budget Portal interface which provides
                               information in a searchable form on programs and sub-programs, and for
PDO 2                          at least 1 MDA, information on transfers to service delivery units.

                               DLR 6.1.6(b): For all MDAs, information is publicly available and in
                               searchable form by program and subprogram, and for at least 1 MDA,
                               information is available on transfers to service delivery units.

                                     Allocation of US$ 12 million decreased by US$1 million to US$11
                                      million.

        6.2    Strengthened          Increased in the targets from 20 to 25 MDAs for annual and
               Fiduciary              quarterly MAD Internal Audit Reports prepared and undergoing
                                      quality assurance.
               Assurance             Timeline extended for two more budget cycles in DLRs under DLI
               and Risk               6.2 for institutionalizing the improvements achieved regarding the
               Management             introduction of improved internal audit processes.
                                     Modifications to the DLRs and associated disbursement amounts.

                               By December 2021:




                                                                                               Page 10 of 39
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                               DLR 6.2.5: MDAs Internal Audit Reports have been prepared and
                               undergone quality assurance in line with enhanced procedures for
                               assurance, risk management and audit follow up (target: 20 MDAs.)

                               By December 2022:

                               DLR 6.2.6: MDAs Internal Audit Reports have been prepared and
                               undergone quality assurance in line with enhanced procedures for
                               assurance, risk management and audit follow-up (target: 25 MDAs.)

                                     Allocation of US$8 million increased by US$8 million to US$16
                                      million.

RA8: Strengthened Service Delivery (New)

     Original allocation of US$15 million. Not revised. Actual: US$15 million.

                                     New areas introduced to strengthen provision of quality public
                                      services to citizens and businesses.
                                     New DLI to substantially increase the number of services
                                      onboarded on the e-Citizen platform to enable citizens and
                                      businesses to perform many widely used, fee-based transactions
                                      online, which would reduce fraudulent invoicing for government
                                      transactions, resulting in revenue growth for the government. The
                                      e-Citizen platform was to be reengineered in line with citizen-
                                      centered design principles with Program support.
               E-Citizen as          The DLI was also to support the formulation of a change
               an Integrated          management and communications strategy regarding the scope,
               Platform for           nature, introduction, and rollout of services offered on eCitizen.
               Government            New DLRs and associated disbursement amounts introduced
               Service                under this DLI.
PDO 2 8        Delivery
               /Strengthened By December 2021:
               Service
               Delivery      DLR 8.5(a): Approved user requirements for reengineered eCitizen.

               (New)           DLR 8.5(b): Approved Change Management and Communications
                               Strategy for eCitizen.

                               By December 2022:

                               DLR 8.6(a): UAT for re-engineered eCitizen completed.

                               DLR 8.6(b): 277 new services onboarded on eCitizen.

                                     Allocation of US$15 million.


                                                                                              Page 11 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  At appraisal in 2017, Kenya was experiencing a period of stable economic growth while undertaking
  reforms in public institutions. The new 2010 Constitution had accelerated progress on a range of
  decentralization reforms with certain government functions, staff, and funds transferred to 47 counties. It also
  boosted progress on the restructuring of national ministries, departments, and agencies (MDAs), while
  strengthening oversight bodies like Parliament and the Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC) and
  establishing the Office of the Controller of Budget (COB) and the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) as
  Supreme Audit Institutions from the defunct Office of the Auditor and Controller of the Budget. The GoK also
  improved the national revenue administration and expenditure management through the enactment of the
  Public Financial Management (PFM) law in 2012 and attendant regulations in 2015.

  Alignment with sector strategy. Kenya’s growth model emphasized public spending to provide
  infrastructure and services but higher concessional and non-concessional borrowing increased interest
  payments on debt necessitating fiscal consolidation and improved value for money. The existing functioning
  of core public financial management systems faced the challenge of inefficient resource allocation for service
  delivery. While the decentralization process led to major reforms, the governance reforms did not fully
  translate into desired outcomes. Despite progress in strengthening the revenue administration at the national
  level, passing of the PFM law in 2012 and more independence of the Judiciary, the PFM systems did not
  deliver on the desired core functionalities due to institutional and systemic weaknesses. The main challenges
  included PIM, procurement, cash management, wage bill management and ineffective oversight and
  accountability (PAD, para 6; ICR, para 2). Kenya’s 2012 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
  (PEFA) included thirteen C and nine D scores across various indicators. The country ranked 146 out of 176
  countries in the 2016 Transparency International Global Corruption Index, indicating the persistence of rent
  seeking behavior in the public sector.

  World Bank (WB) previous sector and country experience. The GoK approved PFMRS for the 2013-
  2018 period to ensure “a public finance system that promotes transparency, accountability, equity, fiscal
  discipline and efficiency in the management and use of public resources for improved service delivery and
  economic development.” The PFMRS was the first time that the Government of Kenya (GoK) was adopting a
  results-oriented outlook regarding PFM reforms. A mid-term review (MTR) in 2016 found that while many of
  the PFMRS reforms were completed or on track, 20 reform activities were delayed and there was no
  progress on 7 reform activities. Key implementation gaps included devolution and strengthening
  cash management, large funding gaps, and the need to strengthen M&E and coordination. The PFMRS was
  revised and a version of the revised PFMRS was published in 2017 (PAD, para 17-18).

  This Program for Results (PforR) operation Program to Strengthen Governance for Enabling Service Delivery
  and Public Investment in Kenya (GESDeK) was anchored in the revised PFMRS to support the
  implementation of a sub-set of areas related to ongoing reform activities in the National Treasury (NT) and
  identified in consultation with Government counterparts. The objectives of the PFMRS were clearly reflected
  in the WBG’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2014-18 which together with the Performance and
  Learning Review (PLR) of 2017 identified key domains for engagement in a good governance platform in


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 39
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



                       Kenya including delivering the devolution dividend. The CPS recognized that governance constraints
                       hindered the achievement of development outcomes at the sectoral and central government levels and
                       diverted resources from public to private purposes through fraud and corruption (PAD, para 14). The CPS
                       was extended by two years to FY20 and aligned with the forthcoming Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
                       that would inform the next CPF.

                       Country capacity and adequacy of PforR Instrument. A PforR financing instrument was selected given its
                       strong results orientation, monitoring and reporting framework, and built-in financial incentives to achieve
                       results that reflected a change in the functioning of PFM systems and provided the needed funding for the
                       government’s program. The PforR was also the appropriate choice for tackling the system-wide governance
                       challenges which required long-term engagement and was therefore unsuitable for a Development Policy
                       Financing type instrument. Moreover, the government had a robust results-oriented PFM reform program for
                       which adequate resources had historically been allocated from the national budget and complemented with
                       technical assistance (TA) from the Kenya Accountable Devolution Program (KADP) multi-donor trust fund.
                       Therefore, an Investment Project Finance (IPF) type instrument was also not deemed suitable, nor was
                       it requested by the GoK. Despite a high level of technical expertise and significant human resources from
                       stakeholders in Kenya, the implementation of policies and reforms was a major challenge. The sequencing
                       and prioritization of reform strategies received little attention, and efforts to strengthen policies and systems
                       had not focused either on the core functions of PFM related with infrastructure and service delivery, or on
                       incentives for sectoral institutions to implement reforms. The selected results areas (RAs) of this operation
                       addressed these challenges by making governance the connecting platform. As the WBG was already
                       providing advisory support and policy dialogue during the formulation of the results-oriented revised PFMRS
                       for 2018-2023, designing a PforR instrument aligned to it was appropriate. The PforR’s PDO was also
                       reinforced in the new PFMRS for 2023 to 2028.

                       The relevance of objectives is rated High.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI 1: Prioritized Public Investments

                Rationale
                DLI1 contributed to PDO1 and PDO2 by strengthening planning and oversight of public investment projects
                through the following specific actions: the development of a PIM manual; the creation of a PIM unit for
                selecting projects based on sound appraisal criteria, alignment with economic and strategic priorities, and
                realistic projections of their returns; and enhancing the Electronic Project Monitoring Information System (e-
                ProMIS) to deliver requirements of the PIM manual with interface with the IFMIS tested and live (ICR, para



                                                                                                                          Page 13 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



10, PAD Annex 1). This was to be measured by the number of projects with capital allocations above
KSH.100 million as required by the PIM manual.

During restructuring, references to the “PIM Manual” were replaced with “PIM Guidelines” that had already
been disseminated across MDAs; new activities with DLRs and associated disbursement allocations were
introduced to complete the inventory of public investment projects for identifying nonperforming and stalled
projects in order to rationalize the project portfolio; and references to e-ProMIS were deleted as the GoK
opted for more advanced technology (RES, Table 2; ICR p. 10-12).

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$25 million, but this was reduced by US$5 million after
restructuring. The TTL clarified amounts in Annex 1B of the ICR labeled “allocated amount” corresponded to
the “revised amount” after restructuring.

The Program initially aimed for 30 projects in compliance with PIM Guidelines and achieved 34 at completion
(ICR, Annex 1).

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO1 and PDO2 by improving both the utilization and
transparency of resource management in MDAs reflected in higher returns on public investments by reducing
delays and cost overruns, increasing value-for-money, and strengthening accountability of public investment
projects.

Although the DLI was highly relevant in its original formulation, after restructuring, the relevance was reduced
as requirements of PIM Guidelines instead of a PIM manual were relatively simpler to follow, and GoK did not
need to undertake any special measures related with DLI1 which implied that DLI1 would not make any
additional contribution to help achieve PDO1.

DLI 1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
DLI 2.1: Reliable Funding for Service Delivery and Investment Projects

Rationale
DLI 2.1 contributed to PDO 1 by supporting efforts to strengthen cash planning and cash management by
supporting specific actions: the preparation of borrowing plans by the MDAs consistent with delivering cash
for the MDAS based on their borrowing plans; introducing a new cash management and exchequer system
for automatic release of GoK resources to MDA bank accounts after MDA approvals in IFMIS; and developing
guidelines to ensure that MDA cash plans protect service delivery and infrastructure budget priorities (ICR,
para 11; PAD, Annex 1).

This was to be measured by a) the average under-release of priority operational service delivery budget
allocations expressed as a percentage of revised in-year cash plans on a quarterly and monthly basis; and b)


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



annual exchequer releases to GoK capital budget allocations as a percentage of the approved budget (PAD,
p. 57).

During restructuring, this DLI was modified for alignment of activities to the new Cash Management
Framework developed by the NT as part of the PFMRS with support from the Program. New DLRs were
introduced to consolidate the gains achieved and institutionalize a more efficient process for cash planning
and approval decisions within the NT.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$19 million, but this was reduced by US$0.5 million
after restructuring.

The Program partially achieved automated cash management and exchequer systems.

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO 1 by improving utilization of resource management in MDAs
by leading to improved technical quality, regularity and planning and management of the cash plans and its
interface with IFMIS. The achievement of this DLI would trigger significantly improved institutional
performance.

DLI 2.1 is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
DLI 3: Efficient and Transparent Procurement

Rationale
DLI 3 contributed to PDO 1 and PDO 2 by strengthening procurement and asset disposal functions in the
public sector by supporting specific actions relating to the upgrading and implementation of the e-
procurement system to enable it to deliver on the requirements of procurement entities, oversight institutions
and suppliers in line with the law and regulations; the establishment of mechanisms for encouraging
compliance with the Public Procurement and Asset Disposal Act (PPAD Act) 2015 and regulations in the
context of the upgraded system; and greater transparency through the SPP. Finally, it would ensure that the
e-procurement system and the portal were up to date and included appropriate information on tenders,
awards, contract implementation, and complaints follow-up by disclosing procurement data by following
OCDS (ICR, para 16; PAD, Annex 1).

This was to be the number of MDAs using the e-procurement system in compliance with the PPADA and
attendant regulations for the full fiscal year and procurement data disclosed in SPP following OCDS (PAD, p.
59).

During the timeline for this DLI was adjusted to allow time for MDAs to use a full-fledged e-procurement
system and to address delays in the formulation of the e-procurement roadmap and the procurement process



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



for the development of the new e-GP platform. New DLRs were introduced with associated disbursement
amounts. The target was revised from 20 MDAs to 5.

The original disbursement to this DLI was US$21 million, but this was reduced by US$8 million after
restructuring.

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO 1 and PDO 2 by improving both the utilization and
transparency of resource management in MDAs strengthening procurement and asset disposal functions in
the public sector.

DLI 3 is rated High



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
DLI 4: Consolidated Staff Data



Rationale
DLI 4 contributed to PDO 1 by consolidating staff data for strengthening payroll management through
specific actions: higher GHRIS functionality to handle consolidated HR data from MDAs and interfacing with
IFMIS; developing and issuance of regulations and standards on itemized payroll details consistent with
enhanced GHRIS functionality and sharing of data; restructuring and uploading of data from different payroll
systems across service delivery MDAs; and publishing of basic wage bill data by administrative / service
delivery unit, consistent with the CoA (Chart of Accounts) (PAD, Annex 1, ICR, para 13).

This was to be measured by the number of MDAs whose payroll data has been uploaded to GHRIS and
were up to date (PAD, p. 59).

During restructuring, the target was revised from 20 to 10 MDAs whose payroll data had been uploaded to
GHRIS and were up to date. The timeline for this DLI was adjusted for MDAs whose payroll data was
uploaded to GHRIS and to address delays experienced in the formulation and implementation of a roadmap
for the development of GHRIS. New DLRs were introduced with associated disbursement amounts.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$20 million. It was reduced by US$8 million after
restructuring.

The Program greatly surpassed the target due to the ease of transitioning MDAs from the Integrated
Personnel and Payroll Database (IPPD) system to the upgraded GHRIS system.




                                                                                                Page 16 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO 1 by improving utilization of resource management in MDAs
by enabling sound decision-making on the wage-bill and human resource management. The achievement of
this DLI triggered highly relevant institutional change.

DLI 4 is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
DLI 5.1: Timely, Quality Assured, Financial Statements



Rationale
DLI 5.1 contributed to PDO 1 by enhancing the timeliness, quality, and relevance of financial statements
and audit reports through specific actions related to: the ability of the IFMIS to generate MDA financial
statements; and adoption of International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) - compliant financial
statements by MDAs (PAD, Annex 1).

This was to be measured by the percentage of MDAs whose annual Financial Statements generated from
IFMIS had been reviewed for quality by the NT and submitted to the OAG within 4 months (PAD, p. 60)

During restructuring targets increased from 30 percent to 40 percent for 2021, and 50 percent for 2022 to
include selected MDAs whose annual financial statements generated from IFMIS had been reviewed for
quality by the NT and submitted to the OAG within four months. There is a discrepancy between the
RES target and the ICR data in Annex 1 (p. 26) where the original target is 50 percent.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$9 million, but this was reduced by US$0.5 million
after restructuring.

The Program achieved the target at 59 percent of MDAs for which the NT reviewed the quality of their
financial statements generated from IFMIS and submitted them to the OAG within legal timelines.

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO 1 by improving utilization of resource management in MDAs
by ensuring that timely and quality financial statements and audit reports would be presented in a manner that
facilitated stakeholders’ ability to understand and scrutinize the impact on service delivery. The achievement
of this DLI triggered highly relevant institutional change.

DLI 5.1 is rated High.



Rating


                                                                                                Page 17 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



High

DLI 6
DLI
DLI 5.2: Timely, Efficient, Quality Audits



Rationale
DLI 5.2 contributed to PDO 1 by enhancing the timeliness, quality, and relevance of financial statements and
audit reports through specific actions related to: the implementation of risk-based audit strategies; adoption of
the audit management software; and revision of audit methodologies in line with international standards
(PAD, Annex 1).

This was to be a) the percentage of MDAs whose financial statement audits had been completed within 3
months after OAG receipt of final financial statements using an improved methodology, undergone quality
assurance; and b) months between receipt of final consolidated financial reports by OAG and submission of
the audited financial statements to parliament (PAD, p. 60).

During restructuring, the timeline for this DLI was adjusted to allow receipt of consolidated financial
statements and submission to Parliament in 7 months in 2021 and 5 months in 2022, from 4 months and 3
months, respectively. Funds for this DLI were fully disbursed. New DLRs were introduced with their
associated disbursement amounts for special audits to be undertaken by the OAG on the use of funds
disbursed to MDAs to address the COVID-19 crisis.

The original disbursement to this DLI was US$18 million but it was increased by US$1 million after
restructuring.

The program achieved the target as 59 percent of MDAs whose financial statements audits were completed
within 3 months after OAG receipt of those financial statements; and the number of months between receipt
of final consolidated financial reports by OAG and submission of audited financial statements to Parliament
was 4, instead of the 5-month revised target (ICR, Annex 1)

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO1 by improving utilization of resource management in MDAs
ensuring that timely and quality financial statements and audit reports would be presented in a manner that
facilitated stakeholders’ ability to scrutinize the impact on service delivery.

DLI 5.2 is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 7
DLI
DLI 5.3 (DLI 7 in ICR) - Post-restructuring: Transparency and Oversight of State Corporations

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)




Rationale
DLI 5.3 contributed to PDO2 by developing and introducing a Government Investment Management
Information Systems (GIMIS) across SCs for the preparation and submission of data on corporate, budget,
and statutory requirements of SCs.

This was to be measured by the approval of user requirements for GIMIS, approval of UAT (User Acceptance
Testing) for GIMIS, number of SCs submitting data on corporate, budget, and statutory requirements using a
MIS, and the development of an investment module in GIMIS (RES Table 9).

The disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$17 million.

The Program achieved the target as SCs budgets and reports were linked to performance targets.

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO2 by improving transparency of resource management in
MDAs by enhancing the transparency and oversight of State Corporations. The achievement of this DLI
triggered substantial institutional change.

DLI 5.3. is rated High.



Rating
High

DLI 8
DLI
DLI 6.1: Transparent Institutions

Rationale
DLI 6.1 contributed to PDO2 by strengthening transparency through specific actions: MDAs and increasingly
the public can access multi-year itemized and facility-level budget and outturn data for all MDAs in searchable
form through the budget module of IFMIS.

During restructuring, this DLI target was revised to target information at program and sub-program levels for
all MDAs, as well as at the service delivery unit level for one MDA. The timeline was adjusted in DLRs under
this DLI for the development of the citizen budget portal due to delays experienced in the development of the
technical specifications for the platform.

This was to be measured by the number of MDAs where information is publicly available online in searchable
form on a) program expenditure, b) project expenditure and c) transfers to service delivery units (PAD, p. 61).

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$12 million, but this was reduced by US$1 million after
restructuring.

The Program achieved the target of 100 percent of MDAs whose information is publicly available online with
the required specifications.


                                                                                                 Page 19 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO2 by improving the transparency of resource management in
MDAs by ensuring that stakeholders inside and outside the government would have access to appropriate
and relevant information on service delivery. Information would be timely, reliable, trusted and used in
decision-making and accountability processes. The achievement of this DLI drove substantial institutional
change, but the relevance would have been higher if the target had not been scaled down during restructuring
to MDAs having information publicly available online on programs and subprograms, not projects
anymore, and at least one (not all) MDA having information online on transfers to service delivery units (RES
46127, p. 7, p. 14). This lowered the DLI’s relevance for improving the transparency of institutions.

DLI 6.1 is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 9
DLI
DLI 6.2: Strengthened Fiduciary Assurance and Risk Management

Rationale
DLI 6.2 contributed to PDO2 by strengthening fiduciary assurance and risk management through specific
actions: updated manuals and the Quality Assurance (QA) framework for internal audit in place to strengthen
assurance and risk management in place.

This was to be measured by the annual and quarterly MDA Internal Audit Reports that were prepared and
underwent QA in line with enhanced procedures for assurance, risk management and audit follow-up (PAD,
p. 62).

During restructuring, the targets for this DLI increased from 20 to 25 MDAs for the annual and quarterly MDA
Internal Audit Reports that were to be prepared and were to undergo quality assurance. The timeline was
extended for two more budget cycles under this DLI for institutionalizing the improvements achieved
regarding the introduction of improved internal audit processes and modifications to the DLRs and associated
disbursement amounts were included.

The original disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$8 million, but this was increased by US$8 million after
restructuring.

The Program achieved 26 MDA Internal Audit Reports that were prepared and underwent quality assurance
(QA), surpassing the revised target of 25.

Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO2 by improving transparency of resource management in
MDAs by ensuring that stakeholders inside and outside the government would have access to appropriate
and relevant information on service delivery. Information would be timely, reliable, trusted and used in
decision-making and accountability processes. The achievement of this DLI triggered highly relevant
institutional change.



                                                                                                Page 20 of 39
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



            DLI 6.2 is rated High.



            Rating
            High

            DLI 10
            DLI
            DLI 8 (DLI 8 in ICR) - Post-restructuring: E-Citizen as an Integrated Platform for Government Service Delivery
            /Strengthened Service Delivery

            Rationale
            DLI 8 contributed to PDO2 by strengthening service delivery through actions related to substantially
            increasing the number of public services onboarded on the eCitizen platform which would be reengineered in
            line with citizen-centered design principles with program support. It would also support actions related to a
            change management and communications strategy which would include public relations with citizens
            regarding services offered in e-services.

            This was to be measured by the approval of user requirements for re-engineered eCitizen, approved change
            management and communications strategy for eCitizen, and UAT for re-engineered eCitizen completed and
            277 new services onboarded on eCitizen (RES Table 10).

            The disbursement allocated to this DLI was US$15 million.

            The Program surpassed the target as 7,793 services were onboarded on the e-Citizen Portal beyond the
            target of 577.

            Achieving this outcome would contribute to PDO2 by improving the transparency of resource management in
            MDAs by enhancing the transparency of service delivery through the eCitizen platform. The achievement of
            this DLI drove highly relevant institutional change.

            DLI 8 is rated High.



            Rating
            High


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            Note: In this section, IEG used the following information sources to assess the relevance of the DLIs: the
            DLIs, measurements, and original allocations are from Annex 3 of the PAD. Activities are from Annex 1 of the
            PAD. Changes and revised allocations are from the Restructuring Paper and revised allocations match


                                                                                                              Page 21 of 39
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



               Annex 1B of the ICR. Results are from the Results Framework in Annex 1 of the ICR. Discrepancies between
               the ICR and other documents are noted.

               The program's objectives and the 10 DLIs were highly relevant to the GoK’s reform priorities and the WB’s
               country strategy, at appraisal and at closing. The program centered on policies and systems foundational for
               achieving results under the revised PFMRS and was aligned to the current CPF for Kenya (FY 23-28).

               In particular, the program supported objectives 1 and 2 of the CPF on “boosting Kenya’s fiscal and debt
               sustainability” and “improving public expenditure transparency and effectiveness” by introducing several
               policies and systems to enhance resource management utilization and transparency in service delivery
               systems across a wide range of areas in the PFM cycle, from the macro-fiscal framework and the credibility
               of the budget to financial reporting and external oversight and accountability in selected MDAs. It was
               seeking to introduce wide-ranging institutional change in the utilization of resource management for service
               delivery.

               The program also paved the way for a new PforR operation approved by the Board in December 2023 which
               was evidence that this program’s PDO remained highly relevant to the ongoing PFM reform agenda in Kenya
               (ICR, paRA33).

               The DLIs were clearly defined, well aligned with the PDO and provided appropriate incentives to trigger
               action and performance. The PforR made a substantial contribution in improving utilization and transparency
               of resource management in selected service delivery MDAs.

               Given that the relevance of the two PDOs and DLIs is rated High, the overall relevance rating is also High.



               Rating
               High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve utilization of resource management in selected service delivery MDAs.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change. The theory of change (ToC) underlying PDO1 was addressed through five components/
               RAs: Prioritized Public Investments (RA1; also, in PDO2); Reliable Funding for Service Delivery and Public
               Investments (RA2); Efficient and Transparent Procurement (RA3; also in PDO2); Consolidated Staff Data
               (RA4); and Timely and Quality Financial Statements and Audits (RA5; also in PDO2).

               By strengthening planning and oversight over public investment projects, selecting projects based on sound
               appraisal criteria, and strengthening cash planning and cash management, strengthening procurement and

                                                                                                               Page 22 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



assets disposal functions in the public sector, consolidating staff data for strengthening payroll management,
and enhancing timeliness, quality, and relevance of financial statements and audit reports, the program would
help improve resource management utilization.

This was to be achieved by activities such as completing the public investment project inventory according to
PIM Guidelines, automation of the PIM process, developing and introducing a new cash management and
exchequer system to ensure automatic release of funds from GoK to MDA bank accounts prior approval in
IFMIS, upgrading and implementing the e-procurement system, increasing GHRIS functionality to handle
consolidated human resource data from MDAs and interfacing the system with IFMIS, implementation of risk-
based audit strategies, adoption of the audit management software and adoption of IPSAS.

Key outputs

34 projects with capital allocation above KES100 million in compliance with procedures in PIM Guidelines
(ICR, Annex 1).

      Automated cash management and exchequer systems set-up, although partially used (ICR, Annex 1)
      12 MDAs piloted using the e-procurement system in compliance with the PPAD Act 2015, and
         regulations for the full fiscal year and procurement data disclosed in SPP following OCDS, but not all
         modules fully deployed as planned –information availability via the Procurement Information Portal,
         and Contract Management up to Invoicing (ICR, Annex 1).
        211 MDAs whose payroll data has been uploaded from the Integrated Personnel and Payroll
         Database (IPPD) system to the upgraded GHRIS system.
        59 of service delivery MDAs for which the NT reviewed the quality of their Annual FS generated from
         IFMIS and submitted to the OAG within legal timelines.
        59 percent of MDAs whose FS audits were completed within 3 months after OAG receipt of FS.
        Months between receipt of final consolidated financial reports by OAG and submission of audited FS
         to Parliament was 4, less than the 5-month revised target (ICR, Annex 1)
        100 percent of MDAs whose information is publicly available online in searchable form on a) sub-
         program expenditure, b) project expenditure, and c) transfers to at least one service delivery unit.

DLI Indicators/ Intermediate Results Indicators (IRI)

This section evaluates the Efficacy of each PDO using information regarding the achievement of the DLIs and
PDO indicators (often the same as DLIs) within each RA, as well as 15 IRIs that IEG assigned to PDO 1 (3 for
RA1, 3 for RA2, 3 for RA3, 2 for RA4, and 4 for RA5).

RA1: Prioritized Public Investments (shared with PDO2)

DLI 1 and PDO indicator 1: Number of projects with capital allocations above KES 100 million which are
following procedures in the PIM manual.

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 30 (2017)




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



Actual Achieved at Completion: 34 in 2023 (DLI 1 Achievement: Substantial).

The ICR reports that the PDO indicator 1 and all intermediate indicators were achieved. This included: (a) the
establishment of a PIM Unit in the NT; (b) the creation of PIM regulations, project appraisal manuals, and
sector specific methodologies for infrastructure, health, and education sectors at the national level; and (c)
development of a user-accepted PIMIS.

The PIM framework laid essential institutional foundations for the implementation of public investment across
national and sub-national levels envisaged in GESDeK II and the Second Kenya Devolution Support Program
(KDSP II). The public investment reform efforts were central in the effective allocation of resources and public
spending, further promoting GoK’s fiscal consolidation efforts.

IRI 1.1: Dedicated unit established with staff deployed assigned and performing NT PIM roles. Baseline: No
unit existed. Original target: Unit set up by September 2017. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in
December 2023 (IRI 1.1 Achievement: Substantial)

IRI 1.2: Approved PIM manual & user requirements which address key challenges in PIM. Baseline: No
manual existed. Original target: PIM manual & user requirements approved by September 2017. Actual
achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 1.2 Achievement: Substantial)

IRI 1.3: Projects baseline stock-taking completed and inventory up to date in Hyperion. Baseline: No inventory
existed. Revised target: inventory ready by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in
December 2023 (IRI 1.3 Achievement: Substantial)

In the ICR RF, this IRI is numbered 1.4. IRI 1.3 was deleted during restructuring. According to the TTL, the
(old) Portal reflects the numbering after restructuring and does not provide flexibility for resequencing the
numbering.

The overall efficacy rating for RA1 is Substantial.

RA2: Reliable Funding for Service Delivery and Investment Projects (shared with PDO 2)

DLI 2: Cash management functionality strengthened through automation in IFMIS and Hyperion budget
system.

Baseline: No (2016)

Target: Yes (2017)

Actual Achieved at Completion: Yes in 2023 (DLI 2 Achievement: Substantial).

The ICR reports that all but one of the indicators was fully achieved. The NT completed the preparation of an
aggregate cash plan and the design of an automated cash management system to improve the predictability
of fund flows regarding government services and projects. The achievement of DLR 2.1a was an intermediate
target to pave the way for the automation of the cash management system, including cash planning,
exchequer requisitioning, and release. However, the use of automated approval process workflows was




                                                                                                 Page 24 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



intermittent. The Independent Verification Agent (IVA) revealed that cash planning, approval, and production
of monthly exchequer release reports were not used consistently.

IRI 2.1: Guidelines adopted by the NT which required that revised MDA cash plans protect service delivery
and infrastructure budget priorities. The ICR notes only partial achievement because the GoK was using two
systems - the IFMIS and Hyperion - and cash management was not smoothly aligned between them. “The
aggregate annual and in-year cash plans are done and approved through IFMIS but not Hyperion. Budgeting
for the Receivers of Revenue is done through Hyperion functionality, which is then exported to the General
Ledger interface to the IFMIS system. Collection of revenue is done through the IFMIS system,” (ICR Annex
1B, p. 43). Baseline: No guidelines existed. Revised target: Guidelines adopted by October 2021. Actual
achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 2.1 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 2.2 (2.5 in the ICR): The automated annual including in-year aggregate cash plans (with revenue
projections and borrowing requirements) in line with approved cash management framework. Baseline: No
automated annual including in-year aggregate cash plans existed. Revised target: Set up by October 2021.
Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 2.2 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 2.3 (2.6 in the ICR): projected in-year MDA exchequer allocations, which are uploaded into the system
and approved in line with the cash management framework. Baseline: No MDA exchequer allocations
uploaded and approved in line with the cash management framework. Revised target: Set up by October
2021. Actual achieved at completion: Partially achieved in December 2023. (IRI 2.3 Achievement: Modest).

The overall efficacy rating for RA2 is Modest. Due to the intermittent use of some of the process workflows
and inconsistent use of reports mentioned above, there was reduced predictability of fund flows regarding
government services and projects.

RA3: Efficient and transparent procurement (shared with PDO 2)

DLI 3: MDAs using the e-procurement system in compliance with the PPAD Act, 2015, and attendant
Regulations for the full fiscal year and procurement data disclosed in SPP following OCDS.

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 5 (2021 revised)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 12 in 2023 (DLI 3 Achievement: Substantial).

The ICR reports that two of the three indicators were achieved while one indicator was partially achieved. The
critical reform steps involved the review and upgrading of the existing procurement system. The NT hired a
contractor to design and implement an e-GP system that would be used by all public procuring entities in both
national and county governments. Under the e-procurement system Module on Registration and Procurement
Planning was fully piloted and the module for uploading the Standard Tender Documents was created.
However, data from the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA), updated Standard Tender
Documents templates, and the Annual Procurement Plan template had not been customized and uploaded to
the system. Therefore, at Program completion, several actions had not been fully piloted as required,
including: (a) requisition and e-bidding; (b) Contract Management module; (c) and e-publication of data in
compliance with the OCDS module. The development and customization of the templates was ongoing at


                                                                                               Page 25 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



Program close. Lastly, delayed integration with IFMIS was a challenge that delayed the e-Payment and e-
Guarantee Management modules.

IRI 3.1: UAT for upgraded e-procurement and SPP complete. Baseline: No UAT and SPP completed.
Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 3.1
Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 3.2: Roadmap agreed for upgrading e-procurement system including SPP, aligned to requirements of
PPADA and attendant regulations. Baseline: No roadmap. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual
achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 3.2 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 3.3: e-GP Project Implementation Unit established, developer/contractor in place, and System
Requirement Specification (SRS) and System Design Document (SDD) approved. Baseline: No unit and SRS
and SDD. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December
2023 (IRI 3.3 Achievement: Substantial).

The overall efficacy rating for RA3 is Substantial.

RA4: Consolidated Staff Data

DLI 4: Number of MDAs whose payroll data has been uploaded to GHRIS and are up to date.

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 10 (2021 revised)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 211 (2023) (DLI 4 Achievement: Substantial).

The ICR reports that all targets were achieved. The initial reform step was to develop a roadmap with
business processes and technical/user requirements for the upgraded GHRIS linked to IFMIS. This was
achieved, albeit outside the planned timeline of June 2018. The PDO indicator of having at least 10 MDAs'
payroll data posted in the improved GHRIS system, was exceeded due to the ease of transitioning MDAs
from the Integrated Personnel and Payroll Database (IPPD) system to the upgraded GHRIS system. Despite
these achievements, the IVA report noted that there is a need to harmonize codes for GHRIS and IFMIS to
make comparisons easier and more transparent. While DLR 4.5 and DLR 4.6 were achieved according to
requirements in the POM, the IVA report revealed inconsistencies between the payroll system and IFMIS.
The basic salary and allowances codes in GHRIS and IFMIS were different due to employees who are on
manual payrolls, salary market adjustments, and the special salary category.

IRI 4.1: GHRIS enhanced to handle consolidated HR data from MDAs and interfaces with IFMIS. Baseline:
No GHRIS enhanced. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in
December 2023 (IRI 4.1 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 4.2 Upgraded GHRIS operational, including use of UPN, HR data warehouse and Payroll module
operational. Baseline: No upgraded GHRIS. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at
completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 4.2 Achievement: Substantial).




                                                                                             Page 26 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



The overall efficacy rating for RA4 is Substantial.

RA5: Timely and Quality Financial Statements and Audit (shared with PDO 2) and new RA-7:
Strengthened Transparency and Oversight (here as DLI 5.3).

DLI 5.1/PDO Indicator 5 (i): The percentage of service delivery MDAs whose Annual Financial Statements
generated from IFMIS had been submitted to the OAG and reviewed for quality control by the NT within legal
timeliness (3 months).

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 50 (2021)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 59 in 2023 (DLI 5.1/ PDO Indicator 5 (i) Achievement: High).

DLI 5.2.a/PDO Indicator 5 (ii): The percentage of MDAs whose FS audits have been completed within 3
months after OAG receipt of final financial statements using an improved methodology, undergone quality
assurance.

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 50 (2021)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 59 in 2023 (DLI 5.2a/ PDO Indicator 5 (ii) Achievement: High).

DLI 5.2.b/PDO Indicator 5(iii): Months between receipt of final consolidated financial reports by OAG and
submission of audited financial statements to Parliament.

Baseline: 10 (2016)

Target: 5 (2021 revised)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 4 in 2023 (DLI 5.2b/ PDO Indicator 5 (iii) Achievement: High).

The ICR reports that this RA addressed challenges related to the lateness in annual audit reporting,
inadequate audit follow-up, and weak linkage to the evaluation of MDA service delivery. Despite initial delays
with the appointment of the Auditor General, the PDO end targets were exceeded. The months between
receipt of consolidated financial statements by OAG and submission of audited financial statements to
Parliament were reduced from 10 months at the beginning of the Program to 4 months compared to 5 months
end target. Additionally, 59 percent of MDAs’ financial statement audits were completed within three months
after receipt by OAG, compared to an end target of 50 percent.

DLI 5.3 (DLI 7 in the ICR)/PDO Indicator 7 (Strengthened Transparency): SCs budgets and reports are linked
to performance targets

Baseline: No (2021 August)

Target: Yes (October 2021)


                                                                                                Page 27 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



Actual Achieved at Completion: Yes in 2023 (DLI 5.3/ PDO Indicator 7 Achievement: High).

The ICR reported the achievements included the approval of user requirements and completion of
acceptance testing for the GIMIS for SCs as well as the target for the number of SCs submitting data on
corporate, budget, and statutory requirements using the GIMIS. The PDO indicator 7 requiring SCs to
utilize GIMIS was exceeded. By program close, 258 SCs were using GIMIS, which far exceeded the target of
30 SCs.

IRI 5.1: The percentage of service delivery MDAs whose Annual Financial Statements generated from IFMIS
had been submitted to the OAG and reviewed by the NT for quality control within 4 months. Baseline: 10
percent (2016). Revised target: 50 percent (October 2021). Actual achieved at completion: 59 percent
achieved in December 2023 (IRI 5.1 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 5.2: Approval of audit codes that classify risk clusters to enable efficient targeting of audit resource.
Baseline: No approval of audit codes existed. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at
completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 5.2 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 5.3: Enhanced audit methodology and quality assurance framework in place. Baseline: No framework in
place. Revised target: Set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023
(IRI 5.3 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 5.4: Special COVID related expenditure audits. Baseline: 0 COVID related expenditure audits. Revised
target: 47 COVID related expenditure audits by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: 47 achieved in
December 2023 (IRI 5.4 Achievement: Substantial).

IRIs in RA7 of the ICR that IEG assigned to RA5:

IRI 7.1: Approved UAT for the SCs MIS. Baseline: No UAT existed. Revised target: UAT approved up by
October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 7.1 Achievement:
Substantial).

IRI 7.2. No. of State Corporations submitting required data using the MIS. Baseline: 0 SCs submitting
required data using MIS. Revised target: 30 SCs submitting data using the MIS by October 2021. Actual
achieved at completion: 258 SCs in December 2023 (IRI 7.2 Achievement: Exceeded - High).

The overall efficacy rating for RA5 is High.

The overall efficacy rating for PDO1: Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve transparency of resource management in selected service delivery MDAs

                                                                                                  Page 28 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)




Rationale
Theory of Change. The theory of change (ToC) underlying PDO2 was addressed through five components/
Result Areas (RAs): Prioritized Public Investments (RA1; also in PDO 1); Efficient and Transparent
Procurement (RA3; also in PDO 1); Timely and Quality Financial Statements and Audits (RA5; also in PDO
1); Strengthened Fiduciary Assurance and Transparency (RA6); and the new Transparency and Oversight of
State Corporations (RA7 in the ICR), which is included in RA5; and E-Citizen as an Integrated Platform for
Government Service Delivery (RA8 in the ICR).

By strengthening planning and oversight over public investment projects, selecting projects based on sound
appraisal criteria, strengthening procurement and assets disposal functions in the public sector, enhancing
timeliness, quality, and relevance of financial statements and audit reports, introducing a Government
Investment Management Information System (GIMIS) across SCs for the preparation and submission of data
on corporate, budget, and statutory requirements of SCs, and support enhancing the uptake of eCitizen by
the public sector and citizens the program would help improve resource management transparency.

This was to be achieved by activities such as completing an inventory of public investment projects according
to PIM Guidelines, automation of the PIM process, upgrading and implementing the e-procurement system,
implementation of risk-based audit strategies, adoption of the audit management software and adoption of
IPSAS, access through the budget module of IFMIS all data for all MDAs in multi-year form and itemized,
introducing the GIMIS across SCs, and enhancing the use and functionality of the eCitizen Platform.

Key outputs (in addition to the common outputs with PDO 1)

      The program achieved 26 MDA Internal Audit Reports prepared and undergone quality assurance
       (QA), surpassing the revised target of 25.
      The program achieved the target as SCs budgets and reports were linked to performance targets.

The ICR (Annex 1, p. 29) does not specify whether all SCs achieved the target or whether all budgets and
reports or a part of them were linked to performance targets.

      The program surpassed the target as 7,793 services were onboarded on the e-Citizen Portal beyond
       the target of 577.

DLI Indicators/ PDO indicators/IRI

This section evaluated DLI indicators, PDO indicators (mostly the same as the DLIs) and 6 IRIs for PDO 2
that were not included in PDO 1 (4 for RA6, 2 for RA8). Some IRIs were already noted in PDO 1 because
they served both PDOs (RA3 and RA5). PDO2 had five RAs, three shared with PDO1 and analyzed above.
The remaining two are analyzed in this section.

RA6: Strengthened Fiduciary Assurance and Transparency

RA6a: Transparent Institutions




                                                                                               Page 29 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



DLI 6.1/PDO Indicator 6a: Number of MDAs where information is publicly available online in searchable form
on a) program expenditure, b) sub-program expenditure and c) transfers to service delivery units for at least 1
MDA.

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 100 (2021 revised)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 100 in 2023 (DLI 6.1/PDO Indicator 6a Achievement: High).

The ICR reports that this RA aimed to build transparent institutions by ensuring that stakeholders can access
timely, reliable, and relevant information on service delivery. By Program close, the PDO indicator was
achieved with 100 percent of MDAs having information publicly available and in searchable form by program
and sub-program, and at least 2 MDAs had information available on transfers to service delivery units, which
exceeded the target of 1.

RA6b: Strengthened Fiduciary Assurance and Risk Management

DLI 6.2/PDO Indicator 6b: MDA internal audit reports have been prepared and undergone quality assurance
in line with enhanced procedures for assurance, risk management and audit follow-up (number).

Baseline: 0 (2016)

Target: 25 (2021 revised)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 26 in 2023 (DLI 6.2/PDO Indicator 6b Achievement: High).

The ICR reported that all DLRs were achieved. As part of the effort to strengthen internal audit in MDAs, a
diagnostic study of the internal audit was conducted and the quality assurance framework for internal audit
updated. The PDO indicator was exceeded, with 26 (compared to a target of 25) MDAs’ Internal Audit
Reports prepared with quality assurance in line with enhanced procedures for assurance, risk management,
and audit follow-up.

IRI 6.1: MDAs’ information publicly available online in searchable form on (a) program expenditure, (b) sub-
program expenditures and (c) at least one MDA transfers to service delivery units. Baseline: No MDAs’
information publicly available online existed. Revised target: MDAs’ information publicly available online set
up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 6.1 Achievement:
Substantial).

IRI 6.2: UAT for the Budget Portal interface which provides information in a searchable form on programs and
sub-programs, and for at least 1 MDA, information available on transfers for service delivery. Baseline: No
UAT for the Budget Portal interface existed. Revised target: UAT for the Budget Portal interface set up by
October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: achieved in December 2023 (IRI 6.2 Achievement:
Substantial).

IRI 6.3: Updated manuals and QA framework for internal audit in place to strengthen assurance and risk
management are in place. Baseline: No manuals were updated. Revised target: Updated manuals and QA



                                                                                                  Page 30 of 39
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



framework for internal audit was in place by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: achieved in
December 2023 (IRI 6.3 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 6.4: Complete diagnostic study of internal audit. Baseline: No diagnostic existed. Revised target:
Diagnostic ready by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 6.4
Achievement: Substantial).

The overall efficacy rating for RA6 is Substantial.

RA8: Citizen Integrated Platform

DLI 8/PDO Indicator 8: Number of services onboarded on re-engineered e-citizen Portal.

Baseline: 300 (2021 August)

Target: 577 (2021 October)

Actual Achieved at Completion: 7,793 in 2023 (DLI 8/PDO Indicator 8 Achievement: High).

The ICR reported that the user requirements and UAT for the eCitizen portal and the publicity and change
management strategy were approved. The PDO's achievement received a significant boost following the
transition to a new administration that took office in September 2022 and declared digitization of government
services a top priority. The program's goal of onboarding 277 services on eCitizen was exceeded due to the
GoK’s commitment. As a result, 7,793 services were onboarded by program closure.

IRI 8.1: Approved UAT for re-engineered e-citizen. Baseline: No UAT existed for e-citizen. Revised target:
UAT for e-citizen set up by October 2021. Actual achieved at completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI
8.1 Achievement: Substantial).

IRI 8.2 Publicity and change management strategy developed. Baseline: No publicity and change
management strategy existed. Revised target: Strategy developed by October 2021. Actual achieved at
completion: Achieved in December 2023 (IRI 8.2 Achievement: Substantial).

The overall efficacy rating for RA8 is High.

The overall efficacy rating for PDO2 is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale


                                                                                                Page 31 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



 The program met both objectives: improving the utilization and transparency of public resource management
 for MDA services. Out of the 10 DLIs, 5 contributed both to improving utilization and transparency, 2
 contributed to improving only utilization (PDO1), and 3 contributed to improving only transparency (PDO2) in
 resource management in selected service delivery MDAs. Except for DLI 3 (Efficient and Transparent
 Procurement) that was partially achieved, all DLI and IRI targets were met, and the Program was almost fully
 disbursed at closing. However, the ICR does not specify if GoK and non-WB development financing was
 disbursed according to estimates.

 The key and notable outputs in improving utilization in resource management in selected service delivery
 MDAs to support PDO1 were: 34 projects with capital allocation above KES100 million in compliance with
 procedures in PIM Guidelines; automated cash management and exchequer systems set-up, although
 partially used; piloting of e-procurement system in 12 MDAs in compliance with the PPAD Act 2015, and
 procurement data disclosed in SPP following OCDS; 211 MDAs with payroll data uploaded to the GHRIS
 system; 59 percent of service delivery MDAs whose Annual FS generated from IFMIS were reviewed by the
 NT within legal timelines; and 100 percent of MDAs whose project expenditure information on service delivery
 is publicly available online in searchable form.

 The key outputs in improving transparency in resource management in selected service delivery MDAs to
 support PDO2 were: 26 MDA Internal Audit Reports underwent quality assurance (QA), SCs budgets and
 reports linked to performance targets; and 7,793 services onboarded on the e-Citizen Portal.

 Each of these notable achievements contributed to strengthening institutional capacity building in the GoK’s
 PFM system in several ways.

 Overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the program's objectives was High. They strongly aligned with the country context, the revised
PFMRS and the current CPF for Kenya (FY 23-28), and directly supported the GoK’s efforts to improve the PFM
capacity of the MDAs. The DLIs were highly relevant and almost all were fully achieved. The overall efficacy
rating is Substantial. Therefore, the overall program Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome




                                                                                                 Page 32 of 39
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



The risk to development outcomes for GESDeK was low. The program established a strong foundation for
implementing and monitoring PFM reforms across MDAs, with adequate national budget resources and
technical assistance from DPs. The continuation of the PforR instrument under GESDeK II would sustain
PFM reform objectives.

The program's expenditure framework, including GESDeK II, remained fiscally sustainable after program
closing with the PFM reform program integrated into the medium-term expenditure framework and reliably
funded since 2006. After the program’s implementation, the MDAs have the authority to incur expenditures
based on their work plans with flexibility for in-year budget reallocations to meet emerging needs.

However, in the years after program closing (2023), macroeconomic, political, and governance risks could
impact program sustainability. Challenges may arise from higher fiscal pressures due to demands for higher
public spending, potential subsidies, and financial needs related to climate-induced disasters. In addition, the
reforms to enhance revenues and accountability that are politically sensitive may pose risks to program
sustainability. Government changes may bring a different set of priorities.

The WBG would attempt to mitigate these risks through GESDeK II which aims to increase revenue
collection and improve spending efficiency. The WBG will collaborate with the IMF and other partners to
monitor fiscal stability and adjust program actions as needed. GESDeK II also seeks to build an alliance
between the executive and parliamentary liaisons to mitigate political contestation's impact on reform
progress.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The GESDeK operation was the first PFM PforR for the NT, the OAG and the State Department for
  Public Service in Kenya and benefitted from the implementation of the Kenya Devolution Support PforR
  (KDSP), which supported capacity building at the county level. The decision to use the PforR instrument
  was informed by an understanding that an appropriately incentivized change management and
  institutional strengthening approach was required and that a traditional investment project would not be
  able to achieve these objectives. However, the unfamiliarity with the instrument resulted in delays and a
  mismatch in expectations, and the limited understanding of the PforR concept created weaknesses in
  work programming, planning, and coordination at program inception. To address this capacity gap, the
  WBG provided TA to facilitate the development of work plans.

  The timing of the program design coincided with the drafting of the PFMRS for 2018-2023. As a result,
  GESDeK had to be initially anchored under its predecessor, which was more input-driven compared to
  the output orientation key for the success of a PforR. The WBG team navigated this challenge by
  continuously sensitizing GoK on the main elements of a PforR, thereby charting a path to a better
  understanding of the instrument and achievement of results.

  Benefiting from the learning of the Kenya Devolution Support PforR (KDSP), this PforR focused on
  strengthening the enabling environment for service delivery and public investment through reforms at the
  national level but would also potentially benefit the sub-national level with outputs such as improved
  access to the e-procurement system and improved cash management. These would strengthen service

                                                                                                     Page 33 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



  delivery and public investment at the sub-national level (PAD para 2) and bring about institutional change
  at the sub-national and national levels.

  The program’s DLIs were selected with Government counterparts, but they were complex, large in
  number, and included difficult areas. This complexity and lack of experience in PforRs in the
  implementing national agencies added to delays in implementation. On the other hand, the ICR notes
  that a comprehensive set of DLIs was an opportunity to establish the foundations for a robust PFM
  system in Kenya. The areas covered by the DLIs included difficult reforms such as procuring IT systems,
  or reforms conditioned to the legislative process which caused delays in implementation. These
  challenges were mitigated by the WBG through TA and implementation support.

  The DPs that had been supporting PFM reforms for decades in Kenya contributed to a WB-executed
  “Reform Implementation Facilitation Facility” Trust Fund to support technical teams and broader
  coalitions to deliver the steps required in the program during the operation (PAD, para 49).

  The overall design of the PforR was efficient and well-suited to the institutional needs of Kenya’s PFM
  system. The DLIs and IRIs were well anchored in the theory of change framework and contributed to
  greater efficiency through automation of processes and transparency-enhancing reforms that laid the
  foundations for institutional change and explain the program’s achievements across-the-board.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The program benefitted from both Task Team Leaders (TTLs) being field-based and one remaining with
 the program throughout implementation. The WB team conducted nine (9) regular implementation support
 missions (ISMs) but the ICR does not report how many virtual missions were conducted during the
 pandemic.

 The ICR noted that a key factor that played a role in the success of the program was its timely restructuring
 at the MTR stage. After the MTR, the program was restructured reflecting sound judgement and a timely
 response in addressing challenges that threatened to undermine achievement of results. The program
 progressed from Moderately Satisfactory at mid-term to Satisfactory at closing. This was due to strong
 technical assistance from various DPs and the implementing agencies’ eventual grasp of the PforR
 instrument as well as its ownership given GoK’s prioritization of the reforms in the PFMRS for 2018-2023.

 The monitoring of results was efficient. The achievement of the PDO indicators and DLRs were verified by
 a reputable IVA. The verification protocols were defined in the Program Operations Manual (POM) and
 involved structured walkthroughs of all activities undertaken or systems developed under each DLR. The
 IVA reports were not only instrumental in verifying the results but also in revealing areas for improvement.
 The findings helped shed light on areas where PFMRS could continue pushing for better performance
 beyond program closing.




                                                                                                   Page 34 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements reflected the Result Areas and DLIs. According to the PAD (para 75), there were
 three specific tools designed to be used in M&E: a) The RF which set up the intermediate outcomes and
 PDO level indicators to measure success; b) The Technical Team Reporting which was the key operational
 level program management; and c) The Program Action Plan (PAP) which identified actions necessary to
 address risks. According to the ICR (para 56), there were two additional tools: d) The IVA (Ernst & Young
 (EY) LLP Kenya was contracted as IVA) for DLIs; and e) The ISMs and diagnostic exercises.
 Implementation was coordinated by the PFM Reform Secretariat at the NT and Result Teams reported on
 the achievement of specific DLIs.

 Additionally, M&E design was strengthened by important initiatives such as a POM, a M&E Framework for
 the PFMRS for 2018-2023, and a Communication Strategy (CS) for 2018-2023 to increase stakeholders’
 support for PFM reform implementation



b. M&E Implementation
  Reporting for the RF indicators was consistently carried out throughout the Program’s cycle. Performance
  indicators were regularly tracked, and the RF was updated during supervision missions. The POM
  ensured the quality of the IVA process and facilitated regular verification of results through structured
  walkthroughs of all activities undertaken or systems developed under each DLR. The IVA reports also
  pointed to areas for improvement where the PFMRS could push for better performance after the
  program’s closing. Additionally, annual ISMs were conducted by the WB and AFD. To strengthen the
  Results Team mechanism, the PFMRS engaged a Program Coordinator at the Secretariat to coordinate,
  support, and work with each Results Team, including planning, budgeting, monitoring, and reporting on
  the achievement of the DLIs (ICR, para 57).



c. M&E Utilization
  Based on the ICR, data was made available regularly for the RF. The first IVA report covered two
  financial years (2017-18 and 2018-19) and was the basis for disbursing program funds for 2020-21.
  Subsequently, three more IVA reports were produced during the program's lifespan with fund
  disbursements based on confirmed achievement of results.

  While overall utilization was satisfactory, some measurement challenges were noted. Early in the
  implementation, delays in fully automating the cash management function and ineffective institutional
  arrangements for cash management were observed. The IVA report highlighted that a lack of relevant

                                                                                                 Page 35 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



  data hindered the measurement of DLR2.3(b) and DLR2.1(c), leading to the restructuring of these DLRs.
  Despite these minor issues, data collection and availability were adequate throughout the operation.

  Based on the analysis above, the overall rating for M&E is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   As a standalone PforR, an environmental and social system assessment (ESSA) was conducted, and only
   two out of the six WB Core Principles on ESS applied: Core Principle 1 (General Principle of Environmental
   and Social Assessment), and Core Principle 3 (Public and Worker Safety). The environmental and social
   risks and impacts of activities under GESDeK were assessed as "low" or "negligible" due to the minimal
   procurement of electronic equipment. Public participation was ensured in PIM regulations, and methodology
   manuals for infrastructure, health, and education sectors were developed with relevant MDAs. No
   grievances were registered during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Fiduciary risks were assessed as Substantial by the task team at appraisal due to the Integrated Fiduciary
   Systems Assessment (FSA) findings that the national-level fiduciary systems for the three Implementing
   Agencies (IAs) had both strengths and challenges. The FSA covered financial management, procurement,
   and fraud and corruption risks associated with the Program and concluded that the PFM system
   complemented by the program-specific mitigation measures was adequate to support the Program (PAD,
   para 78). The fiduciary risks and proposed mitigation measures are laid out in Annex 5 of the PAD (p. 101).

   Financial Management (FM). The FM risk for the program was assessed as Substantial at appraisal. The
   ICR (para 61) reports that the FM arrangements under the program performed adequately. Overall
   performance on FM was rated Satisfactory. The accounting function under GESDeK performed adequately
   in accordance with the PFM Act and regulations. Transactions were systematically captured in IFMIS, and
   there was sufficient staff capacity for fiduciary oversight. Staffing levels in the finance and accounting
   departments of the implementing entities were adequate. There was an improvement in the timely
   submission of annual financial statements to the OAG. However, delays occurred in submitting the audited
   financial statements of the entities to the WB. The last audit report from the NT, dated June 30, 2022, was
   qualified due to issues with prior year adjustments, recording asset acquisitions, propriety of purchasing
   specialized materials and services, and unauthorized use of surpluses. These issues were related to the
   general operations of the NT, not specific to the program.

   Procurement. The procurement risk for the program was assessed as Substantial at appraisal due to the
   combination between good progress on regulatory framework and institutional structures but the nature of
   challenges and inadequate capacity in some areas at the national level. The regulatory and institutional

                                                                                                 Page 36 of 39
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



   framework for public procurement had been strengthened by the implementation of the new Public
   Procurement and Disposal Act by the three implementing MDAs. However, a key challenge in the three
   implementing agencies identified in the assessments was procurement records management and delays
   providing professional opinion by the head of the procurement department (PAD, para 79).

   The ICR rated procurement performance under the program as Satisfactory. Under GESDeK, procurement
   processes adhered to legal provisions. Procurement manuals were internally developed by the regulator
   and MDAs to guide these processes. The WB offered intensive advisory and quality assurance support for
   activities under RA3 regarding e-GP and will continue providing technical assistance and support during
   the piloting and rollout of the system nationwide in GESDeK II through KADP (ICR, para 62).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity. The program contributed to poverty reduction and shared
   prosperity by enhancing service delivery and improving PFM systems. This led to better provision of
   government services, increased transparency, and more timely cash flow to service delivery MDAs. The
   eCitizen platform allows citizens and businesses to access and pay for government services online, while
   e-GP provides more vendors with access to government procurement opportunities. The online budget
   portal enables public access to budgetary and spending data, promoting engagement and scrutiny.

   Additionally, the cash management framework improves the government's ability to manage cash, control
   commitments, consolidate fiscally, and transfer funds to service delivery MDAs.

   Gender. Although the Program's activities were gender-neutral, the ICR does not mention whether training
   for gender sensitization was provided for MDA staff. According to the TTL, the program did not have
   gender sensitization training nor gender-focused activities. Also, when the program was designed in 2017,
   gender-tagging was not a requirement.



d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

                                                                                                  Page 37 of 39
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)




The ICR presents four lessons (p.22-23) based on the experience of this program of which two
are highlighted below:

In designing DLIs, it is important to avoid indicators that depend on the legislative approval
process. In designing DLIs, it is important to avoid those reliant on legislative approval. In GESDeK,
DLR 2.2a, which measured actual domestic revenue collections as a percentage of the annual
budget, was not achieved for three consecutive years due to discrepancies between actual and
budgeted revenue. These discrepancies were caused by the legislature's significant budget
modifications to proposed revenue measures. However, reform momentum continued as revenue-
related reforms were included in the IMF program and the Inclusive Growth and Fiscal Management
DPF. Future Program designs should opt for indicators within the direct control or influence of
implementing agencies to reduce unpredictability and delays.

The quality of technical design complemented with adequate financing and TA were critical
success factors in the achievement of results. The success of GESDeK was attributed to the
quality of technical design, adequate financing, and technical assistance (TA). The program focused
on foundational policies and systems essential for achieving GoK’s PFMRS goals, promoting
engagement across the PFM cycle, including the macro-fiscal framework, budget credibility, financial
reporting, and external oversight. This comprehensive approach was necessary for the country's
PFM and public sector reform trajectory. The PFMR Secretariat had flexibility in resource allocation
based on demands from implementing MDAs and linked to performance management targets. TA
from various DPs, including the WB, and a multi-donor trust fund, KADP, provided critical support
and quality assurance, particularly for ICT-related reforms.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a reasonably good overview of the program and describes the key achievements and
challenges although its discussion and presentation of evidence on efficacy could have been clearer. In
general, the narrative of the ICR is supported by evidence and analysis.

The shortcomings in the ICR are noted below:

      Program costs. There is a discrepancy between the PAD Expenditure Table (Table 10, p. 38) and the
       ICR data on Program costs. As the Financing Table in the data sheet of the ICR (p. 2) does not show
       the non-WB administered financing, it does not report the actual total cost of the program. The program
       Expenditure Summary of the ICR (Annex 3) shows costs for the entire government’s PFMRS program
       (US$632 million) and its non-WB financing data is inconsistent with the table in the PAD.
      Relevance of DLIs. There is insufficient discussion of the DLIs in the ICR and they are not
       presented/discussed individually in the Relevance section (Section A). There is a single paragraph
       (para. 34) confirming that the DLIs' relevance is rated High.

                                                                                                  Page 38 of 39
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Governance for Enabling Service Delivery (P161387)



   Revised allocations for each DLI. In Annex 1B of the ICR “Disbursement Linked Indicators”, the
    amounts labeled “allocated amount” should have been labeled “revised.” The ICR should have
    differentiated between the original, revised and disbursed amounts linked to each DLI.
   Quality of Supervision. The ICR discusses how the quality of supervision was high and benefitted from
    the presence of both TTLs in the field office. It also reports on regular ISMs, but it does not report on the
    virtual missions conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic. There is also no documentation/reports
    related with supervision during the pandemic.
   Achievement of targets. The ICR (Annex 1, p. 29) does not report clearly on the achievement of IRIs.
    “Target achieved” does not specify whether there were shortcomings or present any detail on how the
    indicator was met.



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 39 of 39
