     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0024192

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P092218                                       ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-77310,IBRD-87150                         31-Dec-2013                                         298,480,178.65

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2009                                   31-Dec-2023

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               299,880,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           298,480,178.65                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo            Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Loan Agreement (LA) on page 7, the original objective (June 2009) of the Project was "to
   strengthen and further develop the institutional framework of the financial sector to facilitate financing of
   commercially viable infrastructure projects and thereby increase provision of private infrastructure in
   Indonesia". The Project Development Objective (PDO) statement in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) on
   page 16 was identical.



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



   In March 2017, an Additional Financing (AF) was processed and approved, and the PDO statement was
   revised to read as follows: " to strengthen the financial capacity of Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF) to
   increase the access of private sector financing for infrastructure in Indonesia" (Amended LA on page 7).

   Assessment methodology: The original and revised PDOs were essentially similar, although the revised
   PDO was more concise and accurate. In both statements of the PDO, the overarching goal was " to increase
   the access of private sector financing for infrastructure in Indonesia". Moreover, the 2017 Additional Financing
   aimed to expand the scope of the original project by tripling the level of resources from US$100 million to
   US$300.0 million. Therefore, this validation will not undertake a split rating but will assess the project
   performance based on the revised PDO, the expanded project, and the 2017 revised results framework.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

   Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
   Yes

   Date of Board Approval
   15-Mar-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Unique Component: Deployment of Investment capital (Amount at approval of US$100 million,
   Actual amount at closure of US$ 298.5 million). The project comprised one component supported by an
   IBRD loan aimed to provide long-term debt financing, equity investment, and other financial products, as
   well as advisory services, to commercially viable infrastructure projects through the newly formed company,
   the Indonesia Infrastructure Finance (IIF).

   The IBRD loan to the Indonesia Government was to be on-lent to the P.T. Sarana Multi Infrastructure (SMI)-
   an state-owned enterprise-, which is a shareholder of the IIF, and the loan resources will be used to fund
   the following categories of sub-projects: (a) Funded Projects to provide senior debt, subordinated debt,
   mezzanine finance, equity, and investment for new infrastructure projects, and refinancing and
   securitization for existing infrastructure; (b) Non-Funded Projects to provide credit guarantees and stand-by
   finance for infrastructure projects; and, (c) Fee-Based Products to provide advisory services to the
   Government and to the private sector for infrastructure public-private partnerships (PPPs) and other
   infrastructure projects.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
       Project Cost: The total project cost amounted to US$298.5 million, with US$99.9 million from the
          original project, and US$198.6 million from the 2017 Additional financing.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



         Financing: The Bank financed the project with two financial intermediary loans (FIL) of US$100.0
          million (June 2009) and US$200.0 million (March 2017) to the Republic of Indonesia. The
          Government on-lent the entire proceeds of the loans to SMI (under a subsidiary loan agreement
          executed between the Government and SMI), and the SMI, in turn, re-lent the entire proceeds of the
          loan to PT IIF (under a subordinated loan agreement executed between SMI and PT IIF). The PT IIF
          was the sole participating financial intermediary of the project.

         Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Indonesia, through SMI, provided equity investment in PT
          IIF.

         Dates: The operation was approved on June 24, 2009, and became effective on April 25, 2011, and
          closed 10 years after the original closing date of December 31, 2013.

         Restructurings: The project was restructured five times as detailed below.
              o The first restructuring on 10/21/2013 aimed to extend the closing date for the Indonesia
                     Infrastructure Financing Facility (IIF) Project (P092218) from December 31, 2013, to
                     November 30, 2015. The extension was to provide additional time to achieve the project’s
                     development objective.
                 o   The second restructuring took place on 11/30/2015 and intended to extend the IIFF project
                     closing date from November 30, 2015 to November 30, 2016, to provide the time needed to
                     prepare an Additional Financing (AF) operation.
                 o    The third restructuring extended the loan closing date from November 30, 2016 to March 31,
                     2017, to allow for sufficient time to complete processing of the Additional Financing (AF) for
                     the project.
                 o   A fourth restructuring took place in March 2017 during which an Additional Financing was
                     approved, including: (i) a revision to the PDO for simplification purposes; (ii) a revision to the
                     Results Framework to account for the scale up of project activities; and (iii) a five-year
                     extension of the closing date from March 31, 2017 to February 28, 2022.
                 o    A fifth restructuring on 10/13/2021 extended the project from February 28, 2022 to
                     December 31, 2023, to provide adequate time for (i) adjustment of the on-lending
                     arrangement and to facilitate completion of all activities and achievement of the PDO, and
                     (ii) adjust the interest rate mechanism specified in the project's underlying subsidiary loan
                     agreement, from an interest rate (coupon rate) of the Borrower's Bonds ("SUN") benchmark
                     series with 20 years maturity to a yield of the SUN benchmark series with 20 years maturity.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context: A major challenge in Indonesia was the shortage of long-term resources needed
to appropriately finance infrastructure investment. Given the expected stability of their cash flow once
they are operational, infrastructure projects must be highly geared to combine low unit costs of delivery with
a reasonable return to the equity investors. In these circumstances, fixed rates are highly desirable as

                                                                                                         Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



interest rate “spikes” could threaten project viability. The Government recognized that local currency
financing can be an important public sector risk-mitigation mechanism. It is, therefore, in the Government’s
best interest to develop sound infrastructure financing facilities and bond markets to tap into local currency
resources for projects, particularly in sectors where foreign exchange risk is perceived to be high. Through
the Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility (IIFF), the Government acknowledged that an institutional
solution was needed to address the lack of long-term financing for infrastructure projects and to mobilize
and lead private capital into commercially viable infrastructure projects at the national and local levels. A
specialized private, non-bank financial institution, the IIFF aimed to expand the role of the private sector in
financing and operating infrastructure as similar institutions have done in other countries.

The PDO was consistent with Indonesia's infrastructure development priorities. At project appraisal,
infrastructure needs were particularly acute in power, transportation, and water supply and sewerage while
the available finance was not supportive of infrastructure development. The Medium-Term National
Development Plan (2020) set the agenda of the Indonesian government and emphasized the role of
infrastructure toward expanding economic development and basic services. At the same time, fiscal space
was limited, the corporate bond market was small, and banks were still constrained by five-year loan tenors,
while the middle market for infrastructure finance was particularly large and remained underserved. The
creation of the IIF was identified as an integral part of a comprehensive Government strategy to accelerate
investment in infrastructure as Indonesia further establishes and enhances its middle-income country (MIC)
status. The Government then requested the World Bank Group to support its efforts in establishing the IIFF
as part of its own development priorities and poverty-reduction agenda through the release of a key
constraint on the country’s economy growth - inadequate infrastructure. The proposed project aimed to
support the Government’s efforts to establish a non-bank financial institution - the Indonesia Infrastructure
Finance Facility (IIFF) - that will provide long-term local currency financing to commercially viable
infrastructure projects.

At project closing, the project was still aligned with the strategic objectives of the World Bank
Group’s FY21-FY25 Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The CPF for FY16-FY20 played a
prominent role for Indonesia’s massive infrastructure gap and the need to scale up financing, particularly
through further enabling the private sector: indeed, two out of the six engagement areas identified concerns
infrastructure, recognizing its importance in both job creation and service delivery, and leveraging private
sector investment is also identified as a main theme. The PDO retains its relevance in the latest CPF
(FY21-25), which recognizes investments in infrastructure as among the top 5 development challenges for
Indonesia. The IIFF is a new financial institution that complements the existing financial sector, but at the
same time is a unique partnership between the Government, multi- and bi-lateral donors/investors and the
private sector, to be managed privately and run along commercial lines with independence and full
accountability.

While the partnership was key for the launching and success of this project, the requirements to
create an operational financial institution to cater to the infrastructure sector were
underestimated. The World Bank used its convening power to bring in multiple partners that later on
became the IIF shareholders. The project outcome was supported by the Indonesia Government's
commitment through the PT Sarana Multi Infrastruktur (SMI). The World Bank convening power brought
together the following institutions which ended up becoming IIF shareholders: the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the German Investment and Development
Company (DEG), and Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (SMBC). However, building from scratch a
new and specialized financial institution to cater to the infrastructure sector was a daunting task. It required
addressing institutional, regulatory, and environmental issues, building the necessary technical capacity,

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



               and an extensive timeline to achieve the above aspects. While the World Bank and the Borrower
               established the required partnership to launch and implement this project, the requirements to achieve the
               PDO were underestimated, justifying the longer-than-planned project implementation time
               (15 years). Overall, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen the financial capacity of IIF to increase the access of private sector financing for infrastructure
                             in Indonesia

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change

                                         There was no explicit theory of change in the PAD or in the restructuring papers outlining the linkage
                                          between the project activities and the PDO. The ICR reconstructed a theory of change (Figure 1 on
                                          page 7), which summarized the chain by which original and revised activities of the project were to be
                                          transformed into outputs and outcomes. This review draws from the ICR material to present the
                                          results chain underlying the process of achieving the project development objective.
                                         Toward strengthening the technical capacity of the IIF, the key activities included the
                                          improvement of ES safeguard risk management, fiduciary strengthening and sustainable finance
                                          mainstreaming. Expected outputs included (i) the number of capacity building engagements with IIF,
                                          and (ii) the establishment and operationalization of the IIF with robust Operating Manual and a social
                                          and environmental management system. Expected outcome was a strengthened institution with the
                                          ability to oversee operations of infrastructure finance in Indonesia.
                                         Toward increasing the financing for infrastructure in Indonesia, the key activity was the provision of an
                                          investment loan made to the IIF as subordinated debt to be used for eligible infrastructure projects.
                                          Expected outputs included a strengthened financial capacity of the IIF to increase financing for
                                          infrastructure in Indonesia, including through private capital mobilization. Expected outcome was an
                                          increase in the provision of infrastructure in Indonesia. The pursued long-term outcome
                                          was a sustainable economic growth supporting poverty reduction in Indonesia.
                                         The results framework discussed under Section 9 was robust and showed how identified activities
                                          would underpin the strengthening of the IIF for Indonesia, and would increase financing for
                                          infrastructure in Indonesia, including through private capital mobilization. Overall, there was a logical
                                          chain between the identified activities, the expected outputs and outcome of the project.




                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 16
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)




        However, the ICR neither discussed the assumptions underpinning the theory of change nor the
         outcome attribution. Particularly regarding attribution, achieved outcome was also supported by the
         Indonesia Government, and other external investors, which were IIF shareholders in 2023 as follows:
         (i) PT Sarana Multi Infrastructure (30 percent), (ii) International Finance Corporation (19.99), (iii) Asian
         Development Bank-ADB (19.99 percent), (iv) German Investment and Development Company (15.12
         percent), and (v) Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation (14.90 percent). Moreover, a WB Trust Fund
         (P157490) supporting Indonesia in closing its large public infrastructure gap was implemented during
         the period of 2016-2021.

Outputs

        The IIF became operational, as a credible non-bank financial institution focused on infrastructure
         financing and advisory services. The IIF emerged as a credible player in infrastructure finance in
         Indonesia, with unique expertise combining project finance with environmental & social (E&S)
         safeguard management.
        The IIF built a solid reputation for its advisory services, especially on environmental and social aspects
         such as Environmental Social and Governance (ESG) due diligence, corporate ESG roadmap and
         ESG implementation assistance, for both the public and the private sector, and became a source of
         knowledge and advisory services recognized in national and international fora.
        The target for the number of IIF advisory engagements was also exceeded, totaling 45 advisory
         engagements at closing, compared to the target of 7, and a baseline of 0.

Outcomes

        The target for the number of infrastructure sub-projects financed by the IIF was exceeded, reaching 61
         compared to the target of 7, and a baseline of 0. The IIF’s portfolio grew up to a total of 61
         infrastructure projects with total commitment of over US$1 billion, covering multiple sectors including
         electricity (28 percent), telecommunications (21 percent), road (11 percent), oil & gas (9 percent),
         water and waste utility (9 percent), airport (7 percent), with the remaining including social and regional
         infrastructure, port, railway and mass transportation, and others.
        The target for the amount of financing from Bank funds provided by IIF to commercially viable
         infrastructure projects was exceeded, as a total of US$298.5 million of IBRD loan funds were
         disbursed, equivalent to 99.5 percent of the total loan amount made available to the IIF under the
         parent and additional finance operations between 2009 and 2023, and against a baseline of 0.
        The IIF has leveraged private capital of around 24 times its own capital [ including WB and ADB loan
         as well as Government of Indonesia (GoI) equity contribution)] vastly exceeding the original target of
         4 times.
        The target for the number of infrastructure financing supported by IIF using innovative financing, such
         as local Rupiah financing, take-out financing, financing with maturity greater than 10 years, cash
         deficiency support and credit enhancement, was exceeded, totaling 78 compared to the original target
         of 3, and a baseline of 0.



Rating
High


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Key results of the project implementation in the context of the parent and AF projects include the following:

                                    The IIF emerged as a credible player in infrastructure finance in Indonesia, with unique expertise
                                     combining project finance with environmental & social (E&S) safeguard management and catering for
                                     both the public and the private sector and became a source of knowledge and advisory recognized in
                                     national and international fora.
                                    The IIF’s portfolio grew up to a total of 61 infrastructure projects with total commitment of over US$1
                                     billion, covering multiple sectors including electricity, telecommunications, road, oil & gas, water and
                                     waste utility, airport (7 percent), social and regional infrastructure, port, railway and mass
                                     transportation.
                                    The amount of financing from World Bank funds provided by IIF to commercially viable infrastructure
                                     projects totaled US$298.5 million of IBRD loan funds were disbursed, equivalent to 99.5 percent of the
                                     total loan amount made available to the IIF under the parent and additional finance operation.
                                    The IIF leveraged private capital of around 24 times its own capital, and the number of infrastructure
                                     financing supported by IIF using innovative financing with maturity greater than 10 years was largely
                                     exceeded.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



   5. Efficiency
   Operational efficiency

   The loan was approved in March 2009, became effective in April 2011, but the first disbursement occurred
   only in 2013Q2. The creation and establishment of SMI and IIF, and the participation of other institutions (IFC,
   ADB) complicated the loan effectiveness process and required significant efforts in capacity-building and in
   coordination. Capacity building for a new institution was time-consuming, the project pipeline was slow to fill,
   and IIF, the new institution, needed sufficient time to establish itself in the infrastructure finance
   space. Following effectiveness, IIF made up for the initial delay and the disbursement reached the full amount
   of the original operation in 2016Q1, before the AF appraisal. The AF of $200 million (compared to the original
   operation of $ 100 million) approved in March 2017 further extended the implementation period.

   Economic and financial efficiency

   Both the 2009 PAD, and the 2017 restructuring paper developed detailed economic and financial analyses and
   scenarios with the calculation of NPVs and ERRs. The more than 60 infrastructure projects financed by the IIF
   were expected to bring significant economic and social benefits to the country, and financial inflows to the

                                                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



company itself. The economic analysis carried out for selected WB-financed subprojects indicated high
economic efficiency. The WB was only one of the debt financing providers for the IIF, and for some of the 17
sub-projects funded directly with WB financing, there were other sources of debt and equity financing, making it
difficult to compute the economic rate of return/net present value for WB financing.

At project closure, the WB and the IIF did commission selected business case studies for four representative
WB-funded projects from different sectors that includes NPV/ERR calculations including quantification of
environmental & social benefits. These calculations show that the four projects have an ERR in the range of 10
to 18 percent, and the return is higher if E&S benefits are considered. In dollar terms, the benefits accrued
exceed the economic cost and all projects have positive net present values. Since many projects are yet to be
fully operational or are in progress, it is difficult to repeat the same calculation for all sub-projects, but this
analysis for the selected sub-projects indicates that the economic efficiency of WB funded projects is positive.

While IIF's profitability was an issue, other key indicators remained stable. IIF’s financial performance has
been sound overall, although its profitability was at a low base level. In closing, IIF continued to maintain
sufficient resources, and the debt-to-equity ratio remained stable (between 5-and 6 in the last four years) with
room for increasing lending activities. Total assets and revenue have seen steady growth since IIF’s
establishment in 2010 and reached IDR 15.1 trillion and IDR 1.3 trillion respectively as of end 2023. Profitability
was in the negative territory or at relatively low levels in the early years (between 2010 and 2014) and in 2017
but has seen a steady increase in the last five years with return-on-equity (ROE) at 4.5 percent and return-on-
asset (ROA) at 0.9 percent as of end 2023. While low profitability has been a source of concern, key indicators
such as ROE, ROA and net profit margin have mostly been positive for 14 years since its establishment.

Overall efficiency is assessed as Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The ICR reported positive economic
efficiency of selected sub-projects funded by resources facilitated by the project. The implementation period was
longer than initially planned partly driven by the initial implementation delays and the scaling up under the
Additional Financing.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)




As discussed under Section 3, 4 and 5, the relevance of objectives is rated as high, the project efficacy is also
rated high, while efficiency is rated substantial, resulting in an overall Highly Satisfactory rating of the
project outcome. However, as acknowledged by the ICR, the IIF needs to further diversify its funding base for
its growth, profitability as well as leverage in influencing sub-projects to implement sound ESG practices.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The main risk is that the new IIF will have to overcome and survive sector competition (page 28). The
IIF's growth has been constrained by its limited capital base which reduced its participation in key viable
projects, its growth, profitability, as well as leverage in influencing sub-projects to implement sound ESG
practices. The IIF needs to further diversify its funding base for its growth, profitability and ESG champion
role.

The second risk is that IIF will have to overcome the constrained growth and profitability issue (page
28). The IIF has been unable to get new investors and is still largely dependent on public and international
development financing. IIF is in the process of raising additional capital through rights issuance. So far, SMI
is the only shareholder planning to subscribe to the additional shares, which may result in an increase of SMI
shareholding to 45%, and dilution of IFC and other shareholders' stake. As IIF continues to grow its portfolio,
there will be increasing risks associated with ES and loan quality, and IIF will need to continue to strengthen
its technical capacities and its loan quality monitoring function.

Mitigating actions include the design of an additional grant-funded TA aimed at designing a Joint
Capital Market Program (J-CAP) and PPIAF to support IIF in the development of the proposed
sustainable infrastructure investment fund. A consulting firm is conducting an analysis of options for
establishing the potential fund to scale up investments for sustainable infrastructure projects in Indonesia,
drawing from experience and lessons from similar funds in Indonesia and other emerging countries. The TA
is also expected to take into account the climate screening and quantification tools that have been developed
and provide recommendations on how these could be leveraged towards the establishment of the
sustainable investment fund and how they can benefit IIF’s efforts towards securing the participation of
potential donors that could provide seed-funding for the capitalization of the sustainable infrastructure
financing fund.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant as it addressed a key economic challenge arising
  from tightening of external financing conditions in Indonesia. The 2008 global financial caused the
  worst tightening of external financing conditions for Indonesia in the form of capital outflows, exchange

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



  rate fluctuations and elevated borrowing costs. The IIF local-currency financing offering aimed to
  remove exchange rate risks and was attractive and competitive.

  There were weaknesses in the design of the M&E and implementing arrangements. As discussed
  under the M&E section, some of the original result indicators were imprecisely stated (for instance
  “increased support to government’s policymaking) and were clarified during the 2017 Additional
  Financing restructuring. Similarly, the Bank’s role in the creation of a financial institution had limitation in
  the management of sub-projects, especially regarding the E&S safeguards and procurement standards.
  Moreover, the operation significantly underestimated the risks of delays in developing an
  implementation project pipeline and the lack of expertise, and technical and institutional local capacity
  required to set up a new financial institution.

  Innovative design: This project's innovative nature allowed the World Bank Group to establish a new
  NBFI with flexible mandates including extending finance to private corporates working on public
  infrastructure together with key development partners and private shareholders.

  Overall, the project quality-at-entry was satisfactory with minor shortcomings.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WB convening power was key to bringing together all key partners which contributed to
 the creation of the IIF. The WB team provided broad and high-level support to the preparation of the
 original operation by establishing rapport with the Borrower authorities including Vice-President of
 Indonesia, and stakeholders from the private sector. The latter were much more open and collaborative on
 ES safeguards issues and were key in the good collaboration amongst the WB, IFC and ADB toward the
 IIF creation in mobilizing public and private financial resources.

 The setting up of a new financial institution supporting the infrastructure sector was challenging
 and required sustained commitment of the Bank project team for 15 years. The WB team provided
 extensive capacity-building to the IIF’s journey towards its niche position. The WB team, with Jakarta-
 based staff playing a key role, consistently provided sustained implementation support throughout the
 lifecycle of the project. There were several TTLs for the entire operation which lasted 15 years, but several
 key team members covering at least the entire duration of the AF operation. In addition to building a new
 institution, the client noted that implementing relevant international standards was challenging and
 required change throughout the organization.

 The Bank team contributed to the strengthening of E&S monitoring in infrastructure finance. The IIF
 acknowledged the important role of TTLs, core task team members based in Jakarta who played a critical
 role in providing consistent hands-on support through both regular implementation support missions and
 on-demand capacity building and technical assistance. Climate and environmental risks and opportunities
 (CERO) for the financial sector have seen increasing attention worldwide and in Indonesia throughout the
 lifecycle of this project. However, with the founding and expansion of the Network for Greening the
 Financial System (NGFS) as well as increasing attention by central banks and financial regulators around

                                                                                                        Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



 the world, CERO has become an increasingly important topic for financial institutions. IIF has been able to
 capture the value-added of these climate and E&S initiatives through increased capacity of staff.

 The WB team supported IIF in developing a tool for a screening of climate change adaptation
 investment and quantifying E&S benefits. This TA is an innovative effort to further mainstream climate
 change and other ESG considerations in infrastructure financing and investments and quantifying the
 broader economic and social benefit of implementing an environmental and social framework, making it
 possible to directly link supported project activities to Indonesia’s goals to achieve net-zero emissions by
 2060. Specifically, the screening tool focused on identifying a pipeline of climate adaptation investment,
 which has been notably absent from the sustainable finance portfolios of major banks.

 The COVID-19 pandemic affected the project implementation, but the PDO pursuit was not
 compromised. Throughout the economic downturn caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, the Indonesian
 financial sector demonstrated resilience, and bank asset quality remained relatively stable, avoiding the
 severe deterioration often seen in financial crises. In this context, IIF saw some parts of its portfolio under
 stress or requiring temporary relief on interest or principal payments as the economy was recovering from
 the pandemic. The last ISR of the project notes that IIF was closely tracking the asset quality of its portfolio
 and is undertaking full portfolio stress testing to ensure that the achieved outcome will be upheld.

 Overall, quality of supervision was satisfactory, reflecting the WB convening power that made key
 stakeholders to stay the course, the strengthening of E&S monitoring in infrastructure finance, including
 the developing a tool for a screening of climate change adaptation investment and quantifying E&S
 benefits, and the pursuit of the PDO achievement despite the COVID-19 pandemics.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design section (page 24) indicates that the reconstructed theory of change at closing was
 consistent with the 2017 revised results framework. During the 2017 AF operation, the PDO statement
 was refined to capture the contribution of project component towards PDO-level outcomes. The
 intermediate results indicators were improved to strengthen the causal links between the activities and
 intermediate results and PDO indicators. Moreover, all indicators were within IIF staff’s capacity to measure
 and collect. However, the M&E framework did not include indicators related to the IIF’s financial
 performance, which was a design weakness that was not corrected.

 Overall, the M&E section of the ICR should have been more comprehensive and focused on the results
 chain at approval.



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)




b. M&E Implementation
  Supervision missions and Implementation Status and Results Report (ISRs) were key instruments
  to monitor progress of project implementation on the ground. The 2017 enhanced M&E framework
  was implemented consistently and reported regularly through project implementation support missions
  and reports (ISRs) conducted every half year, even during the COVID-19 pandemic which hampered in-
  person site visits. Except for the changes cleared during the AF operation, the M&E framework was not
  modified. Aide Memories and ISRs demonstrate that missions were carried out on schedule twice a year
  during the project period, and ratings were candid with adjustments in both directions.

  Regular M&E reporting by the IIF to the Bank project team contributed to tracking progress
  toward the PDO achievement. The results indicators of the original and revised operation were tracked
  and reported in ISRs, although there were aspects of the result framework that were difficult to measure.
  The IIF submitted semi-annual progress report including all information needed for M&E purposes. The
  revised results framework emphasized the knowledge and advisory aspects of WB support independent
  of the financing provide and the other sources of capital mobilized, including on E&S safeguards and
  procurement and later on climate adaptation investment screening.



c. M&E Utilization
  The assessment of the M&E utilization draws from the ICR material on page 24 and is summarized
  below.

  The semi-annual reports discussed above, which included the project’s M&E framework, informed
  the IIF’s decision-making and project management, especially with WB team’s hands on support in
  measuring and collecting these indicators through interviews and discussions during the preparation of
  the semi-annual reports. This information allowed the WB team to closely monitor and evaluate the
  overall progress of the project and provides much-needed context for the results indicators being
  tracked. The project’s M&E system was used to inform decision-making stakeholders and project
  management through the lifecycle of the project.

  While noting shortcomings related to comprehensiveness, the adequate M&E tracking and effective
  utilization lead to a substantial overall M&E rating.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                 Page 12 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



  The assessment of Safeguards draws from the PAD and the ICR material on page 25 which is summarized
  below.

  The project was classified as Financial Intermediary (FI) category, and the following policies were
  triggered by subprojects that the IFF is likely to finance : (i) OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), (ii) OP
  4.04 (Natural Habitats), (iii) OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), (iv) OP 4.12 (Involuntary
  Resettlement), (v) OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), (vi) OP 4.36 (Forestry), and (vii) OP. 37 (Safety of
  Dams). As an FI operation, an environmental and social safeguards framework (ESSF) and management
  system (ESMS) approach were followed to comply with applicable WBG Policies and IFC Performance
  Standards on Environmental Social Sustainability.

  Implementation of Environmental and Social policies included the following: (i) an environmental screening
  criteria, an environmental assessment, an environmental management plan and consultation and disclosure
  requirements for each type of sub-project, including analyses of natural habitats, cultural property, forests
  and safety of dams, as applicable, consistent with the regulations of the Borrower and the policies of the
  Bank; (ii) land acquisition and resettlement plan and compensation criteria, and consultation and disclosure
  requirements for each type of sub-project; and (iii) screening criteria and actions designed to facilitate a
  process of free, prior and informed consultation leading to broad community support involving Indigenous
  peoples including indigenous peoples plans, where required, and consultation and disclosure requirements
  for each type of sub-project; and (iv) in each case, project implementation was consistent with the
  regulations of the Borrower and the policies of the Bank and acceptable to the Borrower, the Bank and the
  Company.

  The performance rating for overall environmental and social safeguards compliance was Moderately
  Satisfactory during the last implementation support mission. However, the ICR notes that there is a need to
  continuously strengthen implementation capacity going forward, with a particular focus on (i) quality of
  corrective action plans, (ii) risk-based supervision, and (iii) escalation. A safeguard assessment is being
  conducted during and after the ICR process, with an in-person mission, the results of which will be made
  available separately.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The assessment of the fiduciary compliance draws from the ICR material on page 25 which is summarized
  below.

  Financial Management

  Financial management (FM) was mainly related to financial models to be used in the management of sub-
  projects, as the IBRD loan did not need many disbursements operations. The initial phase of developing
  financial management capabilities experienced a gradual commencement. However, as the initiative
  progressed, the IIF started to enhance its FM proficiency and increasingly adopted the GoI and WB
  procedures.

  FM was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory during 2011-2013 owing to slow progress in developing IIF’s
  Financial Management System and Internal Audit but improved during the remainder of the original
  operation. After the AF operation, FM was consistently rated as Satisfactory until the last supervision

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



   mission. There were no overdue audit reports or Interim Financial Reports from the IIF. Financial
   Management (FM) continued to be rated Satisfactory during the last supervision mission.

   Procurement

   Procurement was mainly related to procedures to be used in the management of sub-projects, as the IBRD
   loan did not need many procurement operations. Due to the nature of an FIL operation, Bank staff would
   only monitor IIF procurement capacity instead of all aspects of sub-project procurement, and this
   sometimes creates tension as a growing IIF portfolio means increased attention needed from both WB and
   IIF if the highest standards were to be followed. There were no notable procurement issues in this project
   as the rating continued to be Satisfactory as IIF followed high standards in their due diligence.
   Procurement continued to be rated Satisfactory during the last supervision mission.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   E&S safeguards expertise for projects funded by the financial sector was enhanced. The WB’s
   support in strengthening the IIF’s capacity, especially in E&S safeguards, was an important value-added of
   the project independent of the financing provided. This occurred because IIF found the implementation of
   international standards on E&S safeguard to be challenging due to a lack of experience and expertise.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory     Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

In the ICR, multiple lessons learned, and recommendations were identified and discussed on pages
28-30, and were generally sound, but this review has highlighted three lessons as rephrased below.

(i) Enhanced coordination and communication among development partners and within the
WBG may reduce implementation delays and generate results. During ICR interviews, the
authorities mentioned that dealing with separate procedures of different international institutions
were time-consuming at the earlier stage. This has gotten better since the WB and other

                                                                                                      Page 14 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



shareholders actively coordinated their requirements and procedures in the effort to reduce the
compliance burden for the client. For instance, WB and IFC’s rating scales were different and their
assessment of IIF’s E&S safeguard compliance differed. This sent conflicting and confusing
messages to the client regarding how they are performing, and the harmonization of approaches
partially led to the achieved results.

(ii) For a lending operation supporting the creation of a financial intermediary geared to
expanding investment in the infrastructure sector, striking the delicate balance between
adherence to the Bank's safeguard and procurement standards and reliance on the client’s
system is essential. Some stakeholders pointed out that the rigorous application of Bank
safeguards and procurement standards constrained the IIF in its effort to develop a more profitable
pipeline of projects and compete in the marketplace. The Bank team continued, throughout the
project cycle, to reach beyond institutional capacity building and actively manage E&S
implementation support at the level of sub-projects, but the IIF, as a financial intermediary, does not
have the needed capacity and authority to impose the Bank’s safeguard and procurement standards
on its clients. Progress made drew from the balance established between requirements from the WB
practices and the Borrower's input based on the country's reality.

(iii) This project underlines the importance of perseverance and the need for continuous
capacity building in the establishment of a new infrastructure Finance Facility. The journey of
establishing the IIF as a credible player in the infrastructure finance space was challenging,
including management turnovers and the initial scarcity of suitable projects. However, extensive
capacity-building efforts, particularly on Environmental and Social (E&S) safeguards, eventually
positioned IIF to carve out its niche. Future endeavors should factor in the time and resources
required for such entities to fully operationalize and recognize the value of early and ongoing support
in E&S safeguarding as critical to building market credibility.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  The creation of the IIF was an innovative and flagship achievement for the Indonesia infrastructure sector.
  Moreover, it epitomizes the Public Private Partnership (PPP) in providing long-term finance and expand
  multisector infrastructure development. To check on the sustainability of the innovative finance provided in the
  IIF context, a PPAR prepared in the medium-term would provide insights on how to mobilize long-term finance
  to address infrastructure needs in most of the World Bank Group clients.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a comprehensive account of the project design, implementation and achieved results, and
is generally evidence-based. The quality of analysis is strong, and the results orientation of the project was a

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID- Indo Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)



key feature of the document. The ICR is internally consistent, as all parts are reinforcing each other from the
activities, the implementing arrangements under the parent and restructured projects, the achieved outputs and
the progress toward the PDO. Moderate shortcomings of the ICR include (i) the weaknesses in discussing the
M&E design and the role of the medium-term review in moving ahead with implementation, and (ii) the Annex 1
which is core to the results framework was not fully filled out. The overall quality of ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 16
