     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024237

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P096532                                      ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP)

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Indonesia                                    Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1460,IBRD-76690,IBRD-87110 31-Dec-2013                                                     171,752,768.20

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Mar-2009                                  30-Jun-2017

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                           47,021,857.19                                               0.00




 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Craig Phillip Kullmann        Dileep M. Wagle              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives in the PAD (p.6) are: i) to increase the safety and the functionality with
   respect to bulk water supply of large Ministry of Public Works-owned reservoirs; and ii) to strengthen the
   safety and operational management policies, regulations and administrative capacity of Ministry of Public
   Works. In the Financing Agreement for the loan (p. 6) the objectives have the same meaning, but are
   simplified as follows:

          i. to increase the safety and functionality of dams in selected locations and

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



        ii. strengthen management capacity of dam safety.

   The restructuring that took place in February 2017 incorporated additional financing and modified the PDO to
   state: increase the safety and functionality of dams in selected locations and strengthen the operation and
   management capacity for dam safety (restructuring paper, p. 10-11), which is the same as in the loan
   agreement. This modified PDO is a simplified version of the original PDO and does not materially change the
   original PDO. This ICRR updates the interim ICRR that was completed prior to the additional financing in
   February 2017.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Dam Operational Improvement and Safety Works and Studies (estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$34.2 million; actual cost US$196.5 million). Under the first phase of the project, this
   component supported minor rehabilitation and remedial works on about 34 prioritized large reservoir sites to
   restore operational performance; developing surveys, investigations and designs for medium to major
   works, providing Basic Dam Safety Facility (BDSF) repair and/or upgrading for improved safety monitoring
   and preparedness systems, establishing a river inflow and sediment monitoring system, and an assessment
   of spillway capacity and downstream flooding risks. The additional financing expanded the scope to
   rehabilitate an additional 140 dams and incorporate updated standards, new studies, and the installation of
   advanced safety systems.

   Component 2: Operation and Maintenance Improvement and Capacity Building:(estimated cost
   US$14.6 million, actual cost: US$34.9 million). Under the first phase of the project, this component
   supported the preparation of Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plans, Standard Operating Procedures
   (SOP) and manuals, as well as undertaking needs-based budgeting and O&M activities. The additional
   financing added strategic studies, emergency preparedness plans, community participation programs, and
   human resource development to further enhance operational safety and efficiency.

   Component 3: Reservoir Sedimentation Mitigation (estimated cost: US$15.1 million, actual cost:
   US$64.6 million). Under the first phase of the project, this component supported i) surveys to determine the
   total available water storage in reservoirs affected by sedimentation; ii) feasibility studies, designs and the
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for medium-term interventions within the
   reservoir; iii) preparations for a sample study for decommissioning of severely silted reservoirs, (to be
   financed under a successor project); and, iv) piloting of institutional models and plans to construct sediment
   retention and river bank protection structures of upstream rivers and sub-catchments. The additional
   financing expanded activities to include a comprehensive Sedimentation Management Program, adding
   both corrective and preventative measures like dredging and community watershed management.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



  Component 4: Dam Safety Institutional Improvement (estimated cost US$ 2.3 million, actual cost
  US$14.7 million). Under the first phase of the project, this component supported i) the preparation of the
  needed Government and Ministerial regulatory documents and concept/academic papers; ii) a public
  awareness campaign about dams and reservoirs; iii) strengthening and developing the Dam Safety Unit
  (DSU), providing it with a fully furnished and equipped office and updated guidelines; establishing a dam
  engineer and technician training and certification system; and, iv) supporting incremental costs of the
  Central Dam Management Unit within the Ministry. The additional financing extended these activities to
  include institutional assessments, regulatory support, enhanced coordination mechanisms, and the
  development of a dam technology center.

  Component 5: Project Management (estimated cost: US$ 4.4 million, actual cost: US$17.1 million). This
  Component provided overall project management including the provision of (i) the principal Project
  Management TA Consultant; (ii) the incremental operating costs of the Central Project Management Unit’s
  (CPMU) and Project Implementation Units (PIUs) activities for coordinating all project interventions; and (iii)
  a TA support to prepare for the successor project. The additional financing added further support for project
  management through enhanced technical assistance, oversight by expert panels, and additional resources
  for effective project implementation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: The estimated total project cost at appraisal was US$70.4 million with the Bank's contribution and
  counterpart funding included. At the restructuring for additional financing, the total project cost increased to
  US$370.4 million, which included contributions from the borrower, World Bank, and the Asian Development
  Bank. The actual project cost at closing was US$327.7 million.

  Financing: The World Bank’s financing at appraisal was US$50.0 million, which increased by US$125
  million with the additional financing for a total of US$175 million. The actual expenditure of World Bank
  financing at closing, December 31, 2023, was US$172.1 million. The Asian Development Bank contributed
  US$125 million to the restructuring for the additional financing and closed with actual expenditures of
  US$124.9 million.

  Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower’s contribution was estimated at US$20.4 million. During
  the restructuring for additional financing, the borrower’s contribution increased to US$70.4 million. The
  actual contribution at project close was US$30.8 million.

  Dates: The original project closing date was December 31, 2013. In total, the project was restructured six
  times. The closing date was extended three times to allow the completion of project activities, reallocation of
  loan proceeds, and revision of some intermediate outcome indicators. The third restructuring was on
  October 23, 2016, to extend the closing date to June 30, 2017. This was to allow time for the preparation of
  additional financing to be implemented as a second phase of the Dam Operational Improvement and Safety
  Project.

  The project was restructured on February 27, 2017, to include additional financing, and modify the results
  framework and PDO. The fifth restructuring modified the results framework, and the final restructuring
  extended the closing date by 6 months. The project became effective on June 8, 2009, and closed on
  December 31, 2023, for a total of 14.5 years of implementation which included 54 months of extensions.


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are sufficiently outcome-oriented and appropriate for the
development status of the country. The country relies heavily on reservoirs for water supply for various
sectors such as agriculture, drinking water, and electricity generation as well as flood protection. (PAD, p.1)
The need to improve the declining reservoir performance in the country was recognized and prioritized in
the WBG Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) at project appraisal and remained relevant to the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) at the time of the interim ICR. The CPS (FY09 – FY 12) for Indonesia
focused on strengthening the country’s institutions and investments in (water) infrastructure, climate change
and disaster mitigation. The CPF (FY16 – FY20) acknowledged the historical underinvestment in
infrastructure in Indonesia and identified water and sanitation projects, including irrigation and dams, to help
close the infrastructure gap highlighting dam safety in the CPF. A shortcoming of the PDOs at appraisal
was the lack of attention given to sedimentation. Sedimentation is an important factor for reservoir storage
capacity, impacting water delivery and flood protection. It was considered at component level, but it was not
considered in the PDOs.

Indonesia sought universal access to water and sanitation by 2019 (CPF FY16-20) (p. 23). To this end the
WBG gave support to expanding existing and supporting new national level water-related programs. The
objectives were relevant to the country priorities: the Indonesian Government makes long-term
development plans as well as five-year medium-term development plans (RPJMN). Each RPJMN identifies
development priorities for the specified period.

The first RPJMN 2004-2009 emphasized infrastructure development, and the sustainable development of
natural resources and food security, all of which were reliant on the effective and sustainable use of water
resources. During project implementation, the government further developed its vision of water and food
security by translating it into an ambitious program of constructing 65 new dams within its legislative period,
2014-2019. The PDOs remain relevant to the government’s 2020-2024 medium-term development plan,
and specifically their strategic areas: (5) Strengthening Infrastructure to Support Developing Economy and
(6) Basic Services Developing the Environment, Increasing Disaster and Climate Resilience.

The CPF (FY16-20) prominently featured dam safety as an integral part of water security in the country.
The PDOs are still relevant to the CPF (FY21-25) Engagement Area II: Improve Infrastructure, specifically
Objective 2.1 Improve infrastructure provision for quality of service where the project is directly referenced
(CPF, p 56-57). Likewise, the project is relevant to the CPF’s Engagement Area IV: Sustain Management of
Natural Assets, Natural Resources-Based Livelihoods and Disaster Resilience, namely: Objective 4.2
Improve Agriculture and Natural Resources Based Livelihoods; and Objective 4.3 Strengthen Multi-Hazard
Disaster Resilience..

The project and PDOs are based on the historical experience of the Bank in the sector. Prior to this project,
the Bank invested in the Dam Safety Project (DSP: 1994-2003), which helped develop the country’s first
dam safety institutions such as the Dam Safety Commission, Dam Safety Unit, Central Dam Monitoring
Unit, and Provincial Dam Monitoring Units. The evaluation of DSP recommended that institutional
strengthening support for this sector would require a long-term commitment such as through an Adaptable


                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



               Loan Program with different phases. (PAD, p. 11) The PDOs reflect the evolution of the Bank’s sector
               engagement.

               The PDOs remain relevant to the current CPF and the government's medium-term plan and are rated as
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase the safety and functionality of dams in selected locations.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 8) identified that the outcome
                             of interest was to increase safety and functionality of dams in selected locations.

                             The mix of inputs identified is adequate and sufficient to reach the outcome. These included the financing of
                             interventions through various components: (i) developing surveys, investigations and designs for medium to
                             major rehabilitation; (ii) minor to major rehabilitation and remedial works on prioritized dams; (iii), providing
                             Basic Dam Safety Facility (BDSF) repair and/or upgrading for improved safety monitoring and preparedness
                             systems; and (iv) emergency preparedness plans, community participation programs, and human resource
                             development to further enhance operational safety and efficiency.

                             Aside from improved instrumentation and rehabilitation to improve safety and functionality, additional inputs
                             were important for dam functionality, which included: (i) surveys to determine the total available water storage
                             in reservoirs affected by sedimentation; (ii) feasibility studies, designs and the Environmental and Social
                             Management Framework (ESMF) for medium-term interventions within the reservoir; (iii) piloting of
                             institutional models and plans to construct sediment retention and river bank protection structures of
                             upstream rivers and sub-catchments; and (iv) dredging activities.

                             As a result, the expected outputs would have been: (i) 147 dams rehabilitated with respect to civil works as
                             well as new mechanical equipment installed; (ii) improved instrumentation installed as well as hardware and
                             software systems supporting dam operation, monitoring, and communication of information; (iii) emergency
                             preparedness plans and community participation plans developed; (iv) sedimentation studies and
                             reforestation and sediment retention programs developed, and (v) dredging of reservoirs conducted.




                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



As a result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: (i) rehabilitated dams have
improved operation; (ii) increased land area under sustainable landscape management preventing
sedimentation; (ii) communities participating catchment area activities; (iii) increased number of dams with

BDSFs operational, (iv) emergency action plans disseminated, and (v) dams are providing real-time data to
operators and decision-makers.

The result of these intermediate outcomes would be the PDO outcome of increased safety and functionality of
the dam, which would contribute to a higher level of outcome of increased resilience to climate change and
increased access to water for human and productive uses.

The ToC’s activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes provide a logical and properly
sequenced causal chain that was sufficient to reach the PDO outcome target. The ToC was comprehensive in
addressing the safety and functionality aspects of the PDO. The ToC included explicit assumptions such as (i)
community activities in landscape and watershed management will reduce soil erosion and sediment loading
of reservoirs; (ii) the government will consistently allocate sufficient funding to cover O&M and dam safety;
and (iii) there will be sufficient institutional and technical capacity to implement the regulatory framework for
dam safety. (ICR, p 8). The results framework captured key outputs and intermediate outcomes that were
appropriate. The PDO indicator for measuring ‘safety’ was based on reduced risk scores and was adequate
and based on good international practice, despite the shortcomings identified in the ICR. However, there were
shortcomings in measuring outcomes related to ‘functionality’. The outcome indicator for the ‘functionality’
aspect of the PDO captured a series of outputs and fell short of capturing the impact of the interventions by
focusing on whether infrastructure improvements to the dams were made. A more outcome-oriented indicator
could have measured the reservoirs’ ability to deliver volumes of bulk water based on their rehabilitated
storage capacity. Given that sedimentation is a significant issue for Indonesia’s dam portfolio and
sedimentation activities were planned for almost half of the reservoirs, an indicator that measured the
reservoirs' restored storage capacity could have been included.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      147 dams were rehabilitated. (Original target was 140). (achieved) (ICR, p. 34). The rehabilitation of
       dams included repairing structural deficiencies, inoperable mechanical systems, and replacement of
       non-functional instrumentation. (ICR, p. 6) Although the ICR highlights the target for this indicator
       should have been 150 when accounting for the number of dams under the first phase and the
       additional financing. If the target should have been 150, then the achievement is 98 percent, which is
       substantially achieved. (ICR, p. 17)

      141 dams with basic dam safety facilities operational. (Original target was 140 dams) (achieved)
       (ICR, p. 34). These improvements included daily access and mobility at dam sites, communication
       facilities, basic equipment for surveillance and monitoring, equipment for inspections and emergency
       repairs, standby power supplies, water transportation, lighting, etc.
      160 dams with emergency action plans updated and disseminated. (Original target was 140 dams)
       (exceeded) (ICR, p. 35). These plans are a requirement under the new regulations and detail the
       necessary actions in the event of a dam breach or under other specified emergency conditions to
       protect life, economic assets, and the environment downstream. (ICR, p. 17)


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)




      761 Ha under sustainable landscape management practices. (Original target was 300 Ha).
       (exceeded) (ICR, p. 37). Sustainable landscape management practices were introduced over an area
       of 761 hectares, including the greenbelts and areas surrounding the dams, exceeding the target of
       300 hectares. These measures aimed to reduce erosion in those areas and slow the rate of
       sedimentation of reservoirs. (ICR, p. 18) While this target was exceeded, the ICR does not discuss the
       impact of these interventions and notes that sedimentation of dams remains a major challenge.
      70 percent of communities join catchment management activities. (Original target was 25 percent).
       (exceeded) This indicator included soft components of increasing awareness of conservation,
       trainings/education on catchment management, and empowerment; however, the indicator is not well
       defined and there is little information in the ICR to describe the impact other than reporting on the
       indicator.
      86 dams, implementing at least 70% of catchment management activities. Original target was 60
       dams). (exceeded) (ICR, p. 38). The ICR noted that this indicator was achieved, but did not elaborate
       on the impact nor provide details other than briefly mentioning training, awareness-raising activities,
       and the introduction of landscape practices such as greenbelts, which was captured in a separate
       indicator. The additional financing paper discussed piloting a payment for the environmental services
       program, but this was not discussed in the ICR. The ICR does not reflect the impact of these
       interventions.

The ICR reported the following additional output that did not have targets and was not included in the results
framework but was related to inputs in the ToC that would contribute to dam safety and functionality.

      A total of 123 dams supported under the project began a process to issue dam operation licenses
       from the Ministry of Public Works and Housing. A total of 64 dams received their operation license by
       project closing. The remaining 56 dams were moving through the process, including discussions with
       the Dam Safety Unit, and responding to its recommendations. (ICR, p. 16)

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework are the following:

      Overall reduction of the risk score by 31.8 percent for all dams under the project. (Original target was
       20 percent). (ICR, p.31) (exceeded). This reduction was calculated by assessing the risk scores
       among 141 dams that were rehabilitated. The risk score reduction was reportedly attained through
       remedial works, mechanical improvements, improved instrumentation, improved basic dam safety
       facilities and emergency management plans. The ICR did not substantiate the reported figure for risk
       score reduction with data showing risk scores pre- and post-intervention as was done in the interim
       ICR; however, the Task Team did provide the analysis that was conducted to substantiate the
       reported figure. The risk scores were developed before and after rehabilitation interventions by
       technical assistance consultants using a methodology based on best international practice and
       endorsed by the International Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD). (ICR, p. 16)
      127 dams with individual hazards reduced by > 20% of risk score. (Original target was 98). (ICR, 31).
       (exceeded). This reduction in risk scores also included dams not only reducing their risk score by 20
       percent but also the number of dams classified as ‘high’ risk (score 46-75) reduced from 118 to 18
       dams and the number of dams classified as extreme risk (score 76-90) reduced from 3 to 0. The
       measurement of risk scores follows international good practice, which evolved during the life of the
       project. (ICR, p. 16). The annexes of the ICR summarized the type of activities carried out at each

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



       dam; however, there was no information in the ICR on risk score reductions for individual dams, which
       was provided by the Task Team after the interview. The overachievement of this indicator was
       primarily due to: (i) improved coordination among stakeholders, and optimized resource allocation, (ii)
       advancements in assessment methodologies (such as the Risk Score Assessment developed in
       DOISP2) that allowed additional dams to be assessed more quickly, (iii) timely implementation of
       interventions, and (iv) and inclusion of small dam type structures that benefited from the installation of
       basic safety equipment and safety documents.
      95 percent of dams returned to improved operations. (Original target was 74 percent). (exceeded).
       One hundred and thirty-four dams out of 141 were returned to improved operation during the project
       supporting the PDO element of improved functionality. This indicator was introduced at the additional
       financing restructuring to better measure ‘functionality’ of PDO 1, which did not exist in the first phase.
       There was no definition for this indicator in the restructuring paper at additional financing, but the ICR
       used the following: (i) hydro-mechanical instrument repaired; (ii) Sediment work in the inlet irrigation
       structure completed; (iii) Spillway repaired; (iv) Dam and reservoir leakage stop; (v) O&M manual is
       available and utilized. The interview with the task team confirmed that the definition of this indicator
       was documented in other project documents such as aid memoirs and the monitoring and evaluation
       system.

The project achieved or exceeded its output, intermediate outcome, and outcome indicators as articulated in
the results framework; however, it was not always clear that the achievement of indicator translated into
impact (e.g. while the rehabilitation likely improved the safety of the dams, it is less clear whether this portfolio
of dams is better able to meet water demands for agriculture, drinking water supply and energy production as
a result of the interventions, as this was not measured particularly given the challenges with sedimentation
that are documented in the ICR). The ICR notes that even though an indicator was added on the return of
dams to improved operation to measure functionality, it "only partially addressed the shortcoming in the M&E
system around the sub-objective on functionality", for which the evidence could have been further enhanced
by measuring dams receiving their operational licenses after passing inspection or trying to measure the
reliability or quality of service from the dams. The achievement of Objective 1 is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the operation and management capacity for dam safety.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 8) identified that the outcome
of interest was to strengthen the operation and management capacity for dam safety.

The mix of inputs identified is adequate and sufficient to reach the outcome. These included financing the
following: (i) the preparation of the needed Government and Ministerial regulatory documents and
concept/academic papers; ii) a public awareness campaign about dams and reservoirs; (iii) developing Dam
Safety Unit (DSU), and providing it with a fully furnished and equipped office and updated guidelines;

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



(iv) preparation of Operations and Maintenance (O&M) plans, Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) and
manuals, as well as undertaking needs-based budgeting and O&M activities; (v) establishing a dam engineer
and technician training and certification system; and, (vi) supporting incremental costs of the Central Dam
Management Unit (CDMU) within the Ministry; (vii) institutional assessments; and (viii) and the development
of a dam technology center.

As a result, the expected outputs would have been: (i) regulatory documents prepared and issued, (ii) dam
operations staff trained and certified, (ii) O&M plans, budgets, and SOPs developed; (iii) DSU and CDMU fully
equipped, and (iv) dam technology center developed.

As a result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: (i) regulations were being
implemented, (ii) dam operation staff were conducting operation and maintenance and applying SOPs, and
(iii) the dam technology center was sharing real-time data (hydrological, dam water levels, etc.) informing dam
operations and safety measures.

The result of these intermediate outcomes would be the PDO outcome of strengthened dam operation and
management capacity, which would contribute to a higher level of outcome of improved performance and
sustainability of the water sector, increased resilience to climate change, and increased access to water for
human and productive uses.

The ToC’s activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes provide a logical and properly
sequenced causal chain that was sufficient to reach the PDO outcome target. The ToC was comprehensive in
addressing the operation and maintenance aspects of the PDO. The relevant assumptions in the ToC that
pertain to Objective 2 are: (i) the government would consistently allocate sufficient funding to cover O&M and
dam safety; and (ii) there would be sufficient institutional and technical capacity to implement the regulatory
framework for dam safety. (ICR, p 8). While the ToC was logical, the results indicators to measure the
outcomes had minor shortcomings. The outcome indicators were heavily focused on outputs making it difficult
to assess the impact of the investments on strengthened operation and management capacity. See the
section below.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      100 percent of dam operational staff receive annual training. (Original target was 100 percent)
       (achieved). (ICR, p.19). At appraisal, this indicator was a one-off training for identified staff, and at the
       restructuring for the additional financing, the indicator was modified to ensure annual training in dam
       operations and safety, which strengthened the indicator. By the end of the project, 100 percent of dam
       operators were receiving annual training. These training courses included 19 staff in the CDMU and
       146 staff in the DSU. By the close of the project, 1,042 people that operate dams were certified as
       dam professionals by the Indonesia Committee on Large Dams (INACOLD), which is a member of the
       International Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD). (ICR, p. 19)
      152 O&M Manuals (including related training) for dams completed. (Original target was 140).
       (exceeded) (ICR, p. 36) These manuals contain the equipment needs for each dam, which are
       important inputs for the calculation of needs-based budgets for the River Basin Organizations.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)




      39 Community-Dam Management MOUs signed on greenbelt management. (Original target was 30
         MOUs). (achieved) (ICR, p. 36). These MOUs were signed between communities and dam operators
         to raise awareness of dam safety and improve landscape management to reduce sedimentation.
        Dam Management Technology Center established and operationalized DGWR-MPWH. (Original
         target was to establish and operationalize) (achieved). At the central level, a Dam Management
         Technology Center within the DGWR-MPWH was established and equipped with forecasting
         capabilities and was receiving real-time hydrological and water level data from 149 dams. (ICR, p. 19)
        149 dams providing real-time data. (Original target was 80 dams). (exceeded) (ICR, p. 38). 149 dams
         were sending real-time hydrological and water level data. A subset of dams also sent real-time video
         from their CCTV networks. At the basin level, 67 Dam Monitoring Units were also established with
         project support, helping to strengthen the flow of information between central authorities and the dam
         operators who are geographically very dispersed.
        19 CDMU staff trained annually. (Original target was 5) (exceeded) (ICR, p. 39)
        146 DSU staff trained. (Original target was 15) (exceeded) (ICR, p. 39). The interview with the Task
         Team highlighted that the original targets were overly conservative and could have been set higher.
        1,042 professionals certified by the Indonesia Committee on Large Dams (INACOLD). (Original target
         was 200) (exceeded). The interview with the Task Team highlighted that the original targets were
         overly conservative and could have been set higher. The interview also noted that the government
         was motivated to train and certify professionals, which also explained why this target was surpassed.

The ICR reported the following additional output that did not have a target and was not included in the results
framework but was related to inputs in the ToC that would contribute to the strengthened operation and
management capacity for dam safety.

      The project supported institutional benchmarking across different River Basin Organizations (RBOs),
         which introduced clear targets for institutional development and promoted constructive competition
         among RBOs.

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework were the following:

      13 River Basin Organizations with need-based O&M budget and plan operationalized within a national
         asset management system. (Original target was 13 RBOs) (achieved) (ICR, p. 32) The O&M budget
         allocations from the MPWH increased from IDR 21 billion in 2009 to IDR 48 billion in 2014 (IDR 35.5
         billion in 2009 prices) to IDR 93 billion in 2023 (IDR 52.6 billion in 2009 prices). (ICR, p. 19). The
         need-based budgeting exercises appeared to raise awareness of O&M costs and supported the
         increases over time, but current funding remains below the needs for sustainable O&M. (ICR, p. 19)

      Issuance of 4 regulations on dam safety (incl. Government/PP, Minister, and/or DG Decree on dam
         safety assurance. (Original target was 3 regulations issued). (achieved) (ICR, p. 33). The key
         regulation of dam safety was the 2015 Ministerial Regulation on Dams (27/PRT/M/2015), which clearly
         defines the roles and responsibilities for dam safety, details guidelines and standards, and empowers
         the regulator. In addition, it requires the certification of large dams by the Dam Safety Commission
         and requires these dams to have dam safety instruments such as Emergency Action Plans (EAPs)
         and O&M Manuals. (ICR, p. 19)


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



                            The ICR’s ToC adequately captured the causal chain and included assumptions. However, the results
                            framework had minor shortcomings in measuring the PDO’s dimensions of operation and management
                            capacity of dam safety. Solely reporting on the number of staff trained limits the understanding of the impact
                            of the training. The ICR noted the limitations of using the number of dam operational licenses issued, which
                            would serve as a proxy for strengthened O&M capacity; however, the project storyline could have been
                            strengthened with some information on how the training has helped them improve dam operation and
                            management. While increased government financing for O&M is positive, what is less clear is the adequacy
                            of those funds for proper O&M and how well those funds are being spent.

                            The output and outcome targets were achieved or exceeded, but there were minor shortcomings in
                            measuring the outcome. Objective 2 is rated as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR documented the achievement of the output, intermediate, and outcome indicators with moderate
                            shortcomings in how the PDOs were measured. The overall efficacy was rated as Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Ex Ante Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, the economic rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 32.8 percent
   with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$108 million at a discount rate of 6 percent. With the restructuring for
   additional financing, the EIRR increased to 60.3 percent with an NPV of US$522.9. The benefit streams that
   were included were: (i) avoided irrigated agricultural losses, (ii) avoided hydropower losses, (iii) avoided
   household property losses, (iv) avoided dam replacement or rehabilitation costs, and (v) avoided emergency
   response costs.

   Ex Post Economic Efficiency: The economic analysis at project completion in the ICR included the same
   benefits streams identified at appraisal. The EIRR at closing was estimated at 48 percent with an NPV of
   US$1,182 million. The ex-post analysis also used a discount rate of 6 percent. The same methodology for the
   economic analysis was applied at ICR stage, which assumed a dam failure probability of 13 percent and a
   reduction of this probability by 90 percent because of project interventions. (ICR, p.53).


                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented in two phases. The
first phase was to be implemented in 5 years but was extended three times for a total of 4 years beyond the
initial closing date. The reason for these extensions was in part due to: (i) initial delays in implementation, (ii)
reorganization of the implementing agency, (iii) issues around procurement and contract management, (iv)
safety concerns with regards to weather conditions, and (v) allowing time to process the additional financing.
The project was restructured with additional financing, adding 6 years to the implementation period. During the
second phase, the project was extended by 6 months. In total, the project was implemented over a 15-year
period. (ICR, p.48) The project was originally envisioned as a series of projects, but the approach was switched
to an extension with additional financing, as requested by the client because it was expected to be faster than
processing a new stand-alone project and easier for the client, but delays still occurred. (ICRR interview)

Financial Analysis. At appraisal, the financial analysis assessed the fiscal impact on the budget of central and
provincial governments, and the financial burden of water users from increased O&M expenditure of dams and
reservoirs if the project dams were to be maintained at good condition. At the appraisal stage, water users were
not charged for using water for irrigation and the O&M cost was fully borne by the governments. The interim
ICCR noted that if this practice continues, the annual fiscal burden to the central and provincial government
would increase by 64 percent from US$2.82 million to US$4.63 million. (Interim ICRR, p. 6) There was no
financial analysis conducted at the interim ICR nor at the final ICR.

Conclusion. While the economic analysis of the portfolio of dams was positive, the economic analysis done for
each cluster of dams revealed mixed results. The EIRR ranged from 12 to 99 percent, while the benefit-cost
ratio ranged from 1.5 to 51.7. All clusters of dams had positive NPVs and EIRR exceeding the cut-off discount
rate range of 8-12 percent. The EIRR at closing, estimated at 48 percent, was lower than the EIRR after the
additional financing at 60.3 percent. The project experienced significant operational and administrative delays
totaling 4.5 years, which is almost one-third of the total implementation period of 14.5 years. An additional
shortcoming of the efficiency analysis was that a financial analysis was not conducted. The efficiency rating is
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  32.80
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               48.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)




The project remains highly relevant to the World Bank CPF. The project design was consistent with the
objectives, and substantially scaled up activities because of the additional financing. The project interventions
helped improve the safety of dams and strengthen the O&M capacity of the Ministry of Public Works. The
project corrected course at the restructuring and attempted to measure a proxy indicator for ‘functionality’;
however, this was more output-based rather than focusing on outcomes. At the same time, the project
implementation experienced 54 months of delays. While the project largely achieved its stated output and
outcome indicators, the quality of those indicators to measure outcomes had moderate shortcomings.
Nevertheless, taken together, a Substantial rating for Relevance, a 'Substantial with moderate shortcomings'
rating for efficacy, and a Modest rating for efficiency results in a Moderately Satisfactory rating for the overall
outcome


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

After the completion of the second phase of the project, the main risk to development outcome remains the
sustainability of O&M funds for dams. The project did not fundamentally change how dam O&M is funded but
was successful in helping develop an asset management system and strengthening the annual budget
estimation process within RBOs and the MPWH based on real O&M needs. (ICR, p. 28) The ICR reported
that the government had demonstrated its commitment to increase the capacity for management of dam
operation and safety with some increase in national budget allocation for dam O&M. However, a systemic
challenge for financing dam O&M is the inability of River Basin Organizations (RBOs) to charge fees for
water used for irrigation, and hydropower generation. O&M needs are expected to increase in the future with
the government’s investments in new dam construction to meet growing demands for water storage services.

An additional risk to the development outcomes achieved is the issue of sedimentation. Sedimentation of
dams reduces their storage capacity to manage hydrological events and the ability to reduce the risk of
downstream flooding. Likewise, reduced storage capacity limits the ability of dams to deliver bulk water on
demand to meet the needs of users (e.g., irrigation, water supply, hydropower). The ICR noted the
complexity and importance of dealing with sedimentation to ensure that the dams can realize their full
potential.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was highly relevant and aligned with national priorities related to dam safety and operation.
  The project benefited from lessons learned from the predecessor Dam Safety Project (1994-2003), which
  highlighted the need to commit to a long-term time horizon for institutional strengthening (PAD, p 11). The
  project design recognized that a phased approach was appropriate by starting with a smaller portfolio and
  scaling up activities in the second project. While a two-phase project was originally envisioned, the Bank

                                                                                                       Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



  and client opted during implementation to use Additional Financing for the original project rather than
  develop a second-phase project.

  With multiple implementing entities at the central and RBO level, the team underestimated the project's
  complexity, contributing to delays in implementation after project effectiveness. The indicators and targets
  selected for measuring the PDOs regarding dam safety were complex and some were unrealistic (ICR, p
  23). The reduction in risk scores envisioned at appraisal was not realistic for some dams because the
  factors to reduce the risk scores were outside of the control of the project (ICR, p. 23). In addition, there
  were limitations in measuring specific PDO indicators such as "increased functionality with respect to bulk
  water supply of large Ministry of Public Works-owned reservoirs".



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank task team provided consistent support to the client through 27 formal missions, which is
 an average of two missions per year. The turnover in the task team with the project resulted in six task
 team leaders during implementation with an average tenure of less than 2.5 years each.

 Near the close of the first phase of the project, the Bank decided not to pursue a series of projects
 approach and process a restructuring with additional financing. This second phase of the project, intended
 to scale-up activities, was informed by a Public Expenditure Review, a study of the regulatory framework
 for dam safety in Indonesia, as well as the findings and lessons from the Interim ICR, including the design
 of community participation activities and the need to build capacity at the sub-national level to support dam
 O&M. (ICR, p. 27) The Task Team took advantage of the restructuring to simplify the indicators in the
 results framework.

 The geographic spread of the project made it impossible for the task team to perform site visits of all dams
 during the missions; therefore, the team relied heavily on consultants supporting the CPIU and CPMU to
 support monitoring and due diligence. In the remaining two years of the project, the client requested that
 the scope of the soft interventions be increased from 140 to 163 dams, which spread the available
 resources. (ICR, p 30) The project struggled with compliance with OP (BP 4.01) Environmental
 Assessments, which was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory for the last three years of the project, up until the
 last supervision report, when it was upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory. The scope and scale of the
 project made it difficult to monitor all works across a large portfolio with limited environmental staff
 assigned to support the sub-projects, which was a shortcoming of the Bank’s supervision. All other project
 ratings for safeguards and fiduciary were consistently rated Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory.

 The Task Team helped the counterparts achieve the project outputs and outcomes with no major non-
 compliance issues other than OP 4.01. There were shortcomings in the M&E system design and
 implementation, as well as late changes to the project’s scope, which had the potential to reduce the
 development impact in terms of overall dam safety improvement. The overall rating of World Bank's
 performance is Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original PDO indicators followed good practice in attempting to measure the risk levels of dams at the
 time of appraisal, but implementation proved more challenging. There were significant shortcomings in
 measuring the PDO for Objective 1 as there was no definition for the “functionality” of dams, which was
 identified by IEG in the interim ICR. The ICR noted that the targets for the dam risk scores turned out to be
 overambitious. The additional financing, introduced via restructuring, attempted to resolve the issue of
 measuring functionality by adding an explicit indicator, but this indicator was based on a series of outputs,
 and the ICR acknowledges that it partially addressed the issue of measuring "functionality."



b. M&E Implementation
  The project M&E system was put in place when the project started. The Central Project Management Unit
  was mainly responsible for monitoring project progress and submitted quarterly monitoring reports to the
  World Bank. The ICR noted various weaknesses in the implementation of the M&E system such as: (i)
  the definition of targets and baselines at the additional financing restructuring were not clear and
  hindered the monitoring of the full achievement of results across the whole project; (ii) revisions in the
  results indicators made during the restructuring for additional financing were not fully reflected in the
  Bank’s system in a timely manner; (iii) the client measured the PDO indicator for the overall risk score
  reduction differently than the indicator definition defined at restructuring, and (iv) some of the original
  indicators were dropped from the results framework even though they were already achieved. (ICR, p.
  24) The Task Team was requested to reduce the overall number of indicators by management at the
  additional financing restructuring which may explain why indicators were dropped despite being achieved.
  These shortcomings are considered significant, making it challenging to monitor the outcomes of the
  project. While there were challenges with the M&E, the client’s documentation allowed the ICR to
  adequately report on the indicators in the results framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  MPWH, Bappenas, and the World Bank used the project monitoring information to review progress and
  inform adjustments to project activities toward achieving the PDOs. The project adjusted the
  methodology for risk assessment scores, which was based on good international practice. Despite the
  issue of using a different definition as noted in the previous section, the adjustment to the risk

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



  assessment methodology helped the client prioritize resources and adapt to changes in the conditions of
  the dams that occurred during implementation. The ICR noted that the client maintained good
  documentation on disaggregated results of progress over the 14-plus years of implementation despite
  the challenges with the M&E design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental: The project was rated a Category B project and triggered the following Safeguard policies:
   (i) OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, and (ii) OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams. The additional financing
   triggered the following additional policies: (iii) OP BP 4.01 Natural Habitats, (iv) OP 4.09 Pest Management,
   (v) OP BP 4.11 Indigenous Peoples, and (vi) OP BP 4.12 Involuntary Settlement.

   The ICR reported challenges in the second phase of the project that included delays in the preparation of
   the contractor for Emergency Management Plans (EMPs), obtaining environmental permits needed for the
   commencement of civil works, and integrating environmental requirements into the bidding documents.
   During the last three years of the project, the client was late or did not submit safeguards reports which led
   to the downgrading of the Environmental safeguards’ ratings to Moderately Unsatisfactory.

   The Bank worked closely with the client and additional safeguards consultants were hired to close the gaps,
   and the situation improved in the last six months of the project. However, nine contractor EMPs were not
   prepared, and two Environmental Management and Monitoring Statement Letters (SPPLs) were not
   completed. The client agreed to prepare Environmental and Social Due Diligence Reports (ESDDR) to bring
   the project back into compliance. All ESDDRs for the project were finalized, and all environmental
   safeguards were upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory by project closing.

   The Safety of Dams (OP/BO. 4.37) was rated as Moderately Satisfactory for 26 out of 27 ISRs, including at
   closure. The project established a Panel of Experts (PoE) to review the rehabilitation designs and advise on
   the implementation of the works. During the additional financing phase, the client was delayed in fully
   establishing the PoE, which was done in 2022 to review high-hazard dams. The PoE should have been
   established earlier in the project to provide sufficient quality control and to comply with OP/BP 4.37. The
   ICR noted several shortcomings; for example (i) Potential Failure Mode Analysis was only carried out for
   one dam when it was supposed to have been done for all high-hazard dams, and (ii) in the first phase of the
   project, Special Studies identified several dams in serious conditions that required immediate action, but no
   action had been taken to address the issues.

   The client complied with the social safeguards and prepared a Preliminary Land Acquisition and
   Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP). The project did not involve any land acquisition, but people were
   relocated from restricted areas at three dam sites where area activities were being undertaken. There were
   no issues concerning indigenous peoples, and the project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was
   systematically incorporated into all PIUs. The project GRM registered 204 complaints related to



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



   construction-related disturbances and had a resolution rate of 100 percent. There were no sexual
   harassment or gender-based violence cases were reported during the project.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. The ICR (p. 26) noted that the project struggled with timely processing of Interim
   Financial Reports (IFRs) in the early years of implementation. However, by closing, the project had
   consistently maintained its compliance on IFR submissions, as well as timely budget availability to mitigate
   payment delays. The project had one non-compliance issue related to the use of loan funds for civil
   servant honorarium payments, but this was resolved. After 2010, the project consistently received
   unqualified audit opinions on its financial statements. The project was consistent on the timeliness of all
   audit report findings, including required refunds of ineligible expenditures noted in the audit reports. (ICR,
   p. 27) The project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating for financial management.

   Procurement. The project had a heavy procurement burden with a total of 568 procurement packages
   across 19 PIUs. The project faced challenges in the beginning because of the lack of experience with
   World Bank procurement processes within some PIUs. An ex-post review in 2014 revealed various
   deviations in procurement processes that required clarification and follow-up from a specific PIU.

   During the first phase, the project faced delays in major procurements related to heavy equipment. During
   the additional financing stage, the project continued to experience delays in procuring new technical
   assistance consultants with selected PIUs due to high contract prices relative to the available budget. The
   ICR reported significant improvements in procurement as implementation continued, and near project
   close all contracts had either been completed or were under implementation. The ICR (p. 27) reported that
   overall, the project complied with procurement requirements, with some exceptions in the case of specific
   PIUs, but these issues were resolved. The project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory rating for
   procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   n/a



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Moderate Shortcomings in
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 Efficacy and Efficiency


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

Dam safety projects that contain a large portfolio of dams can benefit from a programmatic
approach, which is a suitable way to scale up project interventions and strengthen capacity
over time. DOISP was designed and implemented as a programmatic approach, which allowed for
a significant scale-up of interventions and gradual institutional strengthening. Starting with a smaller
set of interventions in the initial phase can enable implementing agencies to learn and strengthen
their capability to expand activities in the second phase. While the project utilized the Additional
Financing mechanism to scale up activities instead of developing a new second-phase operation,
the scale-up over time was a logical choice.

Sediment management requires multi-institutional coordination and a clear strategy for next-
generation dam safety investments. Sedimentation is a complex challenge for dam safety projects
as the causal factors stem from land use patterns far upstream of dam facilities. Governmental
institutions that may be responsible for the regulation of land use (e.g., ministries of environment or
agriculture) are likely to be different than those who manage and operate dam facilities. The
complexity of the issue is increased as mitigation involves changing behaviors and incentives of
private landholders who are upstream and likely to not directly receive the downstream benefits of
the dam facility (e.g., flood protection, water supply). Nevertheless, sedimentation can pose serious
risks to investments in dam rehabilitation and new construction reducing the impact of the
investment. While DOISP was cognizant of this issue, the impact of the sedimentation mitigation
activities was limited. The design of next-generation dam safety projects should incorporate robust
interventions that will likely require multi-institutional coordination to address the challenge, or
explicitly do so in concert with other projects.

If dam risk indices are to be used as PDO-level indicators, the indicator definitions and
targets should be set with the recognition that they measure relative risk within a portfolio of
projects and not actual risk reduction (i.e., the product of the probability of failure and the
consequences). There are some risk parameters that can and will change in response to the
implementation of dam safety measures, and others will be influenced by factors beyond the control
of the project. Given this, risk indices may be better suited as intermediate outcome indicators.
Regardless, the agreed approach to measuring risk must be applied consistently throughout the
project to be able to track project-induced changes. Since the selection of parameters and weights
of risk indices introduces some element of subjectivity, these assessments must be done by or
under the guidance of experts and according to a common guideline or standard. (ICR, p. 29)



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ID: Dam Operational Improvement (DOISP) (P096532)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

This ICR was comprehensive with detailed information on the results of the project with minor shortcomings.
The ICR was transparent and candid on the shortcomings of the results framework and the monitoring and
evaluation system as well as on safeguards and fiduciary aspects. Detailed information on measuring risk
scores across the portfolio of dams in the project was not included in the ICR as it was reported in the interim
ICR, but it was provided by the Task Team after the interview. The ICR could have included a summary of the
changes in risk scores or made reference to the database indicating source to substantiate the results.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
