     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024216

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P152232                                     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                    Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A6361                                    31-Dec-2023                                           6,016,603.01

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Jan-2019                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            14,644,834.00                                    14,644,834.00

 Revised Commitment                              8,751,834.00                                     6,016,603.01

 Actual                                          6,016,603.01                                     6,016,603.01




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. 8) and the Financing Agreement of March 7, 2019 (p.
   6) the objective of the project was “to reduce Hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) consumption in order to assist
   Viet Nam meet its HCFC phase-out obligations under the Montreal Protocol, and to reduce greenhouse gas
   emissions arising from the replacement of these HCFCs”.

   This Review will parse the objective as follows:


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



   i) to reduce Hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) consumption in order to assist Viet Nam meet its HCFC phase-
   out obligations under the Montreal Protocol;

   ii) to reduce greenhouse gas emissions arising from the replacement of these HCFCs.

   When the project was restructured in May 2022, the scope of the project was reduced. Therefore, this review
   will apply a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: HCFC Consumption Reduction (appraisal estimate US$13.56 million, actual US$5.07
   million): This component was to finance activities in four sectors:

         1. AC manufacturing and servicing sector: The project was to finance incremental capital costs (ICC)
            needed for converting to non-HCFC based AC production including procurement of new production
            equipment, performance testing of new AC models, and technician training for installation and
            incremental operating cost (IOC) based on MLF financing guidelines at four enterprises.
         2. Refrigeration manufacturing sector: The project was to finance conversion of priority industrial
            refrigeration systems where cost-effective and low Global Warming Potential (GWP) alternatives
            (e.g. ammonia, hydrocarbons, HFC-32, etc.) were available through Incremental Capital Cost (ICC)
            (for system, component and process redesign, new equipment, performance verification, and safety
            training) and Incremental Operating Cost (IOC) at about 34 enterprises which were eligible for
            Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol (MLF) funding. The aim was to
            achieve a 303 MT reduction by project closure. The implementation of HCFC phaseout in the
            refrigeration sector was to be phased, whereby 6-10 demonstration subprojects for applications
            including ice making units, stand-alone refrigeration units, cold storage rooms, and condensing units
            were to be started at the beginning of the Stage II project.
         3. Refrigeration servicing sector: The project was to finance the following activities in the refrigeration
            servicing sector: training and certification in good servicing and maintenance practices, provision of
            servicing tools to selected vocational training centers to enable training in the handling of alternative
            flammable refrigerants and to selected servicing shops to inform the sector on alternatives and
            prepare for Stage III, and, TA demonstration for about 10 selected industrial refrigeration end users
            on HCFC leakage management.
         4. Foam sector: The project was to finance ICC needed for foam production conversion to
            hydrocarbon, methyl formate or HFO (hydrofluoroolefin) or other low GWP alternatives at about
            44 enterprises. In addition, the project was to finance conversion at an enterprise which used HCFC-
            22 of 100 MT in 2014 for XPS foam production.


                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



  During the May 2022 restructuring, the financing for this component was reduced from US$13.56 million to
  US$7.48 million due to fewer candidate enterprises participating in subprojects than planned.

  Component 2: Technical Assistance and Policy Actions (appraisal estimate US$406,801, actual
  US$314,177): This component was to finance sector-wide technology and knowledge transfer, technical
  assistance (TA) and exchange of best practices. TA activities were to focus on the AC, refrigeration and
  foam manufacturing sectors including training workshops on subproject preparation, approval and
  implementation procedures and requirements, national technical consultant services for subproject
  appraisal and technical support for the PMU and enterprises, HCFC consumption verifications, development
  of technical standards of alternatives, training for government officials, training on the safe use of
  alternatives, study tours on HCFC alternatives, a joint study on integrating HCFC phase-out and energy
  efficiency (EE) improvement in the industrial refrigeration manufacturing and food process sectors, and
  others as needed.

  During the May 2022 restructuring, the financing for this component was increased from US$406,801 to
  US$496,801 to further support the TA needs of stakeholders.

  Component 3: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$678,001, actual US$624,784): This
  component was to finance the PMU responsible for financial, procurement, and safeguard management as
  well as monitoring and reporting.

  During the May 2022 restructuring, the financing for this component was increased from US$678,001 to
  US$768,540 to support additional project management activities on targeted outreach to enterprises
  through the recruitment of foam and refrigeration practitioners.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$14.6 million. Actual cost was US$6.01 million due to
  the cancellation of 40 percent of the financing.

  Financing: The project was financed by a Trust Fund (TF-A6361) in the amount of US$14.64 million of
  which US$6.01 million disbursed.

  Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any financial contribution.

  Dates: The project was approved on January 25, 2019, and became effective on March 7, 2019. The
  project closed on its original closing date of December 31, 2023.

  The project was restructured on May 30, 2022, to: i) reduce the target of PDO indicator “avoided Co2eq-
  emissions” due to a lower number of HFC phase-out subprojects; ii) cancel US$5.89 million in financing (40
  percent of the original financing amount); iii) reduce the financing/scope of component 1 and adjust the
  targets in the Results Framework accordingly; iv) increase the financing for component 2 to provide further
  technical assistance to stakeholders; iii) increase the financing for component 3 to support additional project
  management activities.




                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country/region and sector context. Hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC), like other ozone depleting
substances, are powerful greenhouse gases, some with global warming potential (GWP), and were
primarily used as refrigerants in refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment as blowing agents for
producing insulation foam. Viet Nam acceded to the Vienna Convention and the Montreal Protocol (MP) in
1994.

Viet Nam committed to reducing HCFCs from a baseline of 221.2 tons of ozone depleting potential (ODP)
and not to exceed MP consumption limited between 2013 and 2040. With support of the Multilateral Fund
for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol (MLF) and the World Bank through the HCFC phase-out
project Stage I, Viet Nam successfully met its phase-out obligations for 2013 and 2015. In conjunction with
the Stage I phase-out of HCFC-141b at 12 foam manufacturing companies, the government of Viet Nam
banned the import and export of bulk (controlled by the MP) HCFC-141b in 2015. Viet Nam’s next obligation
was to meet the 35 percent reduction target by January 1, 2020, through continued MLF support amounting
to 55.3 ODP tons (1,006 MT) of reductions in HCFCs from the last funded, agreed level in 2015. Target
sectors for reductions in HCFC were the AC sector, refrigeration sector, servicing sector, and foam sector.

Alignment with the Government strategy. The objective of the project supported Viet Nam’s 2012 Green
Growth Strategy and related action plan to, among others, efficiently and effectively use energy and reduce
GHG emissions in energy consuming industrial sectors while improving energy management capacity, and
to promote consumer uptake of green products through minimum energy performance standards and
energy labeling. Furthermore, the project supported Viet Nam’s national policy on industrialization and
modernization to meet the overall objective of continued economic growth and sustainable development.

Alignment with the World Bank strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
most recent Country Partnership Framework (FY18-22) and its engagement area 3, objective 9 “promote
low carbon energy generation including renewables and energy efficiency and reduce GHG emissions”.
Also, the objective of the project supported Viet Nam in fulfilling its HCFC phase-out obligations under the
Montreal Protocol.

The objective addressed a critical development problem and was pitched at the appropriate level, at the
outcome level. However, given a lengthy government approval process of 33 months, the market
environment had changed by the time the project became effective and many enterprises that were to
participate in the project had closed due to competition from China and other countries in the region or had
already self-funded the phasing out of HCFC. Therefore, while the project’s objective was addressing a key
development problem when it was being prepared, the problem became less relevant by the time the
project became effective.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                        Page 4 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To reduce HCFC consumption in order to assist Viet Nam meet its HCFC phase-out obligations under the
               Montreal Protocol.

               Rationale
               Theory of change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as investing in
               enterprise conversions, providing servicing TA for safe transition to lower-GWP alternatives in AC
               manufacturing, converting 50 percent of the refrigeration manufacturing sector for use of low-GWP
               alternatives in industrial refrigeration systems, and providing refrigeration servicing sector training to trainers
               as well as certifying of technicians in good servicing practices were to result in several outputs. These outputs
               were to include AC manufacturing conversion sub-projects being completed, 50 percent of refrigeration
               manufacturing sector being converted, as well as trainers being trained, and technicians being certified.
               These outputs were to result in the outcome of reduced HCFC consumption and reduced greenhouse gas
               emissions arising from the replacement of these HCFCs.

               The theory of change was sound and logical.

               Outputs:

                     Annual HCFC import quotas were issued throughout project implementation and one ban was fully
                      issued and the other partially issued. However, according to the ICR (p. 31) the foam-related ban
                      (imports of HCFC-141b preblended polyol) only became effective in January 2023, and the AC related
                      ban only targets the import of HCFC-based AC units. Also, the second part of the AC HCFC ban (i.e.
                      ban in HCFC-based AC manufacturing) was only to be in place in mid-2024. Therefore, the target of
                      annual HCFC import quota and the two bans being issued was only partially achieved.
                     100.32 metric tons of HCFC consumption were phased out in the AC sector, not achieving the
                      original target of 317.3 metric tons.
                     417.76 metric tons of HCFC consumption were phased out in the refrigeration manufacturing and
                      servicing sector, not achieving the original target of 588.3 metric tons being phased out.
                     90 enterprises and 3,800 stakeholders were trained on HCFC phase-out, achieving the target of 90
                      enterprises and 3,800 stakeholders being trained.

               Outcomes:

               Viet Nam met its annual targets, including for 2022 (which was not originally planned), for keeping HCFC
               consumption consistently under allowable limits of 221.2 ODP tons. However, since most of the enterprises
               had closed due to competition from China and other countries in the region or had self-funded the pashing out
               HCFC prior to the start of this project, this achievement cannot be solely attributed to the project’s activities.

               The project was able to train enterprises and stakeholders on HCFC phase-out. However, the project was not
               able to achieve the original targets of phasing out HCFC consumption in the AC sector as well as in the

                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



refrigeration manufacturing and servicing sector. Therefore, the achievement of the original objective was
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective remained the same but the scope of the project was reduced.

Revised Rationale
The theory of change did not change.

Outputs:

      100.32 metric tons of HCFC consumption were phased out in the AC sector, achieving the revised
       target of 100.32 metric tons.
      417.76 metric tons of HCFC consumption were phased out in the refrigeration manufacturing and
       servicing sector, achieving 90 percent of the revised target of 465.44 metric tons being phased out.
       According to the ICR (para. 26) the consumption phase-out target was achieved through two sub-
       projects. Originally, the project had planned to implement four subprojects. However, two enterprises,
       that had agreed to participate, dropped out during the restructuring since they did not have the
       required documentation to proof consumption. Therefore, a planned group subproject of four SMEs
       was cancelled. Eventually, one of the four SMEs that were to participate, provided adequate
       documentation and ended up participating in the project.
      315 enterprises and 3,748 stakeholders were trained on HCFC phase-out, achieving the target of 90
       enterprises and 3,800 stakeholders being trained.

Outcomes:

      In 2022, Viet Nam’s national HCFC phase-out consumption was 139.02 ODP tons, achieving the
       target of keeping consumption consistently under the allowable limit of 143.21 ODP tons. Therefore,
       Viet Nam was able to achieve the target of reducing its annual national HCFC phase-out consumption
       from 199.08 tons in 2015 by 55.3 percent, while achieving its obligations to the Montreal Protocol and
       the MLF Executive Committee of reducing and maintaining consumption at 65 percent of its MP
       baseline for HCFCs (221.2 ODP tons) between 2016 and 2022. However, as stated above, since most
       of the enterprises had closed due to competition from China and other countries in the region or had
       self-funded the pashing out HCFC prior to the start of this project, this achievement cannot be solely
       attributed to the project’s activities.

The project was able to achieve its revised target for HCFC consumption phased out in the AC sector while it
was almost able to achieve its revised target for the refrigeration manufacturing sector. However, the project
was able to achieve the target of keeping consumption consistently under the allowable limit of 143.21 ODP



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



tons. In addition, the project was not able to achieve its target for Co2e emission being avoided. Overall, the
achievement under the revised objective was Substantial, but only marginally so.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions arising from the replacement of these HCFCs.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as implementing
foam conversion, air conditioning manufacturing conversion and refrigeration conversion sub-projects were to
result in the output HCFC being phased out. This was to result in the outcome of Co2e emissions being
avoided.

The theory of change was logical and sound and assumed that by replacing HCFC in several sub-project
enterprises, greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced.

Outputs:

      In the PU foam sector (through six sub-projects for 21 enterprises), 165,872 tCo2eq were avoided,
       not achieving the original target of 1,455,650 tCO2eq being avoided.
      In the AC sector, one enterprise transitioned from R-22 to R-32 avoiding 62,109tCo2eq, not
       achieving the original target of 285,138 tCo2eq being avoided. Furthermore, through the energy
       efficiency increase through the use of R-32 in AC, 5,893 tCo2eq were avoided, not achieving the
       original target of 25,616 tCo2eq.
      In the refrigeration manufacturing and servicing sector a total of 755,711 tCo2eq were avoided, not
       achieving the original target of 962,850 tCO2eq being avoided.

Outcomes:

      1,077,768 tons of Co2e emissions were avoided, not achieving the original target of 2,900,000 tons.
       The original target of tons of annual avoided Co2 equivalent emissions was a cumulative target based
       on project financed conversions by enterprises phasing out the use of HCFCs. Therefore, tCO2eq
       of HCFC-141b in imported preblended polyols that were avoided through foam subprojects
       conversions were included.

The project was not able to achieve the phase out targets in all sectors. Also, the project was not able to
achieve the target for Co2e emissions being avoided. The achievement under the original objective was
Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)




                  Rating
                  Modest


                  OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                  Revised Objective
                  The objective was not revised but the scope of the objective was reduced.

                  Revised Rationale
                  The theory of change did not change.

                  Outputs:

                        In the PU foam sector (through six sub-projects for 21 enterprises), 165,872 tCo2eq were avoided,
                         achieving 83 percent of the revised target of 199,010 tCO2eq being avoided.
                        In the AC sector, one enterprise transitioned from R-22 to R-32 avoiding 62,109tCo2eq, not
                         achieving the revised target of 205,140 tCo2eq being avoided. Furthermore, trough the energy
                         efficiency increase through the use of R-32 in AC, 5,893 tCo2eq were avoided, not achieving the
                         original target of 25,616 tCo2eq.
                        In the refrigeration manufacturing and servicing sector a total of 755,711 tCo2eq were avoided,
                         achieving 86 percent of the revised target of 882,051 tCO2eq being avoided. In addition, through the
                         elimination of R-22, 88,183 tCo2eq were avoided, achieving the target (set at restructuring) of 88,183
                         tCo2eq.

                  Outcomes:

                        1,077,768 tons of Co2e emissions were avoided, not achieving the revised target of 1,400,000 tons.
                         The revised target added emission reductions associated with improved servicing and after-sales
                         service by AC manufacturers while removing the emissions avoided from most of the AC, foam, and
                         refrigeration sectors since the number of enterprises seeking project subgrants was much lower
                         than planned due to changes in the market during the lengthy project preparation period (2016-2018)
                         during which enterprises closed due to competition from China and other countries in the region or
                         self-funded HCFC phase-out due to tightened regional supply. Therefore, the actual tCO2eq
                         emissions avoided were less than the revised target due the non-participation of six enterprises in the
                         refrigeration manufacturing sector and lower coverage of phase-out by blending houses in the foam
                         manufacturing sector. In addition, the AC HCFC manufacturing was not in place at closing.

                  The project was not able to achieve any of the output and outcome targets despite a significant reduction in
                  project scope and targets. Therefore, the overall achievement of this objective is Modest.



                  Revised Rating
                  Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



 OBJ_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY
           Rationale
           Both the original objectives were rated Modest, therefore the overall original efficacy is rated Modest.



           Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
           Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




           OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
           Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
           The first revised objective was rated Substantial and the second revised objective was rated Modest, so the
           overall efficacy rating for the revised project is Substantial with shortcomings.



           Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
           Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency:

The PAD did not conduct an economic analysis since many benefits of the project were not quantifiable due to
the lack of data on ozone depletion and climate change impacts on health and other aspects of life in Vietnam.
Instead, the PAD (p. 31) conducted a financial analysis to assess the impact of the proposed project activities
supporting the HCFC-141b and HCFC-22 phase-out on the economic sectors that used those substances.
The financial analysis calculated the net incremental costs for the three sectors that were targeted by the
project. The present value of costs and grant support was calculated for the aggregate of eligible companies
under the with-project (MLF grant) and without-project (no grant) scenarios for the AC, refrigeration, and
manufacturing sectors. The analysis did not include expenses for TA activities and Project Management.

Under the with-project scenario supply of HCFC-22 was to be further reduced through an import quota system,
and the manufacturing and import of AC units containing HCFC-22 was to be banned. Import of bulk HCFC-
141b was already banned, and the import of preblended HCFC-141b polyol was to be gradually reduced and
eventually banned as well. A tax on HCFCs of 4000 Dong (US$0.18) per kg remained in place. Furthermore,
AC, refrigeration and foam manufacturing companies were to invest in substitute manufacturing and safety
equipment, and may face higher, but declining, material input costs). Eligible companies were to receive
financial support in the form of an MLF grant to cover part of their incremental capital costs as well as a portion
of their incremental operating cost in the first year after conversion.

Under the without-project scenario the government was not to regulate HCFC use with additional policy
measures, but was to uphold existing regulations, i.e. the import quota system and the ban of HCFC-141b
imports as well as the HCFC tax was to remain in place. HCFC- 22 and pre-blended HCFC-141b polyol can be
freely imported during the entire analysis period of 20 years (2019-2037). MLF grant support was not available.

                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



Companies were not required to invest in substitute technologies. However, over time, they were to face higher
input costs from China (main source of HCFCs imported by Vietnam). The without-project scenario was
supplemented by an analysis of a self-conversion option, which considered participating companies investing in
conversion technology at an opportune time and without MLF support, solely driven by increasing HCFC costs
and decreasing costs of substitutes.

Given that China (and other countries) will abide by their agreed Montreal Protocol obligations and will continue
to gradually phase-out production of HCFC-22 and HCFC-141b, while at the same time increasing supply of
substitute chemicals will become available in Vietnam, the assumed price changes and, over time, resulting
production cost decreases (in the with-project case) and increases (without-project) appear reasonable, and the
project was a worthwhile investment, especially given its positive impact on the environment.

The ICR (para. 42) conducted a cost-effectiveness analysis applying the same methodology as the PAD.
Combining all sectors, the ICR conducted an overall grant cost-effectiveness of US$7.37/kg which was below
the MLF approved cost-effectiveness of US$9.41/kg. Including the private sector counterpart funding of US$2.8
million, the cost effectiveness is only US$9.04/kg.

The ICR (para. 43) also compared the MLF-level cost effectiveness with established thresholds for conversion to
low-GWP alternatives (foam at US$9.44 and refrigeration at US$15.21), which showed that the project was
particularly cost-effective.

When taking the hidden costs and benefits associated with diminished exposure to ozone depletion, climate
risks, and the improved energy efficiency of HFC-32 technology, the cost-effectiveness would be even higher.

According to the ICR (para. 45) the project’s cost-effectiveness in reducing Co2eq emissions was US$10.27 per
ton (compared to a carbon price range from US$53 to US$107 for investment projects according to the World
Bank’s 2024 Updated Guidance Note on the Shadow Price of Carbon in Economic Analysis).

Operational efficiency:

The project experienced several procurement related delays due to lack of adequate procurement capacity and
experience in World Bank procurement processes as well as changes in staff. Despite these delays, the project
was implemented in four years instead of the originally planned five years. However, a lower number of HCFC
phase-out subprojects as assumed resulted in the cancellation of 40 percent of the total financing. Also, by the
time the project was restructured in May 2022 (only 19 months before project closure), only 30 percent of the
project financing had disbursed indicating a low disbursement during the first three years of project
implementation.

Overall, the project met the cost-effective benchmarks and was completed in four years. Therefore, the project’s
efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Original project: The relevance of the objective was Substantial. Overall Original Efficacy was Modest.
Efficiency was rated Substantial.

Revised project: The relevance of the objective was Substantial. Efficacy was Substantial with moderate
shortcomings and Efficiency was Substantial. Therefore, the outcome rating was Moderately Satisfactory.

Based on the split evaluation below, the overall outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.

                       Original Targets      Revised Targets
Relevance              Substantial           Substantial
Objective 1            Modest                Substantial
Objective 2            Modest                Modest
Efficacy               Modest                Substantial
Efficiency             Substantial           Substantial
                       Moderately            Moderately
Outcome rating
                       Unsatisfactory        Satisfactory
Numerical value of
                      3                    4
outcome rating
Disbursement
                      2.7                  6.1
(US$m)
Share of
                      0.3                  0.7
disbursement
Weighted value of
                      0.9                  2.8
the outcome rating
Final Outcome rating 0.9 + 2.8 = 3.7, rounded to 4 = MS
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



The project’s development outcomes do not face any major risks. The government remains committed to the
project objective. Also, the MLF Executive Committee approved in December 2023 a Stage III Phase-out
Management Plan to assist, through the World Bank, Viet Nam meet its phase-out milestone between 2023
and 2030, while also developing the servicing sector infrastructure to provide a supply of recycled HCFC to
maintain the function of existing equipment until the end of its normal product life. This will support the
objective to ban all HCFC-based manufacturing and imports and ensuring the sustainability of phase-out
achievements. The new World Bank project will especially focus on the servicing sector since it faced most
obstacles during phase-out stage II.

However, according to the ICR (para. 91) MONROE’s implementation of sector bans on importing and
manufacturing HCFC-based projects is critical for the sustainability of project outcomes. While the AC sector
has fully phased out HCFCs, formal adaptation of the manufacturing part of the ban (which is expected to be
implemented in 2024) will be key to prevent any reversal to manufacturing with HCFCs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design was built on lessons learned from stage I of the HPMP in the foam sector such as: i)
  verifying enterprises’ past consumption of HCFC-141b prevents misinterpretation by beneficiaries; ii)
  developing a detailed project implementation manual facilitates implementation and gives the project
  management unit credence in its day-to-day activities and interactions with project beneficiaries; and iii)
  by providing financial support to all enterprises using bulk HCFC-141b through a group-project approach,
  the government can quickly gain buy-in for the introduction of the HCFC-141b ban.

  According to the PAD (p. 29) the World Bank team identified relevant risks with the following rated as
  Substantial: i) limited budget and institutional capacity to support small medium enterprises (SMEs) in
  accessing affordable, low-GWP alternatives and to develop and implement their own conversions; ii) lack
  of knowledge of World Bank procurement rules and lack of transparency and public oversight in
  procurement processing at recipient enterprises; iii) health safety issues associated with mildly to
  extremely flammable or toxic alternatives; and iv) lack of reliable HCFC consumption levels by SMEs.
  The project mitigated these risks by conducting training workshops to build technical capacity for SMEs,
  assigning experienced and qualified procurement staff at the PMU, following the agreed procurement
  procedures as stated in the procurement implementation manual, developing Environmental
  Management Plans (EMPs), as well as hiring consultants to carry out independent validation of HCFC
  consumption at subproject appraisal stage. However, mitigation measures were not adequate, and the
  project experienced several procurement related delays due to lack of capacity. Also, the World Bank
  team did not identify the risk of many SMEs independently phasing out HCFCs or ceasing operations
  (due to the government's delays in processing the project (2016-2018) during which the market change
  and competition from China and other countries in the region was strong) which resulted in a reduction of
  the pool of eligible enterprises for subprojects requiring a project restructuring to reduce the scope of the
  project.

  During project preparation, the World Bank team developed a phase-out model to assess the readiness
  of the foam and AC sectors for a complete HCFC phase-out. Also, the model identified challenges with


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



  alternative technology that prevented a complete ban on HCFC-based manufacturing in the refrigeration
  sector.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the World Bank team (September 10, 2024) the World Bank conducted a total of 8
 supervision missions (four in person and four virtually) on a bi-annual basis. Also, the ICR (para. 86) stated
 that the World Bank team supported the PMU in developing annual training plans and delivering training
 with a special focus on project management, subproject appraisal, fiduciary aspects, HCFC phase-out
 monitoring, and environmental management. Also, the World Bank team ensured that subproject
 enterprises implemented advice on financial management, procurement, and environmental and social
 safeguards appropriately.

 Furthermore, the World Bank, on behalf of the government, acted as an intermediary with the Executive
 Committee and managed the preparation of MLF funding tranche implementation progress and plans.
 When it became evident that the project’s scope did not reflect the market environment, the World Bank
 team restructured the project appropriately. However, this was only in May 2022, 19 months before project
 closure, since the changes had to be approved by the donor, the Multilateral Fund (MLF) Executive
 Committee (which only meets twice a year and the first meeting did not lead to a concrete decision).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified. The theory of change and how key activities and outputs
 were to lead to the intended outcome was soundly reflected in the Results Framework. The selected
 indicators encompassed all outcomes of the PDO statement and the intermediate outcome indicators were
 adequate to demonstrate the contribution of the project’s activities towards achieving the objective.

 Furthermore, all indicators were sufficiently specific, measurable, relevant, and time-bound (SMART).
 However, the Results Framework measured results that were not all solely and directly attributable to
 project activities. For example, under PDO indicator 1 (“national HCFC phase-out targets met”) it
 is questionable if all achievements made can be solely attributed to project activities. Also, one
 intermediate outcome indicator (enterprises and stakeholders being trained on HCFC phase-out) did not

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



 have a target, making the assessment of the achievement challenging. Furthermore, the project delivered a
 large number of outputs that were not included in the Results Framework and lacked a target.

 The PMU of the Department of Climate Change at MONRE was responsible for the project’s M&E
 activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 69) monitoring on HCFC consumption reductions took place on two levels, on
  the national and enterprise level. At the national level, MONRE, MOIT, and Customs cooperated to issue
  quotas and then confirm if imports realized were within MONRE-issued quotas for the period 2016-2022.
  This allowed for monitoring the reduction of HCFC at the national level on an annual basis. In addition, an
  independent consultant further verified these annual import contracts and customs declarations against
  Customs records. At the enterprise level, consumption was monitored by the PMU supported by a
  consultant.

  When the scope of the project was reduced in May 2022, the targets in the Results Framework were
  adjusted accordingly.

  According to the ICR (para. 67) the PMU provided consolidated semi-annual progress reports to the
  World Bank team. Also, independent consultant firms were hired to appraise subprojects, and assist
  companies in proposal preparation. The project continued using the excel-based reporting system from
  stage 1 to collect and monitor key project data.

  The ICR (para. 71) stated that the M&E function is expected to sustain HCFC phase-out efforts and will
  likely to be replicated in the Stage III HCFC phase-out operation.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 72) the project’s M&E data were used for compliance reporting under the
  Montreal Protocol and the MLF. Also, M&E data were used to identify implementation bottlenecks such
  as slow beneficiary appraisal and engagement in subprojects as well as low disbursement and
  enterprise involvement which resulted in the reduction of project scope.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). According to the ICR (para. 77)
   the project prepared three generic Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the AC, foam, and

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



  refrigeration manufacturing sectors which were to be adapted by relevant beneficiary enterprises to the site-
  specific environment. The 11 subprojects prepared site-specific Environmental Social Management Plans
  (ESMPs) identifying sector-level applied mitigation measures and procedures to control and minimize
  environmental, health, and safety risks as well as impacts associated with the conversions to approved
  alternatives. The ICR (para. 78) stated the project complied with the World Bank’s safeguard policies with
  the exception of fire protection certification of production facilities at a water heater manufacturer that
  converted to cyclopentane preblended polyol foam-blowing technology. A post-closure action plan was
  developed, and the manufacturer submitted the fire protection plan according to the latest regulations to the
  local fire protection authority and the fire appraisal was approved In May 2024.

  The project also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework to address potential impacts on land
  acquisition and resettlement caused by project activities. None of the 11 beneficiary enterprises required
  land acquisition and resettlement.

  When the project closed, compliance with the World Bank’s safeguard policies was Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement:

  According to the ICR (para. 80) the project experienced procurement related delays throughout project
  implementation due to changes in staff, challenges in applying Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP), as well as issues impacting the timing and scope of procurement activities. Also,
  despite the decrease in project financing, the restructuring increased the number of packages and
  consultant services requiring procurement by the PMU by ten times, while at the same time several project
  activities required attention due the approaching of the closing date. Due to the lack of procurement
  capacity, the last equipment package required rebidding. When the project closed, procurement was rated
  Moderately Satisfactory.

  Financial Management:

  According to the ICR (para. 81) the project’s financial management arrangements including staffing,
  planning, and budgeting was adequate. Also, the accounting system had appropriate internal control
  procedures and accounting software. Interim Financial Reports and audits were adequate and complied
  with the World Bank’s financial management requirements. The ICR (para. 71) stated that unaudited
  interim financial reports were submitted on a bi-annual basis. The project’s financial management
  performance was satisfactory throughout implementation apart from slow disbursement during the early
  phase of project implementation due to delays in receiving internal clearance of the financial plan, applying
  proper cost norms for workshops and timely management approvals for consultant deliverables.
  Furthermore, there was a delay in the submission of an Interim Financial Report. According to the World
  Bank team (September 10, 2024) the external auditor’s opinion was unqualified.

  When the project closed, financial management was rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                    Lengthy preparation period
                                                                                    which resulted in changing
                                                                                    market environment and
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    overestimation of sub-projects
                                                                                    requiring a reduction of project
                                                                                    scope.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included several useful lessons learned, which were adapted by IEG:

      If the government requires a long time for processing the project and signing the
       legal agreement there is a risk that the market/shareholder analyses are no
       longer relevant once the project becomes effective and might have to be updated. In
       this project, the process with the government started in 2016 and lasted several years. Once
       the project became effective in 2019, the market had changed completely resulting in
       implementation issues such as limited progress in the identification, preparation, and
       approval of subprojects and conversion activities and SME’s lack of capacity and willingness
       to prepare individual subprojects. These challenges resulted in disbursement delays and the
       need to reduce the project’s scope.
      A project design involving the private sector that is sufficiently flexible to be adapted
       to unforeseen market changes can ensure that the project meets the objective within
       the boundaries of donor conditions. In this project, the heavy reliance on the subproject
       approach became difficult in the refrigeration sector due to market shifts and an initial
       misunderstanding of the make-up of the sector as well as restrictions imposed on
       alternatives by the MLF Executive Committee. As a result, it was not possible to modify the
       design of project activities for the refrigeration sector leading to a significant return and partial
       reallocation of funds.


                                                                                                        Page 16 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)



        Providing continuous training and capacity activities for project beneficiaries and
         partner agencies can positively impact the sustainability of outcomes beyond the
         project. In this project, while some enterprises did not qualify for MLF assistance, enterprise
         capacity was further strengthened through workshops and awareness raising sessions held
         for enterprises in the AC, foam, and refrigeration sectors, to ensure that these enterprises
         were ready for HCFC phaseout on their own once the bans became effective.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. Also, the ICR included an
economic analysis and useful lessons learned for future projects in this area. Furthermore, the ICR was
internally consistent and sufficiently outcome driven. The ICR would have benefitted from being more specific
which outputs were delivered under the project. Furthermore, the ICR would have benefitted from specifying to
what degree the lengthy preparation phase (with the consequences of many enterprises having either closed
down or gone through the transition already prior to project startup) affected the attribution of the measured
indicators. Overall, the quality of the ICR was Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
