     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0024164

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P157425                                       Transformation of Tertiary Institutes

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Ecuador                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86670                                    31-Dec-2021                                         48,397,045.14

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Nov-2016                                   30-Nov-2023

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               90,500,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                52,100,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                            48,397,045.14                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Sarveshwari Singh            Judyth L. Twigg                Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the Loan Agreement and Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD), was “to increase enrollment and persistence in public technical and technological programs designed
   and implemented in collaboration with Employers and to strengthen the institutional management of Tertiary
   Technical and Technological Education” (Loan Agreement, December 22, 2016, p. 5).

   During implementation, a total of US$38.4 million was canceled in view of the country’s macroeconomic
   stabilization efforts and Ecuador’s compliance with fiscal measures under the International Monetary Fund’s

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



   (IMF's) Extended Fund Facility (ICR, p. 15). The PDO remained the same, as did the outcome indicators, but
   outcome targets were revised to allow for greater realism given the country context. Only a small percentage
   of project funds had been disbursed at the time of the first to fourth restructurings at which targets were
   revised. The ICR considered an assessment of project outcomes using a split evaluation under various
   alternatives of split rating scenarios but ultimately did not apply a split rating to efficacy and outcome. Since
   the efficacy and outcome ratings would not be affected by a split rating, this Review concurs with the ICR in
   not using the split rating methodology. Achievement is assessed according to the final set of revised outcome
   targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-Apr-2019

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project design included three components as stated in the PAD.

   Component 1: Optimizing and Upgrading the Supply in Targeted Provinces (Appraisal: US$86.3
   million; Actual: US$41.4 million). This component was designed to improve actual and perceived quality of
   education services to increase enrollment and graduation. It aimed to finance activities in targeted provinces
   including construction of new Technical and Technological Training Institutes (ISTs), rehabilitation of
   existing ISTs, and equipping ISTs with laboratories and equipment.

   Component 2: Improving Program Relevance, Quality of Teaching and IST Management Capacity
   (Appraisal: US$5.6 million; Actual: US$6.1 million). The three subcomponents under this component were:

         Subcomponent 2.1. Development of Relevant Programs would finance technical assistance (TA) for
          the design of new Tertiary Technical and Technological Education (TTTE) programs relevant to
          labor market demand in collaboration with employers.
         Subcomponent 2.2. Training of Teachers and Management Staff of ISTs would finance TA for the
          design and carrying out of training programs for teachers and management staff.
         Subcomponent 2.3. Administrative and Academic Management System would finance TA for the
          development of an integrated information technology system that would facilitate and optimize the
          administrative and academic management system of ISTs. At the national level the main users
          would be the Secretariat of Higher Education, Science and Technology (SENESCYT), and at the
          IST level users would be management, staff, teachers, students, graduates, and tutors.




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



  Component 3: Strengthening Mechanisms for Institutional Coordination, Boosting Demand, and
  Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project (Appraisal: US$10.5 million; Actual: US$4.6
  million). The four subcomponents under this component were:

        Subcomponent 3.1. Institutional Partnerships with Employers and Private ISTs would finance TA,
         training, and workshops to strengthen institutional arrangements between SENESCYT and
         employers’ associations, and between public and private ISTs.
        Subcomponent 3.2. Estimation of Labor Market Demand would finance TA, training, and surveys for
         the design of a methodology to estimate labor market demand using surveys conducted in
         partnership with employers. Also, existing administrative data would be used to estimate employers’
         demand.
        Subcomponent 3.3. Boosting the Demand for ISTs would finance a communications strategy and
         training to increase demand for TTTE among students, and to carry out an awareness-raising
         campaign among students from the most vulnerable part of the population about scholarships to
         finance TTTE studies.
        Subcomponent 3.4. Management, Monitoring and Specific Impact Evaluations would finance
         the technical and administrative management of the project, external audits, and research studies on
         the state of TTTE and the impact of institutional improvement on education outcomes.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: The total project cost at appraisal was US$102.4 million, consisting of an International
  Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan of US$90.5 million and counterpart funding of US$11.9
  million. At appraisal, signs of significant fiscal constraints were evident due to a drop in oil prices, which
  impacted the project very early in project implementation. During the first restructuring, US$18 million was
  cancelled from the loan amount, and an additional US$20.4 million was cancelled in the third restructuring.
  Actual counterpart funding was US$295,948. The actual final credit amount was US$52.1 million. Actual
  disbursements were US$48.4 million.

  Dates: The project was approved on November 23, 2016, and became effective on March 22, 2017. A Mid-
  Term Review was planned but not conducted due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The original project closing
  date was December 31, 2021. The closing date was extended twice. The fifth project restructuring extended
  the closing date to December 31, 2022. The sixth project restructuring extended the closing date to
  November 30, 2023.

  Restructuring: The project was restructured six times.

  Restructuring 1: April 29, 2019

  The government requested a cancellation of US$18 million because of implementation delays for all project
  components, including planned civil works that could not be completed within the project
  timeline. Implementation delays resulted in a low disbursement rate of 1.67 percent as of March 2019. The
  project components were adjusted as follows:

        Component 1: The number of ISTs to be constructed and renovated was reduced from 11 to 6.
         Funding was reduced for this component from US$76.4 million to US$58.4 million.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



      Component 2: Additional investments would be made to support teacher training at the national level
       and the development of information systems. The new budget allocation for this component
       was increased from US$5 million to US$8.61 million.
      Component 3: The component would focus on strengthening coordination with employers. The new
       budget allocation for this component was reduced from US$9.10 million to US$5.49 million.

Results framework: The first outcome indicator, the number of students enrolled in the public technical
programs, was reduced from 32,242 students to 25,376 students.

Restructuring 2: March 18, 2020

The government was facing a difficult economic situation due largely to the significant fall in oil prices. To
avoid further implementation delays owing to lack of liquidity and fiscal resources to finance value-added
tax (VAT) fees, the government requested amendments to its full portfolio of Loan Agreements to allow for
the financing of VATs with loan proceeds.

Restructuring 3: June 1, 2020

The project continued to experience implementation delays. The disbursement rate was 5.4 percent as of
April 2020, and the project had been in problem status since May 2018. On March 10, 2020, the Bank
received a request from the government to process a partial loan cancellation in the amount of US$20.4
million. Infrastructure investments in Component 1 were most affected by the downsizing. Fiscal constraints
and the need to reduce debt levels within the context of the IMF's Article IV program precipitated the
request. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic also shifted the government’s financing priorities.
Changes were made in budget allocations across eligible expenditure categories and in the results
framework.

      Component 1: The number of civil works supported by the project was reduced from 6 to 4.
      Component 2: The total number of teachers receiving in-service training interventions would
       decrease as a cost-cutting measure. The training program for 80 IST principals and vice-principals
       was cancelled.
      Component 3: Project funds were allocated to finance rapid-response activities to curtail increases in
       dropout rates that would likely result from the pandemic and fiscal crisis. Approximately US$1.5
       million was redirected to implement computer-assisted student remediation programs, equip
       institutes with better internet connectivity, and develop more virtual content for students.

Results Framework: PDO indicator targets were revised to reflect the partial cancellation of the loan and
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. For PDO indicator 1, the target number of students enrolled was
reduced from 25,376 to 14,613 students. For PDO indicator 2, the persistence rate target of 74 percent was
reduced to 68 percent.

Restructuring 4: March 25, 2021

The target for PDO Indicator 2, persistence rate, was reduced from 68 percent to 40 percent for the years
2020 and 2021. This was in response to increases in student dropout rates largely because of the
pandemic, with projected enrollment reductions of 10 and 15 percentage points in 2020 and 2021,
respectively.


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



   Restructuring 5: November 30, 2021

   The closing date was extended for one year from December 31, 2021, to December 31, 2022, to complete
   civil works and procurement of laboratory equipment, and to provide TA.

   Restructuring 6: December 21, 2022

   The closing date was extended by an additional 11 months to November 30, 2023, to complete one civil
   work, set up laboratories, conduct teacher training, and ensure that data produced were used by policy
   makers. The targeted number of ISTs that would be provided with equipment was increased from 4 to 13.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Project objectives were well aligned with the priorities expressed in the government's National Development
Plan (NDP) 2013–2017. The NDP aimed to address key constraints to development by focusing on two
strategies, the reduction of extreme poverty and the transformation of the Ecuador Productive Matrix. To
further these strategies, the government developed an ambitious training program emphasizing science and
technology areas, which included the transformation of ISTs with the goal of providing employers with a
skilled workforce. Only 27 percent of IST students were enrolled in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics programs. The graduation rate in ISTs continued to be low. Although 71 percent of students
completed their classes, only half of them graduated; the remaining students did not complete a final
internship or project that was a condition of graduation. The NDP established goals and initiatives to
address these challenges, including increasing the graduation rate in ISTs to 80 percent. Project objectives
remained responsive to priorities as expressed in the government’s current development plan, Plan de
Creación de Oportunidades 2021-2025.

At entry, the objectives were relevant to the World Bank’s Country Engagement Note (CEN) for the period
FY2016-FY 2017 (Report No. 100012). The CEN recognized the importance of labor income for poverty
reduction and reducing inequality. It highlighted the need to improve the quality of labor supply among the
poorest quintiles and to strengthen the relevance of the school curriculum for the labor market.

Notwithstanding macroeconomic challenges, project restructurings, and adverse impact of the COVID-19
pandemic, the project was responsive to changing needs. Adjustments were made while keeping focus on
achieving the objectives. To support the government’s response to the COVID-19 emergency, rapid-
response activities were financed to help mitigate the pandemic’s effect on enrollment in technical institutes
and dropout rates.

At closing, the objectives continued to be aligned with the World Bank Group’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Ecuador for FY2019-FY2023 (Report No. 135374-EC). Following a mid-term review of
the CPF, the strategy was extended until 2025. The objectives respond directly to the CPF’s Results Area II
(Boosting Human Capital and Protecting the Vulnerable). This area includes Objective 4, “Improve access
to demand-driven technical education.” It aims “to build upon reforms to technical and technological
education that have been implemented by the government and to ensure adequate programs that will result


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



               in an increased stock of skills and knowledge.” Additionally, the CPF “will support investments that aim to
               increase enrollment rates in institutes offering relevant and quality programs” (CPF, p. 29).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Increase enrollment in public technical and technological programs designed and implemented in
                             collaboration with employers

                             Rationale
                             A theory of change (TOC) and results chain were not explicitly included in the PAD. The ICR prepared a
                             retrofitted TOC. By upgrading IST (Technical and Technological Training Institute) facilities and providing
                             equipment and supplies to equip the institutes, enrollment in public technical and technological programs
                             would increase.

                             Outputs and intermediate results

                             The project financed the building of a new IST in Machala, now the most modern institute in the country, and
                             rehabilitated three institutes in Quito, Lago Agrio, and Manta (IRI 2), exceeding the revised target of 3 ISTs
                             built or rehabilitated. The original target of 9 ISTs was not met. More than 10 technical degree programs were
                             established. Enrollment capacity was 2,880 students. Facilities included 18 laboratories, 2 workshops, 32
                             classrooms, and a library.

                             Thirteen ISTs were fully equipped (IRI 3), achieving the formally revised target of 13 and exceeding the
                             original target of 11. The installation of the equipment provided access to industrial and automotive
                             machinery, science, electronics, electricity, gastronomy, computer and didactic equipment, and supplies.

                             The project team later stressed that the project also implemented "soft" activities, including updated curricula,
                             encouragement to students to reach out to employers, the creation of employer advisory councils, teacher
                             training, and on-line student remediation.

                             Outcomes

                             Enrollment in public technical and technological programs designed and implemented in collaboration with
                             employers (PDO 1) was 19,965 beneficiaries, exceeding the formally revised target of 14,613 beneficiaries.
                             The original target was 32,242 beneficiaries.



                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



An examination of project Implementation Status and Results Reports calls into question attribution of
observed outcomes to the project's interventions. Two years prior to project closing, at the end of 2021, the
enrollment target had already been reached at 19,965 (ISR No 12, December 20, 2022). At that time, the
construction of the new IST in Machala and the provision of laboratory equipment for all supported ISTs were
still in progress. The reason for the final extension of the closing date to November 30, 2023, was to complete
these activities.

Additionally, an earlier ISR had noted that enrollment had reached 18,860 in December 2019, increasing by
more than 3,600 students from May 14, 2019. (ISR No 6, December 31, 2019). At this point in the project, the
supply of ISTs had not increased and were still in the design phase (ISR No 7, June 26, 2020. With the
outcome target having been achieved before the main outputs were implemented, these points suggest that
progress toward achieving the enrollment target was not attributable to project activities.

However, the project team later provided information that, from project onset through closure, the percentage
of enrollment in employer-designed programs accounted for by the nine ISTs that benefited from both hard
and soft interventions supported by the project increased from 17 percent to 50 percent. This outcome
indicates that the project's interventions substantially impacted enrollment.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase persistence in public technical and technological programs designed and implemented in
collaboration with Employers.



Rationale
By conducting training programs for teachers and IST managers and engaging with employers to increase the
relevance of curricula to meet labor market demand, persistence in public technical and technological
programs would increase.

Outputs and intermediate results

The total number of teachers and management staff trained (IRI 4) was 462 at project closing, falling far short
of the revised target of 750. The original target was 3,400. The aim of teacher training was to strengthen
student’s retention in technical and technological studies. While the project aimed to finance 80-hour training
programs for teachers and management staff, the scope was significantly downsized as the GoE shifted
focus to other activities in light of the pandemic including computer-assisted student remediation programs
and strengthening institutes’ connectivity. The evaluations that had been planned to assess the quality of
training were dropped.

Consultations with the productive sector resulted in 37 percent of programs designed in collaboration with
employers (IRI 5), almost reaching the formally revised target of 40 percent. The original target was 100

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



percent. To strengthen the relevance of academic programs to meet labor market demand, Consultative
Councils were established in all 22 national provinces to form partnerships with the private sector. The aim
was to design technical programs in collaboration with local employers using a defined methodology and
macro and micro labor market studies. An evaluation that had been initially planned to assess the quality of
the programs was not conducted.

Outcomes

The persistence rate in technical and technological programs designed and implemented in collaboration with
employers (PDO 2) at completion was 49 percent, exceeding the formally revised target of 40 percent.

An Implementation Status Report (ISR No 9, June 14, 2021) noted that almost three years before project
closing, the actual (current) persistence rate was 49 percent at the end of 2020, the same figure reported at
project closing. As noted earlier under Objective 1 for enrollment, the IST civil works were not completed. ISR
No 6, December 31, 2019 reported that teacher training had not started. Teacher training scope had been
reduced and the Consultative Collaboratives had not been activated and were to be active in July 2020. (ISR
No 7, June 26, 2020, p. 3). With the outcome target having been achieved before the main outputs were
implemented, these points suggests that progress toward meeting the persistence target is not attributable to
project activities.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthen the institutional management of Tertiary Technical and Technological Education

Rationale
By developing and implementing an academic and administrative information system to provide access to
standardized information from all institutes in the country, tracking graduates’ employment, implementing a
gender plan, and surveying the satisfaction of project beneficiaries, institutional management of tertiary
technical and technological educations would be strengthened.

Outputs and intermediate results

To improve management capacity, the project financed the development and implementation of an
administrative and academic management system (SIGA 1.0) of ISTs (IRI 6), and the target was met. SIGA
was the first system to enable ISTs to manage student academic enrollment, progression, and graduation in
real time. It is functioning in all 52 public ISTs in the country. Prior to SIGA's implementation, institutes
collected minimal data and some used manual data collection. The new system reportedly provided timely
data for management decision making.

The project aimed to develop and implement a module in the administrative and academic management
system to track graduates (IRI 7), which was not met. The project financed the analysis, use, and transfer of
administrative data for the module to track graduates, but the module was not launched by project closing. It

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



                            aims to provide information on employment rates, industry sector, and salaries. It is expected that
                            SENESCYT would use the data to make informed decisions to improve programs and allocate resources.

                            Ten percent of graduates were tracked out of total graduates in the administrative and academic
                            management system (IRI 9), falling far short of the revised target of 70 percent. The original target was 80
                            percent. A survey was distributed to 57,685 IST graduates to obtain sociodemographic information, academic
                            achievements, pre-professional activities, and employment data. The response rate was limited and
                            implementation of the tracking system was not completed by project closing.

                            The project implemented a Gender Plan (IRI 10), and the target was met. SENESCYT implemented the plan
                            with the establishment of gender-disaggregated monitoring in SIGA for enrollment, persistence, graduation
                            rates, and to estimate scholarship allocations for female students in male-dominated fields.

                            The project published one report on beneficiary satisfaction surveys of students, teachers, and management
                            staff, falling short of the target of four reports (IRI 11). The surveys asked questions about satisfaction with
                            the process of social management and consultation, and the quality of the education in the new or
                            rehabilitated ISTs. The remaining 3 planned reports could not be completed due to the civil works’ schedule
                            which did not allow for enough time to conduct the surveys within the project timeframe.

                            Outcomes

                            Reliable data produced by the new integrated administrative and academic management system is used for
                            decision making by main stakeholders (PDO 3), and the target was met. SIGA included functionalities that
                            were used to strengthen institutional management. A nationwide grading system was developed that allowed
                            decision makers to apply uniform procedures and regulations to all institutes around the country. SIGA
                            enabled estimation of teaching loads in institutes across the country and enabled the launch of new projects
                            including the establishment of a pilot project for a language center. Six thousand students had benefitted and
                            234 teachers were identified using SIGA.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            For Objective 1, additional evidence (beyond that in the ICR) provided by the project team demonstrates that
                            the project contributed substantially to increased enrollment in public technical and technological programs
                            designed and implemented in collaboration with employers. For Objective 2, to increase persistence, there is
                            insufficient evidence that project activities contributed to reported achievement. For Objective 3, to strengthen
                            the institutional management of Tertiary Technical and Technological Education, project activities contributed
                            to improvements in strengthening institutional management and decision making. The aggregate
                            achievement is indicative of a Substantial rating for overall Efficacy.



                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was carried out for the project. The analysis estimated the benefits of
enrollment in technical and technological education on the future incomes of student beneficiaries. The analysis
estimated the number of students who would benefit and who are expected to complete technical and
technological education, and would not have achieved this level of education without the project. It assumed that
investments in education increase an individual’s productivity and future earnings. The economic costs were the
investment costs to implement the project, and recurrent costs incurred at project completion.

The estimates were based on the difference between: (a) an intervention scenario where the number of
graduates is based on a projected demand for technical and technological education and (b) a counterfactual
scenario where the number of graduates follows its trajectory as if the project did not exist. The net present
value (NPV) was estimated at approximately US$220 million with an internal rate of return (IRR) of 10 percent.
The analysis assumed a discount rate of 5 percent.

The ICR also included a cost-benefit analysis, updating the analysis conducted at appraisal. Based on the
effectiveness hypothesis and the project’s expected impact, the NPV was calculated at approximately US$80
million with an IRR of 10 percent, assuming a discount rate of 5 percent.

With regard to implementation efficiency, the ICR noted shortcomings that reduced overall project efficiency and
concluded that the project’s implementation was overall not efficient. There were three changes in government
administration that led to frequent ministerial and staff changes and the need to reconfirm priorities. This led to
significant institutional instability and implementation delays. Also, the process used by the Ministry of Economy
and Finance for allocating the project’s annual budgets was complex. Macroeconomic stabilization triggered two
partial loan cancellations totaling US$38.4 million. Six restructurings required multiple revisions to project scope
and activities. The loan closing date was extended twice, for a total of 23 months, to allow for the completion of
activities. Implementation efficiency is therefore rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  10.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                              10.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives is rated High. Efficacy is rated Substantial, as evidence was sufficient to demonstrate
that project-financed activities contributed to the achievement of Objectives 1 and 3, though that was not the
case for Objective 2. For efficiency, the project had economic benefits, but implementation challenges reduced
overall efficiency, leading to a Modest rating. These ratings are consistent with an overall Outcome rating of
Moderately Satisfactory, indicating that there were moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation,
implementation, and attributable results.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The government continues to prioritize technical and technological education to address a key constraint to
economic growth, the availability of trained workers with skills that match the needs of employers.
Sustainability of development outcomes depends on building and institutionalizing mutually beneficial
partnerships between employers and the technical institutes, where employers have the incentive to
contribute time and expertise for program design, monitoring, and analyzing trends in supply and demand in
the labor market. The main risk to development outcome is the severe fiscal constraints that necessitated a
temporary halt on additional public debt across all sectors. Discussion of a government request for a follow-
up operation has been postponed and may resume in the next fiscal year. An increase in insecurity may
impact the sustainability of project investments and the potential expansion of the model to other provinces.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was relevant and aligned with the government's strategy to improve access to technological
  education. It incorporated partnerships with employers for the design of curricula so that graduates would
  have skills that are aligned with their business requirements. This element of project design was informed
  by earlier non-lending technical assistance in the Skills Development Strategy for Effective Social
  Inclusion in Ecuador (P152751), which identified the economic subsectors with the highest employment
  and income-generation potential. Based on this study, training in sectors with the highest potential was
  prioritized. It was a shortcoming, however, that incentives for employers to participate were not built into
  the project. The focus on strengthening institutional management was an important component, as was


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



  developing and implementing an information management system to provide reliable data for improved
  decision making by stakeholders.

  The project incorporated counterpart financing of US$11.9 million at a time when the country was facing
  severe fiscal challenges associated with the fall in oil prices. Beginning in 2015, the government made
  fiscal adjustments, including the postponement of non-priority public investments and a temporary freeze
  on public sector wages. These challenges suggest that it was overly optimistic to assume that the
  government could provide counterpart financing. Further, the risk rating for institutional capacity for
  implementation was Substantial, and this rating optimistic. At project preparation, the World Bank was
  restarting dialogue in the education sector following a six-year hiatus of overall Bank engagement in the
  country.

  Design could have incorporated greater adaptation to the country context and adopted a more simplified
  approach given the limited experience of the government in implementing a large and complex project
  where more than 80 percent of the financing was for civil works.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted in-person missions as well as virtual workshops during the pandemic to
 support project implementation. The team carried out six restructurings due to macroeconomic conditions,
 implementation challenges, and the COVID-19 pandemic. The project team sought to maintain focus on
 the project’s relevance during the pandemic and responded well to the government's prioritizing of actions
 to improve connectivity and provide better digital learning opportunities for students.

 Fourteen ISRs documented progress on a project that had many changes owing to a substantial reduction
 in scope. A few years before the project closed, the end-targets for the indicators on enrollment and
 persistence rate were reported as met in the ISRs when activities were in design/early stage of
 implementation. The documentation of these indicators in the ISRs should have triggered recognition of the
 disconnect on achievement of results attributed to project activities.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)




a. M&E Design
 At project design, it was recognized that more reliable data than were currently available were needed to
 measure the achievement of project objectives. For example, baseline data on persistence rate were not
 included in the PAD's results framework due to the lack of information. A key project component included
 developing and implementing the administrative and academic management system for ISTs to provide IST
 managers and government officials with timely, high-quality data. The project planned to conduct an
 evaluation of the impact of improvements in infrastructure on enrollment and persistence rates in ISTs.
 Also, evaluations of teacher training and the Consultative Councils were incorporated in project design.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the project level, monitoring and evaluation was the responsibility of the Project Management Unit
  (PMU), which collected and compiled data on all indicators as planned. The PMU worked closely with the
  National Information System in Higher Education (Sistema Nacional de Información de Educación
  Superior del Ecuador), which was the main source of administrative data.

  During restructurings, revisions were made to end targets to reflect changes arising from partial
  cancellations of the loan, unforeseen adverse enrollment shocks, and the mobility constraints imposed by
  the COVID-19 pandemic. As noted earlier, some of the evaluations were not carried out, including the
  teacher training evaluation.



c. M&E Utilization
  A significant shortcoming was that reported enrollment and persistence rates showed that end-targets
  were met when project activities were in the early stage of implementation. No plausible causal link
  could exist between the relevant project activities and achievement of Objectives 1 and 2. This break in
  the results chain should have been detected through analysis of project M&E data. Additional evidence
  (beyond that presented in the ICR) was required for IEG to validate attributable achievement of
  outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Environmental Category B, as it triggered the Environmental Safeguard Policy
   OP/BP 4.01 because it would directly finance construction and upgrading of ISTs that could generate
   potential adverse environmental impacts. The government prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework, as locations for some ISTs were not known during project preparation. Also, an
   Environmental Form and corresponding Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were prepared at entry for


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



  those ISTs where the location was known. The remaining EMPs were to be developed during
  implementation when final sites were decided.

  The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy was triggered because some ISTs were to be located in rural
  areas with the presence of natural habitats including natural water streams and forests. The Physical
  Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) policy was triggered because Ecuador has pre-Columbian sites, and
  construction could have involved excavation in areas where unexpected findings could occur. The Forests
  (OP/BP 4.36) policy was triggered because some IST locations had not been finalized, although most ISTs
  were to be built in urban areas.

  A Social Assessment was conducted during project design, reporting that the geographical scope of the
  project included areas with the presence of indigenous people and Afro-descendants, among the poorest
  and most vulnerable populations. The Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.10) was triggered
  due to the presence of indigenous peoples who would be project beneficiaries and who had raised
  concerns about sending children to schools outside of their communities, and about the availability of safe
  and reliable transportation. The Borrower prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and
  Indigenous and Afro-descendant Peoples Plans to identify activities, procedures, and arrangements to be
  applied to indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants in the provinces with high presence of these
  populations.

  The Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) policy was triggered because planned civil works could have
  involved potential temporary and permanent impacts on land, assets, and livelihoods. A Resettlement Policy
  Framework was prepared for the interventions that had not been identified during appraisal to guide the
  preparation of Resettlement Plans for investments involving land acquisition. Grievances and Redress
  Mechanisms were defined.

  The ICR reported that the overall safeguards rating was consistently Moderately Satisfactory during project
  implementation (ICR, p. 28), except in one ISR when it was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory. Shortcomings
  in compliance occurred for a brief period. Communication plans were not prepared to inform people about
  ISTs that would no longer be built, which created reputation risks. No significant advances on the
  Indigenous Peoples’ Plans had been registered, and performance reports for the grievance mechanism had
  not been received. As a result, the rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory. A new
  environmental specialist was appointed, and progress was made on the Indigenous Peoples’ Plan, which
  led to performance improving quickly. The rating was upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory and later to
  Satisfactory until project closing. The safeguards risk at appraisal was Moderate and at closing, Low.

  According to the ICR, the Grievance Redress Mechanism was established, operationalized, and
  disseminated. Two complaints were received and resolved concerning an alleged incidence of non-
  compliance with an environmental management plan, and a contractual issue raised by a former contractor
  regarding non-delivery of supervision reports.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  During project preparation, a financial management assessment was conducted to evaluate the adequacy
  of the proposed financial management arrangements with the implementing entities. The project’s residual
  financial management risk was considered High following the adoption of mitigation measures, including:

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



   (a) regular review of the procedures to ensure that the project was in full compliance to avoid
   implementation delays; (b) implementation arrangements that closely monitored the liquidity needs of the
   project; and (c) strengthening of institutional and human resource capacity of the implementing entities to
   manage a complex project (PAD, pp. 52-53).

   Also, during project preparation, an assessment of the procurement capacity of the implementing agencies
   was carried out. Identified risks were related to capacity, knowledge of Bank procurement procedures or
   contracting, and staff turnover. Mitigation measures included: (a) frequent monitoring on quality assurance
   and physical progress; (b) verification of all justifications for any variation in price before executing the
   works; and (c) contract managers acquiring proper contract management skills (PAD, p. 61). The residual
   procurement risk was rated High. Recommended financial management and procurement actions were
   detailed in the Project Operations Manual (ICR, p. 28).

   During implementation, moderate shortcomings in compliance with the World Bank’s financial
   management requirements occurred, although the ICR notes that they did not impede timely and reliable
   provision of information for project monitoring and management. These included: (a) the need to document
   expenditures regularly; (b) timely availability of budget; and (c) on one occasion, timely contracting of the
   project’s auditors and delivery of audit reports.

   During implementation, financial management and procurement performance were mostly rated as
   Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, p. 28) For financial management, ratings were Satisfactory at the beginning
   of the project and Moderately Satisfactory for the duration of implementation. In the case of procurement,
   delays occurred in preparing the initial procurement plan and launching procurement processes. Coupled
   with multiple restructurings that required repeated revisions to budgetary allocations, the timeliness of civil
   works contracting was affected. Procurement was rated Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory during
   implementation and closed as Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)



                                                                                 Lack of utilization of data for
                                                                                 monitoring and implementation.
                                                                                 No plausible causal link was
Quality of M&E                      Substantial          Modest
                                                                                 demonstrated between the
                                                                                 project activities and
                                                                                 achievement of Objective 2.
                                                                                 Intermediate indicators and
                                                                                 outputs were not discussed in
                                                                                 assessing efficacy. Key targets
                                                                                 for two PDO indicators were
Quality of ICR                      ---                  Modest                  reportedly met before
                                                                                 completion of project activities,
                                                                                 raising questions about
                                                                                 attribution of outcomes, which
                                                                                 was not addressed in the ICR.

12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 30-31) provided insightful lessons, including the following:

During preparation, recognition of macroeconomic conditions and political realities in project
design and scope can mitigate known risks. While Bank teams have little control over a country’s
economic and political context, project design can be well-targeted and the loan amount more
modestly scaled to increase the likelihood of achievement of objectives.

When reengaging with a country after a long hiatus, implementation arrangements that
realistically account for institutional capacity can enable implementation readiness and
implementation efficiency. Large-scale civil works can be a complex undertaking, especially in
countries with limited experience and knowledge of Bank policies on procurement and safeguards.
Project components can be successfully implemented when capacity is accurately assessed during
preparation.

Monitoring of progress is important to verify achievement of project outcomes. A clear causal
link between project-financed interventions and objectives enables attribution of results to the project
rather than external factors. Accurate monitoring and reporting are essential to assure accurate
attribution.

Implementation support can enable course corrections to right-size a project. When a project
is substantially downsized and multiple restructurings occur, Bank teams can provide substantial
implementation support while focusing on development outcomes and maintaining implementation
efficiency.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Transformation of Tertiary Institutes (P157425)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a concise overview of the country and sector context as well as the Bank’s reengagement
with the Government of Ecuador. It included clear descriptions of the six project restructurings and their impact
on project components, as well as changes in indicator targets in the results framework. The ICR's lessons
were well framed and insightful. However, as for quality of evidence and analysis, a significant shortcoming was
attributing achievement of Objectives 1 and 2 to project-financed activities that were not yet implemented or
completed. Additional data had to be acquired from the project team in order to complete this validation.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
