     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024180

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P125232                                     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Mongolia                                    Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-54870,IDA-65880,TF-A0794                31-Dec-2018                                          39,595,894.52

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 06-Jun-2014                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             24,800,000.00                                     5,665,000.00

 Revised Commitment                              42,465,000.00                                     5,665,000.00

 Actual                                          39,686,137.02                                     5,665,000.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz           Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Financing Agreement (CN 5487, Schedule I, page
   5) and in the Grant Agreement (TF0A0794, Schedule 1, page 5) is “to improve governance and community
   participation for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas of Mongolia". This description
   coincides with the one presented in the PAD (PAD385, page 4).

   The PDO will be parsed, for the purposes of this review, as follows:


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



         To improve governance for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas of Mongolia
         To improve community participation for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas
          of Mongolia



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project was structured around the following three components:

   Component 1. Capacity Building for Local Governance and Livelihoods (cost at appraisal: US$11
   million; revised cost US$5.95 million; actual cost: US$5.95 million). This component sought to build capacity
   at the local and national levels for the implementation and further development of the Government’s
   programs and mechanisms to support rural development. It supported efforts to help the districts to
   effectively manage the significant increases in governance responsibilities related to investment planning
   and execution that had been delegated through the Integrated Budget Law (IBL); a national law that
   established a formula-based intergovernmental transfer mechanism for budget decentralization at province
   and district level. The component would finance training and technical assistance activities to officials at the
   district level, in areas related to the implementation of the Local Development Fund (LDF), which was
   established by the IBL as a formula-driven intergovernmental transfer mechanism, providing predictable and
   sizeable funds to support local capital investment in public infrastructure and services. The training and
   technical assistance would be in medium term planning, community participation, budget preparation;
   finance management and procurement; reporting; monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and pastureland
   planning and management (the pasture land management activities were dropped during implementation).

   Component 2. Good Governance Performance-Based Support Program (cost at appraisal: US$21.6
   million; revised cost US$33.58 million¸ actual cost: US$33.58 million). This component consisted of two
   subcomponents.

   Subcomponent 2.1: Performance-based financing (PBF) which funded performance-based grants (PBGs)
   that were awarded to districts (soums) with funds from the LDF, based on their performance, as measured
   by an annual review using the Annual Performance Assessment (APA) scoring mechanism. The objective
   of the PBF would be to enhance good governance in the entire budgeting process (policy planning, budget
   preparation and adoption, budget execution, accounting, reporting, internal and external control and public
   scrutiny). Particular importance would be given to citizen participation and to their satisfaction with the LDF
   process and outcomes, via an alignment of soum budgets with the citizens’ priorities at the rural subdistrict
   administration units. The APA rated all districts annually, and was applied by independent assessors
   against a set of agreed performance indicators.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



  Sub-component 2.2: this subcomponent financed the setup and management of the Annual Performance
  Assessment (APA), and was to be financed by the Swiss Development Cooperation grant.

  Component 3. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (cost at appraisal: US$3.6 million;
  revised cost US$2.94 million; actual cost: US$2.94 million). This component financed the staff and
  operating costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the implementation of key functions such as
  M&E, procurement, Financial Management (FM), and management of environmental and social safeguards.
  The development of the management information system (MIS) for the LDF; specialized studies; and the
  project baseline, midterm, and end line surveys.

  Changes to components

  During the third restructuring in Sept 2017 (RES28497), at the government’s request, references to the
  Soum Program were removed from the Financing Agreement, given that budgetary constraints in the
  country had reduced the funding for that program. The definition of activities under Component 2 was
  amended to include the provision of financial support from the project to the Local Development Fund. The
  allocation was of US$ 12 million, and helped cushion the precipitous decline in the Government’s general
  Soum LDF budget during the recessionary period of 2017 and 2018. The elimination of the Soum Program
  was an important factor in the decision to drop the pasture land management activities initially planned at
  appraisal.

  The components’ costs were revised through the eighth (and last) restructuring in October 2022,
  (RES52580), to reflect: (a) a reduction in the total value of the Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC) co-
  financing grant (from US$11.4 million to US$5.67 million), (b) an increase in Component 2 costs related to
  the LDF ‘top-up’ payments that had been allowed through the third restructuring (RES28497), and (c)
  reductions in the capacity building and operations costs due to COVID-19 and related budget austerity
  measures. Thus, Component 1 costs were reduced from US$9.4 million to US$5.95 million, Component 2
  costs were increased from US$29.3 million to US$33.58 million, and Component 3 costs were reduced from
  US$4.10 million to US$2.94 million.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$ 36.2 million. The revised project cost
  was US$ 42.47 million and the actual project cost was US$ 42.47 million, which represents 117% of the
  cost at appraisal and 100% of the revised cost.

  Financing. The project was financed by two IDA credits and a co-financing Trust Fund grant from the Swiss
  Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC). IDA-54870-MN was of US$ 24,8 million and the grant
  (TF-A0794) was of 5,67 million. An additional IDA credit of US$ 12 million was approved in April 2020: IDA-
  65880, to support two additional rounds of performance-based grants for the districts, continue with the
  capacity-building exercise, and to strengthen the project’s M&E.

  Borrower contribution. There was no borrower contribution in this project.

  Dates




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



The project was approved in June 2014, made effective in July 2015, and had the MTR in October 2016.
The original closing date was in December 2018 and the actual closing date was December 2023, i.e. a five
years’ extension in total.

The project underwent 8 level-II restructuring processes:

      First restructuring (RES20832), in January 2015. The dissolution of the Ministry of Economic
       Development in Mongolia provoked the need to change the Implementing Agency to the Ministry of
       Finance. The date regarding adoption of the Project Implementation Manual was pushed back, given
       the delayed start of project implementation.
      Second restructuring, in September 2015, with changes in the disbursement arrangements, as well
       as in the cut-off date for retroactive financing for the SDC grant, that was changed from January 30,
       2015, to May 26, 2015, to reflect the date on which the donor signed the Trust Fund Agreement.
      The third restructuring (RES28497) in September 2017, following the MTR, introduced changes in
       components, costs and loan closing dates (from December 31, 2018, to October 31, 2020), as well
       as the following changes in the RF:

The PDO indicator ‘Percentage of soums who qualify for performance-based financing’ was replaced by
the indicator "Average soums’ APA score". This change is not considered substantial, as the meaning of the
indicator remains unchanged, because the APA score is the tool applied to qualify the performance of the
districts (soums). The % of qualified districts and the APA score are two ways of referring to the same
reality. The target also did not change, and this has been reported by the team as a coincidence
(conversation of July 26).

The PDO indicator "Percentage of soum citizens surveyed agreeing that LDF is meeting local
priorities" (disaggregated by gender) was rephrased as ‘Percentage of soums’ citizens surveyed reporting
that LDF financed investments reflect their priority needs’ (disaggregated by gender). The new description
focuses more on the individual priorities, but both indicators measure the same reality: how citizens assess
the match between what they think is needed (locally or individually) and how funds are allocated. The
difference in the description does not pose substantial changes to the meaning of the indicator and what it
tries to assess. The targets of this indicator were revised down, from 85% (original) to 65%.

The PDO indicator “Participation: nationwide household participation rate at rural subdistrict level (bagh)
citizens’ public meetings to discuss soum budget priorities, disaggregated by gender” was revised to the
following: “Participation: Percentage of bagh households participating in public bagh meetings”. The gender
angle was dropped. The new description does not reflect substantial changes in the indicator.

Two new PDO indicators were added: “Number of subprojects completed” and “Direct project beneficiaries
(Female beneficiaries)”.

The definition of activities under Component 2 was amended to include the provision of financial support to
the Local Development Fund. This revision allowed for allocating approximately US$12 million to general
LDF financing as bridging support to help cushion the precipitous decline in the Government’s general soum
LDF budget during a recessionary period.

      The Fourth restructuring paper (RES33209), in June 2018, extended the SDC grant to the closing
       date of June 30, 2019 and increased the financing amount to the project to a total of US$ 5,665
       million.

                                                                                                Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



         The Fifth restructuring paper (RES37811), in June 2019, presented an extension of the SDC grant to
          December 31, 2019, at the request of the government.
         The Sixth restructuring paper (RES39881), in December 2019, presented an extension of the SDC
          grant to June 2020, at the request of the government.
         The Seventh restructuring (RES42507), in June 2020, comprised the following changes: Change in
          Loan Closing Date of the SDC grant to June 30, 2021; Reallocation between disbursement
          categories; adjustments to the RF (as a consequence of the AF approved in 2020) as follows: the 2
          PDO-level indicators that were added at the 3rd restructuring were dropped (number of
          beneficiaries and number of subprojects), as well as the following intermediate indicator: “Guidelines
          necessary to improve governance and community participation for the planning and delivery of LDF
          developed”, which had been achieved in May 2019. Some of the remaining SDC grant funds were
          allowed to co-finance PBGs, which were previously financed only by the IDA credit.
         The Eighth restructuring paper (RES52580), in Oct-2022, introduced the following
          changes: Component costs were revised to reflect (a) a reduction in the total value of the SDC co-
          financing grant (from US$11.4 million to US$5.67 million), (b) increase in Component 2 costs related
          to the LDF "top-up" payments allowed through the third restructuring, and (c) reductions in the
          capacity building and operations costs due to COVID-19 and related budget austerity measures.
          Thus, Component 1 costs were reduced from US$9.4 million to US$5.95 million, Component 2 costs
          were increased from US$29.3 million to US$33.58 million, and Component 3 costs were reduced
          from US$4.10 million to US$2.94 million. The changes in the RF consisted of: (i) revising the targets
          of 4 intermediate result indicators: the target of the indicator “Number of Aimag Level Support Team,
          national government staff, and soums’ government staff trained” was increased from 20,000 to
          35,000; the target of the indicator “Percentage of bagh citizens who know the approximate current
          annual LDF allocation for their soum” was reduced from 25% to 10% (and equally reduced in its
          gender-disaggregated component); and the target of the indicator “Number of projects completed”
          was increased from 29,900 to 40,000.

   A split evaluation is not undertaken, as the changes at the PDO-level indicators that took place in the third
   and seventh restructurings did not substantially affect the PDO. The changes of the 3rd restructuring were
   on the description of the indicators but did not change their meaning and what they were set to measure in
   any substantial way. The dropping of 2 PDO-level indicators in the 7th restructuring is also not considered
   substantial, because: (i) they were not in the original RF (were introduced at 3rd restructuring); (ii) they are
   not pitched at outcome level and did not substantially contribute to the measurement of project outcomes.
   While some intermediate indicator targets were reduced, this does not trigger a split rating as a) they project
   did not achieve the original nor revised targets; and the more significant indicator targets were increased,
   and they were achieved.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at appraisal

Mongolia is a lower-middle-income country in East Asia, with a population of 3.4 million and a territory of
1.6 million km2. It is one of the most sparsely populated countries in the world, with an economy heavily

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



dependent on mining. Agriculture, dominated by livestock breeding, is particularly important for the
livelihoods of rural populations who constitute approximately 40 percent of the population (ICR, page 6).
The rural livelihoods are, however, increasingly challenged by climate change: increased frequency of
severe weather events, exacerbated desertification, land degradation, and natural disasters such as flash
floods, fires, and severe winter conditions. Additionally, weak governance and regulation over using
common natural resources and a lack of effective cooperation and collective action at scale perpetuate a
vicious cycle of declining natural resources.

At the time of the appraisal (2014), Mongolia was enjoying a period of rapid economic growth driven by the
mining sector, but with rural areas risking falling behind. The country needed to develop efficient and
transparent mechanisms for decentralized service delivery, raising the capacity of the provinces (aimag)
and the district (soum) officials to manage funds transparently and maintain strong local government
performance. The approval of the Integrated Budget Law (IBL) in 2011 (effective from January 2013) was
an important development in this regard. The new law established a formula-based intergovernmental
transfer mechanism for capital investment resources at the aimag and soum levels.

This project was the third and last of an adaptable program loan (APL) series, designed to help soum
governments operationalize the rules and regulations that govern the Local Development Fund (LDF),
which was created with the introduction of the IBL. The purpose of the overall APL was to reduce
vulnerability and achieve secure and sustainable livelihoods for poor and vulnerable near-poor households
nationwide. Whereas the first project was a pilot and the second scaled up the interventions, this third
project was designed to institutionalize the mechanisms and give sustainability to the results, creating a
more effective and transparent system for local governance for sustainable rural investments at a national
scale.

Consistency with Country Strategy

At closure, the project objectives remained highly relevant to Mongolia’s national development objectives.
The project directly aligned with two of the nine objectives of Mongolia’s long-term development policy
“Vision 2050”, approved in 2020. The PDO aligned with the Governance pillar of this policy by creating an
environment of continued learning for civil servants in various technical areas irrespective of time and
distance, establishing systems for transparency and accountability in the prioritization of local investments
with citizen participation and building trust between citizens and local governments, supporting digitization
of government systems by creating an MIS integrated with the national budget mechanisms, and
establishing a regular and transparent mechanism for assessing local government performance.
Additionally, the PDO contributed to the Regional and Local Development pillar of “Vision 2050” by
providing a mechanism to respond to local priorities, as identified by citizens in multiple areas including
sustainable agriculture and basic social services (ICR, page 16).

Consistency with Bank strategy

The PDO continued to be aligned with the new World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
Mongolia, 2021–2025 (Report No. 132141-MN). It was a key contributor to Focus Area 1 of the CPF:
Strengthening Economic Governance, and the CPF envisioned a follow-up operation to support the LDF.
The PDO was well aligned to emerging development challenges and priorities in the country program such
as climate adaptation and mitigation, food security, and economic diversification.

Previous Bank experience


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



               The PAD presents how the lessons learned in the previous 2 projects of the APL and in other similar
               projects nurtured the design of this one, and clear key examples are given on how. The effort in capturing
               the lessons is also explicitly mentioned regarding the Environmental and Social Management Plan, and
               mitigation measures that had proven effective under previous projects were brought to this one (PAD, page
               17). The novelty in this project was the introduction of the performance-based grants. The lessons from
               international projects are stated to be drawn to this one, to ensure effectivity (ICR page 26).

               PDO level. The PDO, “to improve governance and community participation for the planning and delivery of
               priority investments in rural areas of Mongolia” is coherent with the previous two Sustainable Livelihood
               Projects (SLPs) of the Adaptable Program Loan. Whereas the first phase was a pilot and the second
               focused on scaling up interventions at national level, this project aimed at institutionalizing the management
               of investments for sustainable livelihoods. The PDO is pitched at an intermediary outcome level, as
               improved governance and increased community participation are both means to arrive at a higher end
               (improved livelihoods and quality of life for rural communities).

               Given the alignment of the PDO with the Bank and country strategies, the Bank's previous experience, and
               the PDO level, the relevance is deemed High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve governance for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas.

                             Rationale
                             The PAD did not include a ToC as that was not a requirement at the time, but the ICR created a ToC
                             retrospectively, based on the PAD text, both for the Adaptable Loan Program as a whole and for this third
                             project. The ToC outlines that: the activities on training, technical assistance and knowledge exchange for the
                             districts and provinces officials (activities), the development of guidelines and manuals governing the Local
                             Development Fund (activities), the provision of performance-based grants under the LDF (activity) and the
                             development of district level performance monitoring systems (activities) would be expected to lead to having
                             trained staff (output), an improved LDF regulation (output), sub-projects being completed thanks to the grants
                             provided (output) and a measuring system developed for the improved management (Average Performance
                             Assessment, APA) and for the Monitoring Information System (outputs). These outputs in turn were expected
                             to lead to the intermediate outcomes of improved government capacity to manage the LDF, mobilized citizen
                             participation, increased provision of basic rural infrastructure via de performance-based grants (PBGs) and
                             improved transparency and accountability of the district performance. In turn, these outcomes were expected



                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



to lead to improved governance and participation for the planning and delivery of priority investment in rural
areas (objectives).

The logic presented in the ToC is clear and coherent. Although the ICR presents three intermediary
outcomes, only 2 of them are captured in the PDO description (the basic infrastructure improvements are not
part of the PDO, although they are an important part of the project interventions).

The intermediary outcomes that are directly linked to Objective 1 are the following: (i) improved government
capacity to manage the LDF, (ii) increased provision of infrastructure via de PBGs and (iii) improved
transparency and accountability. The three intermediary outcomes were expected to lead to achievement of
Objective 1 of improved governance for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas.

Outputs

      52.8% of trained province-level staff and national government staff are applying skills learned through
         the project (planning, procurement, financial management, community participation and M&E), of a
         target of 80%. Not achieved
        73.8% of soums’ government staff trained by province-level support team with improved capacity
         (applying learned skills in planning, procurement, FM, community participation and M&E), of a target
         of 85%. Not achieved
        52,569 province, national and district level government staff trained, of an original target of 20,000 and
         revised target of 35,000. Target exceeded
        4 LDF-related or other MoF regulations were submitted for MoF review, with SLP3 support, of a target
         of 4. Target achieved
        5.2% of bagh citizens know the approximate current annual LDF allocation for their soum, of an
         original target of 25% and a revised target of 10%. Not achieved
        41,156 sub-projects completed, of an original target of 29,900 and a revised target of 40,000. Target
         exceeded
        1,120,059 direct project beneficiaries, of an original target of 600,000. Target exceeded
        571,230 women beneficiaries of an original target of 300,000. Target exceeded

Outcomes

The Average soums’ Annual Performance Assessment score (previous description of this indicator:
“Percentage of soums that qualify for performance-based financing”) achieved 71% at closure, with an
original target of 70%. Achieved.

The APA score is an index measure of six performance areas, with 34 specific indicators. The performance
areas are (a) participation in the planning process; (b) project planning, prioritization, and budgeting; (c)
disclosure and transparency; (d) budget execution and procurement; (e) M&E; and (f) asset ownership and
management. The average score increased for each of the six APA performance areas, with an especially
steep increase in the area of participation. It increased in all provinces. There was a sharp drop in the number
of poor performing soums (which did not qualify for PBGs). This can be seen in the decline in number of
soums that scored ‘zero’ on one or more areas of the APA (from 41 in 2016 to 14 in 2023).

The APA focused on compliance but did not measure results of the subprojects implemented


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



54.5% of soum citizens surveyed reported that LDF financed investments reflect their priority needs,
whereas the original target was 85% (and had gender disaggregation) and the revised target was 65% and
was not disaggregated by gender. Not achieved.

This indicator was rephrased with the Sep 2017 restructuring from its original wording “Percentage of soum
citizens surveyed agreeing that LDF is meeting local priorities”. A new target of 60% was set after the
baseline survey. With the Additional Financing in 2020 the target was raised to 65% (email of team from
August 4). The ICR reports on the following additional factors that may have had an influence on the low
results: (i) The fact that the size of the grants declined substantially between 2017 and 2020, causing some
local disappointment; (ii) the fact that unrealistically long lists of subproject proposals were submitted by
citizens each year, of which only a small fraction could be approved.

The outcome indicators adequately measure results contributing to achievement of Objective 1, as the first
one measures the technical improvement of the performance of the districts (APA score), whereas the
second seeks validation of this improvement among the citizens. Although one of the 2 outcomes has not
been achieved it was the spirit of that outcome (as phrased originally) that the communities perceive that the
budget allocations met local priorities. The fact that the outcome was rephrased and the concept of their
priority needs was included, added a subjective factor that may have influenced the responses the way the
team has explained. This is confirmed by the additional survey data collected.

A shortcoming is that the outcomes derived from the subprojects (mostly basic infrastructure) are not
captured. The ICR states that the project financed an estimated 6,900 subprojects for education, health,
water and sanitation, community lighting, veterinary services, winter fodder, and other community-prioritized
services. The estimated population benefitting of these projects is 1.1 million. Having left these important
outcomes without measurement is a missed opportunity to measure essential project results.

Additional outcomes reported in the ICR not included in the RF, and hence without target values

The ICR reports the following results of an end-line survey: 94 % of respondents concluded that the LDF’s
efforts were effective in supporting the development of soums and local communities, 71.4 percent believed
that the LDF’s investments brought changes that benefitted all citizens and communities, and only 22.7
percent felt that these changes catered solely to a specific group.

Despite the mixed results at output level, it is the outcome indicator of the APA scoring system that best
captures the achievement of Objective 1, and it has very good results.

The efficacy rating of Objective 1 is therefore Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve community participation for the planning and delivery of priority investments in rural areas of
Mongolia.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)




Rationale
ToC

The training and technical assistance activities in community participation, the provision of performance-
based grants and the development of the performance monitoring systems (activities) were expected to lead
to the public officials trained in community participation (output), the completion of subprojects financed with
grants (output), and the Monitoring information system and APA assessments carried out to inform budget
process (output). These outputs, in turn, were expected to lead to the intermediary outcomes of (i) citizen
participation mobilized and to (ii) improved transparency and accountability of the performance at district
level. Those intermediary outcomes were expected to lead to the improved participation for the planning and
delivery of priority investments in rural areas (objective).

The concept of participation was clarified by the team (conversation of July 26) and covers participation in the
meetings where the LDF allocation is voted over.

Outputs

The outputs reported under Objective 1 are also relevant under Objective 2.

       52.8% of trained province-level staff and national government staff are applying skills learned through
        the project (planning, procurement, financial management, community participation and M&E), of a
        target of 80%. Not achieved
       73.8% of soums’ government staff trained by province-level support team with improved capacity
        (applying learned skills in planning, procurement, FM, community participation and M&E), of a target
        of 85%. Not achieved
       5.2% of bagh citizens know the approximate current annual LDF allocation for their soum, of an
        original target of 25% and a revised target of 10%. Not achieved
       41,156 sub-projects completed, of an original target of 29,900 and a revised target of
        40,000. Achieved

Outcomes

       60.4% of bagh households participated in public bagh meetings, of a target of 60%, Achieved

An additional measurement of this outcome is facilitated by the APA score (outcome indicator for PDO1), as it
has one criteria that relates to participation, and it registered the highest increase over the course of the
project, starting at less than 10% and reaching over 70% in 2023.

In order to achieve community participation, this third project of the APL focused on improving the capacity of
the government officials. The outcome indicator for PDO2 does not sufficiently reflect this process or the
existence/improvement of these mechanisms for community participation through the officials in the
government (it is the APA improved scores that give complementary evidence on this). The bagh meetings
served to discuss and to vote over the proposals for budget allocation. 47.3% of the respondents in a survey
stated they had voted in the selection of LDF projects, and digital voting also became possible as it was
introduced during COVID.



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



                            The outcome indicator does not, on its own, assess achievement of the PDO2. However, when assessed in
                            conjunction with the community participation component of the APA score, it is clear that both indicators were
                            achieved.

                            The rating for Objective 2 is Substantial with minor shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The Substantial rating of Objective 1 and the rating of Substantial with minor shortcomings for Objective 2
                            give an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency

   Ex-ante economic analysis. The PAD (page 13) states that an ex-ante economic analysis of the LDF-funded
   activities was not possible, because of the difficulties in quantifying the benefits of fiscal decentralization (as
   disbursements would not be linked to specific investments on the ground), and because the choice of
   investments was not known beforehand.

   Ex-post economic analysis. The ICR presents two economic analyses. One is on the return on the capacity-
   building activities and the incentive system created by the APA and PBG systems (that would increase the
   efficiency of the LDF financing) and the other is on the infrastructure sub-projects of the communities financed
   by the LDF (PBGs).

   For the first analysis, the methodology used compares the “with project” situation (with the additional LDF
   financing) to a counterfactual, considering only the government budget for the LDF (without the additional LDF
   financing). The discount rate is set conservatively at 15 percent, because of the high interest environment. The
   analysis shows that the project had an NPV of US$34.5 million, and an IRR of 56%. With the sensitivity scenario
   the project returns remain positive: IRR of 21% and NPV of US$ 4 million.

   For the analysis on infrastructure subprojects, three types of subprojects have been examined: fodder storage
   units, wells and street lighting. Subproject costs and benefits are based on surveys of the beneficiary

                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



communities and households. The total sample of interviewed representatives from subprojects was 18 for
fodder storage units, 20 for street lighting and 19 for the wells. For each subproject, a situation without project
(prior to the investment) is compared to a situation with project. The costs and benefits include the cost of the
subproject and its maintenance costs and taxes, as well as benefits and time/cost savings of the households in
the community. All the assessed investments are viable with positive net present values and internal rates of
return. The fodder storage was least profitable (IRR of 16%), but the profits are more tangible as they
correspond to cost savings for fodder purchase. Instead, the wells (IRR 199%) and street lighting (IRR 354%)
have very high benefits, but these do not necessarily result in additional cash flow for households, as the
benefits mostly correspond to time savings or having additional value to time.

The annual cost of the APA exercise is considered low, at about 0.8 percent of the average annual LDF
allocation to districts, in comparison with similar programs (eight other World Bank-funded projects conducting
APA-type assessments spend on average 1.2% of the fund budget on the assessment-ICR, page 21)

Other operational and administrative factors affecting efficiency:

The project was extended several times, resulting in a total of 5 years extension. The ICR reports on several
factors affecting project efficiency:

      Factors hampering early implementation: the abolition of the main implementing ministry and a delay in
       parliamentary ratification of the project financing; the loss of some PIU staff, the need for the government
       to hire qualified staff to manage the LDF, and challenges with completing the initial APAs in time to
       inform budget allocations for the following year. These delays necessitated an initial extension of the
       project closing date and are responsible for the effectiveness date being 1 year later than approval
       date.
      Budget reductions and important component reallocations: (i) A reduction of the SDC grant amount in
       year 2 that led to a reduction in the budget for capacity-building activities under Component 1; (ii) the
       reduction of the governments flow of funds to the LDF in 2016 and 2017 due to economic recession and
       government fiscal constraints encouraged by the IMF. At the Government’s request, the World Bank
       reallocated US$12 million of the funds earmarked for PBGs to the general district LDF budget.
      Delays and poor performance of the project in the first two years of implementation triggered the need to
       ensure stronger links between the project activities and the general government budgeting processes,
       causing changes in the PMU and the implementation arrangements to align them to government systems
      The Law on Budget Austerity (effective May 2022) and the COVID-19 pandemic significantly restricted
       travel and face-to-face capacity-building activities.

Despite the above, the Technical Audit Report finds that 93 percent of assessed subprojects were implemented
on time (ICR, page 47).

The economic analysis shows positive results, with the caveat of the sample of the PBGs (58) being too small in
comparison with the total number of subprojects (+40.000). Despite the significant delays, the changes in
implementation arrangements and funding, the frequent adjustments contributed to realigning the project to
ensure its efficiency, and Efficiency is therefore rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

High Relevance, Substantial Efficacy and Substantial Efficiency result in an overall outcome of Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political risk. Political interference both in the assessment and in the process of planning and delivering
local investments is a risk, especially in periods preceding local elections. If the APA is not completed in a
transparent and rigorous manner, trust in the performance-based system may be compromised, which in turn
can lower the incentives of local governments to perform well, and for citizens to actively engage in the local
investment prioritization and budget implementation process. Therefore, continued political commitment will
be essential to maintain a rigorous APA process.

Technical risk. There is the risk to the quality of implementation of the APAs. From 2024 onward, the APA
process will rely on data from the MIS rather than on independent field-based assessments, as has been
done under the project. While the correlation between the field-based APA and the set of MIS indicators
chosen to measure performance going forward has been demonstrated, there is a risk that the system could
be compromised in its neutrality to artificially inflate ratings.

Institutional capacity risk. In the absence of the project, support for capacity-building activities may
decline, and governance performance may start to lag behind. Previous APAs have shown a strong
correlation between investing in training and capacity of local government officials and an increase in
performance results, especially in the area of community participation and engagement of the communities in
the decision-making process for budget allocation.

Financial risk. The LDF has been financed from different sources of national and local revenue over the
course of its implementation since 2013. The sources are varied, the most significant being the royalties from
mining, oil, and other large extractive projects, representing approximately 55 percent of the LDF revenues

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



between 2013 and 2023 and currently (as of 2023) 89 percent. Dependence on such revenues that are
linked to international commodity prices susceptible to wide fluctuations based on forces outside the
Government's control exposes programs such as the LDF to levels of unpredictability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank drew on global experience to propose a system of performance-based financing (the
  novelty in this 3rd project of the series that was not included in the previous ones). The team organized a
  learning visit for the Government of Mongolia to the Indonesia National Program for Community
  Empowerment, which had a well-established mechanism for citizen participation in decision-making at
  the village level. Lessons learned from implementing PBGs internationally and from local governance
  programs globally were incorporated in the project design, namely the fact that they are effective at
  bringing about institutional change and that they provide incentives to local government to improve key
  institutional performance areas and also more broadly in areas of good governance. A challenging design
  decision involved the local-level implementation arrangements. The project envisioned recruitment of a
  five-person team (SST) in each province, reflecting a clear need for intensive outreach and training of
  citizen representatives at the district and sub-district levels. Two main implementation options were
  considered: i) to co-mingle funds with the LDF and subject the project flow of allocated disbursements to
  the country systems; or ii) to operate a separate IDA financed “window” for the LDF top up. The team
  assessed that although the former may carry more risk and may present a greater implementation
  challenge, lessons showed that this approach was more consistent with the aims of institutionalization
  that the project wanted to prioritize. Lessons on effective capacity building for local government were also
  introduced (longer term, frequent and repeated training and with locally-based trainers and an effective
  back-stopping and oversight structure at the local level). The Environmental and Social Management
  Plan benefitted from the lessons learned in the previous 2 phases, and incorporated the mitigation
  measures that had previously worked best.

  There were minor shortcomings at appraisal: the pastoral risk management activities were not sufficiently
  well-defined at preparation; and (ii) not including outcome-level indicators to capture the improvements in
  the livelihoods resulting from the basic infrastructure subprojects.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 18 supervision missions were conducted during the life of the project (more than two per year). Several of
 the 8 restructuring processes show the Bank team’s rigor in applying necessary adjustments to better align
 the project activities and results to the changing reality. For instance, at the last restructuring (8th), the



                                                                                                    Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



 targets of some intermediary result indicators were revised and increased, to better align them with the
 actual targets at that time, as they had largely surpassed the original ones.

 The institutional changes at the level of the main ministerial counterpart during the first 2 years of the
 project coupled with the lack of definition of the pastoral risk-management elements of the project at
 appraisal, affected the implementation of the pastoral risk-management, and it was dropped in the 2017
 restructuring.

 Having had zero disbursement in the first year of effectiveness, the disbursements more than tripled within
 a year following the restructuring of 2017. The approach of delivery mechanisms for capacity building and
 outreach changed during COVID-19 and the subsequent Law on Austerity, yielding interesting unexpected
 lessons on how youth and women participation increased with the new electronic mechanisms for
 participation. Implementation Status and Results Reports were produced regularly.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 At appraisal, the M&E was meant to comprise a set of qualitative and quantitative indicators that would
 monitor outcome and implementation progress, focusing on the overall LDF performance and
 responsiveness to local priorities, and citizen’s engagement in the budgetary process. The local
 government performance would be evaluated annually through Annual Performance Assessments (APAs)
 carried out by independent experts. The core areas for assessment, in line with IBL requirements, included
 the following categories: (i) citizen participation (ii) budget preparation, (iii) budget execution
 (implementation), (iv) reporting (v) financial management and (vi) citizen feedback. Further, the APAs were
 to be designed to monitor compliance with the environmental and social safeguard policies of the
 government and the World Bank.

 To enhance the focus on empowering citizens to monitor the use of public funds, the project was to
 continue with the Participatory M&E (PM&E) approach already established countrywide in the previous
 project (phase 2). The aim was to institutionalize the system, supported by unpaid, volunteer
 Community Supervisors and Evaluators, as an integral part of the official process for implementing the
 LDFs (PAD, page 41). The PIU had the overall responsibility of monitoring the LDF on behalf of the MOF.
 At the local level, the Supervision Committee of the elected soum Citizens’ Representative and soum
 government officers were to provide information and deliver performance monitoring.




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



 The M&E system’s focus reflected the priority concern of the MOF, regarding the operationalization and
 management of the LDF.

 A shortcoming is that the RF could have included the outcomes of the subprojects on basic infrastructure.
 (increased quality of life, better access to basic services such as water and electricity, improved
 productivity of cattle production), since most of the budget allocation was on the subprojects for basic
 infrastructure services at community level.



b. M&E Implementation
  It was not until 2018 that an M&E specialist was hired in the PIU and original target indicators were
  established. A baseline took place in 2019.

  The midterm survey was conducted electronically under COVID-19-related restrictions. With the
  emphasis on inclusion and women’s participation, the RF included output-level gender-disaggregated
  measures. The system also allowed for a more detailed look into the performance of different parts of the
  country and aspects of performance to be able to address specific lagging areas. The RF was
  substantially revised during the second year of implementation (3rd restructuring in 2017). The
  introduction of the APA scores in the description of the outcome indicator on improved
  governance allowed for a comprehensive way to measure overall change in local government
  performance. The APAs were carried out by independent consultant firms by applying a single standard
  to rank soums to qualify for PBG. Consulting firms were contracted to carry out baseline, midterm, and
  end-of-project evaluation surveys. The PIU took the overall responsibility for developing and carrying out
  the M&E system on the government’s behalf until the end of the project, when it was expected to be
  taken over by MoF.

  The M&E specialist in the PIU consistently documented results from administrative data and independent
  surveys. The PIU prepared and submitted quarterly progress reports and midterm and end line reports to
  the MOF, World Bank, and SDC in a timely manner. Arising questions on the methodology for measuring
  different RF indicators were resolved and the PIU was able to gather data to allow for consistent
  measurement of the indicators through the baseline, midterm, and end line surveys.

   The targets of some new PDO indicators were only set with the AF once the PIU had recruited an M&E
  specialist, established a methodology for measuring the new indicators, and established a baseline
  (Correspondence with Bank team, August 4th, 2024).



c. M&E Utilization
  The project’s M&E results were used to improve implementation performance. For example, the APA
  performance measures were used to better target the capacity-building activities, allowing to
  place greater attention on the provinces and districts with lower performance and governance areas that
  exhibited lower scores. The APA scores were also used to select and pair higher and lower performing
  districts for peer learning visits. The MTR helped reassess targets and content of the LDF trainings and
  communications. When the results showed that local government officials placed higher value on in-




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



  person versus virtual learning, the project recommended restarting face-to-face trainings where possible,
  even though the Budget Austerity Law limited the opportunity for travel.

  The project’s MIS was tested and shown to be a suitable source of proxy information for the APA
  process in measuring district performance. The comparison exercise between the MIS and the APA
  motivated a simplification of the APA indicators (reduced from 34 to 12). Recommendations were made
  to strengthen the ownership and M&E aspects of the APA score.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project complied with the safeguards. The project was assessed as Category B-partial assessment,
   three safeguards were triggered (OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment, OP 4.04, Natural Habitats, OP 4.10,
   Indigenous Peoples). OP 4.10, Indigenous peoples, was triggered due the nationwide scope of the project
   including areas populated by ethnic minorities (when a change to one of the PDO-level indicators took
   place). An Environmental and Social Management Plan was prepared and disclosed on April 9, 2013. An
   Indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared and disclosed on April 11, 2013. During the project’s additional
   financing, both plans were updated and redisclosed on March 1, 2020. The project contributed to
   strengthening country systems for environmental and social risk management at the district level. The PIU
   did not have the opportunity, or sufficient capacity, to assess each project-funded subproject individually.
   The original risk of this situation was originally assessed as low and acceptable, but proved otherwise in
   reality, as it was reported that there had been use of pesticides that had not been screened by officials
   (conversation with the Bank team on July 26th, 2024). As a consequence of this the PIU hired a safeguard
   specialist.

   When the bank team and the PIU recognized that environmental and social considerations needed to be
   integrated more systematically in the LDF implementation, the project undertook specialized environmental
   and social risk management studies, which resulted in the preparation of simplified screening guidelines,
   which were integrated in the LDF regulation. In its last two years of implementation, the project invested in
   the development of environmental and social codes of practice and related training materials that can be
   rolled out at the district level and be used beyond the project. The LDF working was expanded at the district
   level to include an environmental expert.

   The project contributed to increasing the LDF benefits for ethnic minority groups. The PIU prepared an
   Indigenous People (Ethnic Minorities) Framework, with focus on the Kazakh and Duha people living,
   respectively, in the western and northern parts of the country. Due to their language, customs, and lifestyle,
   these communities faced a risk of exclusion from the prioritization of the LDF investments. The PIU
   implemented tailored capacity-building and outreach activities for these communities. As a result,
   Tsagaannuur district successfully met the APA requirement in 2023 and received a PBG for 2024 LDF
   financing, which will be used for a mobile kindergarten to benefit both tribes of the Duha people.




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project complied with World Bank procurement policies and procedures. The PIU retained a capable
  procurement specialist throughout project implementation. Procurement under the LDF followed
  Government of Mongolia procedures and the PIU conducted regular due diligence reviews to ensure that
  required goods and small works were procured under project-financed subprojects with PBGs in
  accordance with the public procurement legislation under local government ownership. The same due
  diligence was regularly conducted at the province level by the province finance departments..

  The previous project (phase 2) had motivated the Public Procurement Law of 2012 that introduced the
  Community Participatory Method of procurement, which allows citizens to bid on ‘very small value works
  contracts’ as a community group without being established as a legal entity. The project found that
  awareness of this possibility among citizens was low, and skills required for such small works, which do not
  require special licenses, was limited. The project recommended investing in local citizens’ skills for
  traditional crafts and labor, which would help increase local incomes.

  Financial management

  In the early stages of project implementation, FM performance was uneven. Key challenges related to
  delayed submission of interim financial reports (IFRs), Statements of Expenditures (SOEs), and lack of
  capacity at the PIU and local levels. A recurring issue was related to poor quality of primary documents
  and periodic financial reporting by the LPOs to the PIU for accounting of project activities carried out
  locally. In 2018, the PIU recruited an FM specialist, who was retained through project closing. Given the
  nature of project activities, many small transactions occurred in rural areas, leading to extensive
  reconciliation work between local project bank accounts and the main project Designated Accounts and
  operating accounts. Due to the high workload, the PIU assigned a team assistant to support the project FM
  specialist which helped significantly in speeding up the reconciliation work and outreach to the LPOs. FM
  training sessions for the LPOs organized by the PIU also significantly helped in improving the quality of the
  local FM work. The PIU’s fiduciary performance gradually improved with the continuous support from the
  World Bank and timely submission of project financial reports became a norm. All annual audited financial
  statements were submitted on time to the World Bank and had unqualified opinions.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR reports climate resilience as a positive impact of some subprojects, according to an assessment
  of the LDF’S experience in supporting climate and disaster risk resilience at the district level, carried out in
  2023. A review of investments in eight soums (across four aimags) indicated that between 7.4 percent and
  20.4 percent of the LDF financing is invested in subprojects that support climate resilience (e.g., water
  storage, fodder reserves, animal health). The assessment also concluded that a more deliberate inclusion
  of climate resilience indicators, and clarification of eligible activities in this area in the LDF regulation, could
  further strengthen the impact of the program as a mechanism to support local adaptation.

  Due to the project experience, the MoF extracted lessons on how to ensure a fairer allocation of transfers
  across rural areas. With the introduction of the Livestock Head Tax in 2021, the LDF mechanism was

                                                                                                        Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



   chosen to manage and program these tax revenues on behalf of the herder communities from which the
   taxes were collected.



 d. Other
    ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                       IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
 Outcome                          Satisfactory              Satisfactory

 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory              Satisfactory

 Quality of M&E                   Substantial               Substantial

 Quality of ICR                   ---                       Substantial


12. Lessons

The following are some relevant lessons presented in the ICR with some language adjusted by IEG:

When specific capacity building activities are targeted as identified in needs assessments,
this can contribute to effective learning by the government officials. In this project capacity
building activities were linked to the results of the APA scoring exercise, with also served to identify
needs among officials, so that the training and the technical assistance was targeted for the officials
of the districts and sub-districts that most needed them, in specific areas.

Predictability and consistency of local transfers may contribute to enhanced commitment of
local authorities and citizens. The LDF’s sources of finance, since 2013, are linked to international
commodity prices susceptible to wide fluctuations based on forces outside the Government's control,
which exposes programs such as the LDF to levels of unpredictability that can undermine the
relevance of the fund to local planners and credibility to local citizens.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well structured and clearly presents important information about the project, giving a good picture
with plenty of details and insights. The efficiency section is particularly insightful, presenting a detailed analysis.


                                                                                                        Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MN Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)



The evidence of results is clearly presented, despite the amount of information and all the changes in the
8 restructurings. The ICR is results-oriented. The discussion on achievements is adequately balanced between
reporting on the achievement of outcome indicators and what the project achieved on the ground. It provides
good coverage of the implementation experience, presenting the project in its context of being the third phase
of a 3-project program (the ToC of the whole program is also presented). The lessons extracted are clear.
They appropriately respond to the key issues and are linked to the narrative and ratings presented in the
report. The report is consistent and presents a logical linking and integration of its various parts.

The ICR is longer than what the guidelines (~15 pages) state.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
