     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024184

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145533                                    Contaminated Site Management Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A0193                                   31-Dec-2021                                         14,280,851.59

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Apr-2015                                30-Nov-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           15,000,000.00                                    15,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            14,280,851.59                                    14,280,851.59

 Actual                                        14,280,851.59                                    14,280,851.59




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Alejandra Eguiluz          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the Grant Agreement (TF0A0193) under Schedule 1,
   page 5, is “to improve the country's capacity for managing site contamination and demonstrate
   environmentally sound identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with persistent organic pollutants
   (POPs) and other hazardous chemicals”. This formulation is identical to the one in the PAD (PAD938, page
   12).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



   The PDO will be parsed, for the purposes of this review, as follows:

         To improve the country's capacity for managing site contamination.

         To demonstrate environmentally sound identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with persistent
          organic pollutants (POPs) and other hazardous chemicals.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Capacity Development for Prevention and Control of Site Contamination (Total cost at
   appraisal:US$21.836 million, of which US$8.22 million Global Environment Fund (GEF) grant; Actual cost:
   US$24.04 million, of which US$10.42 million GEF grant). This component would support activities related to
   (i) the development of technical guidelines, policy recommendations, and financing options for contaminated
   site cleanup; (ii) knowledge sharing events, and training and awareness raising activities in support of
   prevention and control of site contamination; (iii) development of management tools, such as a national
   database of POPs-contaminated sites, feasibility studies, and environmental warning systems; and (iv)
   other technical assistance activities.

   Component 2: Cleanup Demonstrations of Sites Contaminated with POPs and Other Hazardous
   Chemicals (Total cost at appraisal: US$50.00 of which US$6.03 million GEF grant; Actual cost: US$24.91
   million, of which US$3.73 million GEF grant). This component would support activities related to the cleanup
   of up to 6 sites contaminated with persistent organic pollutants (POPs) and other hazardous chemicals
   located in the provinces of Chongqing (sites of Ganshui and Jingkou), Liaoning (Northeast Pharmaceutical
   Group site), and Guangdong (site of Qingyuan). The activities were to be carried out through a series of site
   investigations, risk assessments to determine remediation goals, tailored remediation programs,
   environmental and social management plans, and public consultations and information disclosure.

   Component 3: Project Management (Total cost at appraisal: US$3.16 million, of which US$0.75 million
   GEF grant; Actual cost: US$3.26 million, of which US$0.85 million GEF grant). This component would
   support incremental operating costs associated with project management and day-to-day project
   implementation, procurement and financial management, and environmental and social safeguards
   functions carried out by the Project Management Units (PMU), including coordination and collaboration
   activities among national and local government agencies, nongovernmental agencies, and private sector
   actors (site owners, polluters or site redevelopers).

   Changes to components

   At the second restructuring the following changes in components took place:

   Under component 1: (i) the introduction of risk management action plans for each contaminated site
   management process and a cross-sectoral information platform to facilitate decision-making; a study on

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



  investigation, risk assessment and remediation techniques for sites contaminated with chlorinated paraffin;
  a study on odor investigation and control in contaminated sites; and technical guidelines for using
  specialized methods to screen dioxins in soil; (ii) a study on protection and safe use of contaminated
  agricultural land; a study on design and application of risk management and control technology for land
  reclamation; and (iii) additional knowledge sharing activities such as project communication and publication
  services. New activities under Component 2 involved additional measures in support of the cleanup
  activities at the Chongqing Jingkou site.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. At appraisal, the total project cost was estimated at US$ 75.0 million, of which US$ 15 million
  GEF grant. The revised total project cost was US$ 52.21 million, of which 14.28 million GEF grant. The
  actual project cost was US$ 47.2, of which GEF grant of US$14.28 million. The actual GEF cost represents
  95% of the initial GEF amount.

  Financing. The Project was financed with a GEF grant of US$ 15.00 million (TF0A0193).

  Borrower contribution. At appraisal, the planned borrower contribution was US$ 50.00 million. The actual
  borrower contribution was US$ 32.92 million. The contribution was reduced at the second restructuring,
  when funds were reduced from component 2, to which borrower funding was associated.

  Dates

  The project was approved in April 2015 and became effective in Sept 2015. The mid-term Review took
  place in October 2018. The original closing was in December 2021 and the actual closing took place in
  November 2023.

  The project underwent two Level-II restructuring processes. The initial understanding of the concentrations
  and extent of POPs soil contamination at some of the sites turned out to be insufficient during the actual site
  remediation process. Further investigations were needed at these sites, requiring a more detailed diagnostic
  and additional time for completion. Additionally, as a consequence, some sites withdrew from the process.

        The first restructuring took place in December 2021 (RES48719), with the purpose of extending the
          closing date by 15 months, from December 31, 2021, to March 31, 2023.
        The second restructuring took place in March 2023 (RES54834), and comprised the following
          changes: a second extension of the project closing date by 6 months, until November 30, 2023; the
          reallocation of some of the undisbursed amount US$3 million from the grant between components,
          due to the withdrawal of 2 sites from the project. The disbursement estimates for the remaining grant
          amount as well as the Grant Agreement were revised accordingly. One additional intermediate
          outcome indicator was added to the Results Framework (“Information platform for contaminated site
          management and redevelopment at the local level”) with an end-target of having the platform
          established and functional by project closing. The withdrawal of the 2 sites (component 2) also had
          the consequence of the borrower's contribution being reduced from US$ 50 million to US$ 32.52
          million.




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



   A split evaluation is not undertaken, as there were no significant changes to the PDO or the PDO-related
   indicators and no significant reduction of targets during the restructurings.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at appraisal

China’s rapid industrial transformation over the past four decades has generated many economic benefits
while at the same time contributing to environmental pollution and degradation, impacting the quality of soil,
air, and water, with soil pollution and posing serious public health and environmental risks and an obstacle
to further urban and rural economic development. By the early 2000s, soil pollution had begun
contaminating the food chain with heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), solvents, fertilizers,
pesticides, and other organic contaminants, which were also polluting groundwater and surface waters. In
2001, China signed onto the Stockholm Convention on the elimination of POPs and aimed efforts at
improving the legal and regulatory framework and prioritized the development of remediation technologies
for contaminated sites. The GoC’s vision was to have a national management system in place for soil
protection by 2020, along with localized action on contaminated site management that would lead to a
marked improvement in the country’s soil quality. An amendment to the country’s Environmental Protection
Law was passed in 2015, establishing environmental protection as a top national priority, with a focus on
local government enforcement.

However, several factors were hindering widespread effective management of contaminated sites in China,
at the following levels: the legal and regulatory framework, the availability of public data and the
management capacity. There were also technology and funding constraints. The project sought to
introduce international experience of a risk-based approach, to demonstrate an environmentally and
socially sound management process for the cleanup of sites contaminated with POPs and other toxic
chemicals. Under the risk-based remediation approach, an environmental and human health risk
assessment would be carried out to determine the need for removal and/or remedial action, to what extent,
and in which locations (depending on the future use of the site). The intent was for the technical and
managerial experience gained from the identification and cleanup demonstrations of POPs-contaminated
sites to be disseminated nationwide, thereby contributing to the country’s ongoing efforts to address site
contamination and comply with the Stockholm Convention.

Consistency with Country Strategy

The Project Development Objective (PDO) was consistent with China’s political vision and its strategy to
improve the legal and regulatory framework, prioritize the development of remediation technologies for
contaminated sites. In this context, China had signed the Stockholm Convention on the elimination of POPs
and had officially enacted it. The National Implementation Plan (NIP) for POPs Reduction and Elimination
was released in 2007, including a set of objectives for improving the legal and regulatory framework, and
prioritized the development of remediation technologies for contaminated sites. A series of national policies
and programs were launched to promote soil protection and environmentally sound management of
contaminated sites. The GoC’s vision was to have a national management system in place for soil
protection by 2020, along with localized action on contaminated site management that would lead to a

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



marked improvement in the country’s soil quality. An amendment to the country’s Environmental Protection
Law was passed in 2015, establishing environmental protection as a top national priority, with a focus on
local government enforcement.

At closure, the project’s PDO remained equally relevant to China’s latest (the 14th) Plan on National
Economic and Social Development (2021–2025). Chapter 38 of the 14th plan asserts the country’s
intentions to promote the management, control, and restoration of contaminated farmland and construction
land, and emphasizes precise and systematic pollution management, coordination in reducing pollution and
carbon emissions, continuous improvement to air and water quality, and effective management of soil
pollution risks (ICR, page 12).

Consistency with Bank strategy

The project’s objectives remained highly relevant to the World Bank Country Partnership Framework for
China (FY 2020–25, Report No. 117875-CN). The project’s efforts to reduce hazardous waste while
strengthening the country’s management capacity for prevention and control of soil pollution in the long run
contributed under Engagement Area 2: “Promoting greener development,” namely Objective 2.2: “Reducing
Air, Soil, Water, and Marine Plastic Pollution.” Furthermore, by materially reducing China’s public exposure
to contaminated land and increasing access to reliable and accurate environmental information, the PDO
also remained consistent with the World Bank Group’s mission of ending extreme poverty and boosting
prosperity on a livable planet, and the UN Sustainable Development Goals, namely SDG 15 – Life on Land,
SDG 9 – Sustainable Industrialization, and SDG 3 – Good Health and Well-being.

The project’s PDO remained consistent with the objectives of the Stockholm convention (the GEF is the
financial mechanism used by countries to undertake interventions towards the convention’s goals). Among
these, more specifically: “taking measures to ensure that POPs wastes are managed and disposed of in an
environmentally sound manner; developing strategies for identifying sites contaminated by POPs”
(https://www.thegef.org/partners/conventions).

Previous Bank experience

At appraisal, the World Bank counted on extensive experience working with other countries on site cleanup
(Azerbaijan, India, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Montenegro etc.) and lessons learned from these projects were
incorporated into the project design. In China, two POPs demonstration projects supported by the World
Bank and funded through the GEF had been completed, involving a cleanup of two chlordane and mirex
production sites in Jiangsu. These two GEF-funded projects also provided valuable lessons that were
incorporated in the project (PAD, page 17).

PDO level. The PDO, “to improve the country's capacity for managing site contamination and demonstrate
environmentally sound identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with persistent organic pollutants
(POPs) and other hazardous chemicals”, is pitched at output and intermediary outcome level. The first part
of the PDO (achievement of greater management capacity) is a means to a more ultimate outcome of a
sustained reduction in contamination levels and improved public health. The second part of the PDO
(demonstration of sound identification and cleanup) refers to obtaining concrete demonstrative examples
that also contribute to the improved capacity and are pitched at output level.

Given the alignment of the PDO with the World Bank and country strategies and the project’s clear
rationale, the relevance is rated High.


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the country's capacity for managing site contamination.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC)

                             The PAD did not include an explicit ToR, but the ICR (page 8) presented one as follows: the activities aiming
                             at developing technical guidelines and policies, training on awareness raising and supporting soil pollution
                             prevention and control, as well as developing management tools for contaminated site control on POPs
                             (activities) are expected to lead to a set of guidelines (output), the policy recommendations (output), training
                             modules and courses (output), and s set of management tools and the national database (outputs). These
                             outputs were expected to lead to improved capacity for managing the contaminated sites (outcome, Objective
                             1). The longer term impacts were expected to be improved environmental and human health, sustainable
                             urban (re)development and green growth trajectory in China.

                             There is a gap in the logical chain in the underlying assumption that “elaborated or issued” guidelines, policies
                             and tools would automatically lead to improved management capacity. This gap could have been addressed
                             by adding indicators reflecting the increased use of the new guidelines and policies and/or other measures of
                             improved capacity, to better bridge the gap between the new available policies and guidelines and the change
                             in behavior.

                             Outputs

                                        10 selected priority technical guidelines (TG) and policy recommendations (PRs) for prevention and
                                         control of site contamination at the national and local levels were issued and 25 developed. The target
                                         did not specify the expected number of technical guidelines and policy recommendations; “Selected
                                         priority technical guidelines (TG) and policy recommendations (PRs) for prevention and control of site
                                         contamination at the national and local levels developed or issued”. It is thus not possible to assess to
                                         what degree the target has been achieved.
                                        27 Training materials published and on-line training courses integrated into MEP staff training system.
                                         The target was only “Training materials published and online training courses integrated into the staff
                                         training system of MEP” and did not specify the number of materials or courses that would be
                                         expected to materialize. It is therefore unclear to what degree the target has been achieved.
                                        22,518 people were trained on prevention and control of site contamination, of which 20,550 within the
                                         central government, 470 in Liaoning, and 1,498 in Chongqing. The target was only “as per annual

                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



         training plans” and did not specify the targeted number of trainings or people trained. It is therefore
         unclear to what degree the target has been achieved.
        The database that was created with the data from the remediation sites is integrated into the national
         contaminated land management database, which is fully operational, achieving the target to have the
         database integrated into the national contaminated land management database.
        As part of a public awareness campaign, six science films and other promotional videos and materials
         were produced. The distribution and outreach of these are unclear. Furthermore, as part of the same
         campaign, a science education center was established. It is unclear as to what degree the target of
         “having a public awareness campaign successfully implemented” was achieved.
        A feasibility Study for Knowledge and Remediation Center in Chongqing was completed, achieving the
         target of having completed a feasibility study.
        Regional Soil and Groundwater Contamination Prevention and Warning System at the Changshou
         Industrial Park was established, partly achieving the target to have a warning system established and
         functional.

Outcomes

      A national database of POPs contaminated sites was established and operational, achieving the
         target of having an operational national database. The ICR reports that the National Database has
         been integrated in the national information system hosted and managed by MEE.

The indicators lack specificity, as they do not present quantifiable targets. Furthermore, they do not specify
the types of guidelines, policy recommendations, or trainings that are expected. In addition, the Results
Framework lacked relevant indicators at the outcome level to measure the changes in the working practices
on the new approach/response/management to site contamination that the project aimed to promote.

The lack of quantified targets makes it impossible to assess the level of project achievement compared to
targets.

For the indicator regarding the national database, considering that no database existed before the project it
would have been an adequate indicator to measure improved levels of transparency, coordination, and
collaboration among stakeholders, and thus more effective management and remediation of contaminated
sites. However, without any indicators to measure this, it is not possible to assess the degree of achievement.
The operational database was meant to provide: (i) centralizing of the information and provision of a
comprehensive repository of data on contaminated sites, including their locations, contamination levels, and
remediation status; (ii) making data accessible; providing easy access to vital information for government
agencies, facilitating informed decision-making and strategic planning; (iii) Allowing for continuous monitoring
of contamination trends and the effectiveness of remediation efforts, helping to identify emerging issues and
areas requiring attention; (iv) Resource Allocation: Assisting in prioritizing sites for remediation based on risk
assessments and contamination severity, ensuring that resources are allocated efficiently and effectively.
However, how and to what degree the database is used and how the usage changes practices have not been
measured or documented, as no relevant indicators at outcome level were identified.

Given there is insufficient information on how the relevant institutions have transformed in terms of improved
capacity for managing site contamination, Objective 1 is rated Modest due to a lack of evidence.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To demonstrate environmentally sound identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with persistent
organic pollutants (POPs) and other hazardous chemicals

Rationale
The theory of change that applies to Objective 2 is the following:

The activities regarding the identification and selection of up to 6 sites and the definition of the suitable
remediation technology and processes for each site (activities) were expected to lead to soil remediation for
those sites (output). This output was expected to lead to objective 2 of the PDO: demonstrating
environmentally sound identification and clean-up of sites contaminated with POPs and other hazardous
chemicals.

The ToC contains some gaps. The concept of “ environmentally sound” is not defined. Furthermore, the ToC
is lacking relevant outcomes to clarify what kind of changes would be expected to happen following the
demonstration activities, linking the learning experience derived from the sites to the new practices that would
be incorporated at national level. The measurement of how this would be assessed is also missing;
appropriate indicators at outcome level that reflect and measure this outcome are missing. The question of
attribution is difficult to assess, given the gaps in the ToC.

Outputs

      423,388.04 metric tons of POPs & POPs waste were destroyed, disposed of or contained, of which
       8,500 in Chongqing, 45,000 in Liaoning, and 370,000 in Qingyuan, exceeding the target of 79,000
       metric tons.
      191,575 people benefited from the site cleanups, of which 8,660 in Chongqing (4,330 or 50%
       females), 155,800 in Liaoning (77,900 or 50% females), and 27,115 in Qingyuan (13,557 or 50%
       females), exceeding the target of 8,100 people.

The reasons behind these enormous differences in targets and achievements (achievements of waste
destroyed are more than five times the target, and the number of beneficiaries is more than 23 times the
target) are not outlined in the ICR. This may be an indication of poor planning and targeting.

The remediation site of Qingyuan was added during implementation. It was one of the largest electronic
waste dismantling and recycling centers in the country. This resulted in a large amount of dismantled waste
that had accumulated. The estimation of this output at appraisal was based on a set of sites, but a few were
dropped and others added during implementation.

Outcome:




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)




                                  8.6471 ha of contaminated land has been managed or dump sites closed under the project, exceeding
                                    the target of 5.20 ha.

                            The final surface intervened is higher than expected, while the number of sites is lower (4 instead of the
                            expected 6). An explanation for how the lower number of sites is not negatively affecting efficacy is missing in
                            the ICR (for instance, that the remediation processes were the same for the sites withdrawn than for the ones
                            that remained, therefore not hampering the demonstration effect).

                            The number of beneficiaries is directly linked to the risk-based approach that is at the core of the intervention,
                            used to manage risks of exposure of groups of people depending on their use of the site. Although improved
                            health is not directly measurable after clean up, it is plausible that the site remediation will have a positive
                            effect on people’s health.

                            While the RF lacked indicators to measure sound identification of contaminated sites and improved
                            identification protocols, the ICR refers to identification guidelines and identification training. It would have
                            been useful, however, in order to demonstrate and measure the achievement of this part of the project (sound
                            identification of contaminated sites), to have had both appropriate indicators and additional information in the
                            ICR to show how identification protocols were strengthened and used.

                            The high achievement of the outputs (considerably higher than expected) led to a larger than expected
                            surface area cleaned (outcome). This is due in part to the fact the specific sites and their remediation surface
                            was unknown at the moment of appraisal, and the addition of sites with extensive areas of waste during
                            implementation. The ICR acknowledges that the difference between the original and end-targets can be
                            partially explained by the fact that these targets were conservative estimates at the time of project preparation
                            and more accurate figures were expected during implementation based on more detailed site investigations.
                            The achievement of Objective 2 is therefore rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall rating of Efficacy is Substantial with moderate shortcomings, as Objective 1 is only Modestly
                            achieved while Objective 2 was substantially achieved.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial




                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

The ex-ante economic efficiency analysis presented in the PAD (page 65) focused on component 2, as that was
the component that was most appropriate for a cost-benefit analysis and it represented 65% of the project
budget. The analysis was applied to the 4 sites that seemed at the time more likely to participate. The EIRR for
the 4 sites were the following: 8.7% (Nepharm), 29.2% (Sychem), 35.7% (Jingkou) and 55.2% (Ganshui). The
project costs used in the economic analysis included the actual remediation costs only. The project benefits
used included health benefits and incremental land value.

The ex-post analysis takes into account that during implementation, one site (Shenyang Chemical Plant) was
dropped and Qingyuan Electronic Waste Disassembly Site added. The cost-benefit analysis does not apply to
the Qingyuan Electronic Waste Disassembly Site as it does not generate much health benefit (few people live
close by), and the treated land value is difficult to quantify for its possible use as a public park. The result is that
3 sites remain the same as at appraisal and they are subject to the comparison of the ex-ante and ex-post cost-
benefit analysis. The results for the three comparable sites, at project completion, are the following: Nepharm
13.9%, Jingkou 67% and Ganshui 42.7%. For the case of Ganshui the ICR has taken the percentage proposed
in the PAD in the case that the remediation treatment did not involve a cement kiln plant. However, the PAD
presented an alternative cost-benefit analysis in case a cement kiln plant was involved. As this happened to be
the case during implementation, it is the EIRR for that scenario that is taken in this assessment as the reference
for comparison.

For two of the three compared EIRR, the analysis at closure yields higher results (by 5.1% higher for Nepharm
and by 31.3% higher for Jingkou) and lower for Ganshui (by 12.5%). Overall, the ex-post analysis yields higher
results than what was expected, with the caveat of having at closure only 3 sites for which the comparison can
be undertaken, instead of the initial 6 planned at appraisal.

Other operational and administrative factors reported in the ICR as affecting efficiency:

      The project underwent a 23-month extension.

      The land clearing activities carried out in Qingyuan were stalled because lengthier consultations were
       needed with local villagers. This affected the construction progress and provoked delays. Implementation
       delays were also caused by (i) earlier financial and procurement issues and slow progress with
       identification of demonstration sites and disbursements; (ii) the COVID pandemic.
      The extensive experience of the central PMU (FECO) with project implementation was a key factor for
       project efficiency. It also served as National Coordination Group for the Implementation of the Stockholm
       Convention and maintained close contact with all stakeholders, facilitating cross-pollination between the
       national and provincial levels.

The results presented in the economic analysis and additional complementary factors justify a rating of
Substantial Efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                          Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

High Relevance, Substantial Efficacy and Substantial Efficiency yield Moderately Satisfactory rating for Overall
Outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment risk There is a risk that the government may drop the remediation of the sites’
contamination as a priority. Although the demonstrative objective has been achieved (objective 2), if the risk
materializes, the efforts would not be maintained to expand the remediation intervention to other sites
Although currently this is a small risk, given the policies and commitments in place (14th Five- Year Plan
2021–2025), there is some uncertainty beyond 2025, as the new Five-year Plan is not yet published and the
priorities are not revealed.

Environmental risk There are two potential environmental risks: (i) that despite the remediation efforts,
some levels of contamination remain; (ii) that during the remediation treatment some pollutants end up
spreading outside the treatment areas and pose a health hazard for the technicians in the site and environing
communities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design took into account the lessons learned from similar projects in other countries and from
  projects in China that had benefitted from GEF funds. The lessons were laid out in the PAD (page 17).

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



  For instance, the lesson regarding how it is important “to foresee unexpected events, financially and
  technically, as they nearly always occur during cleanup operations”, translated into anticipating the
  possibility of having to use a different remediation strategy for one of the sites, which is a risk that actually
  materialized for the case of Gushian. Due to this lesson, a cost-benefit analysis was calculated in case of
  materialization of this eventuality.

  The risk assessment was comprehensive, and the mitigation measures adequate, such as, for instance,
  the need for a strong central PMU that would ensure stakeholder coordination and make up for the lack
  of capacity identified at the level of the two local PMUs.

  The PDO is pitched at output/intermediary outcome level. The Results Framework has important
  shortcomings: the indicators identified at PDO-level were pitched at output level and were not specific nor
  measurable (type of materials was not specified and quantified targets were not identified). The RF fails
  to reflect the project’s results at outcome level, like e.g., measurements of improved capacity and
  measurements of decreased pollution levels. The PAD stated that 4 of the 6 sites were more likely to
  participate (page 63), which points at a possible overestimation of the target at appraisal, as the reality
  during implementation was that 4 sites indeed remained in the project.

  While important aspects of Quality-at-Entry were in place, shortcomings related to lack of specified target
  values and lack of relevant outcome indicators in the Results framework warrant Quality-at-Entry rating of
  Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 16 Supervision Missions were undertaken throughout the life of the project. They were held twice a year
 throughout the project life, except for the first and last year of implementation. Implementation Progress
 remained Moderately Satisfactory throughout most of the project life on account of delays in procurement
 and other activities – mainly related to Component 2, slow disbursement, and limited institutional capacity.
 There was a notable drop in ratings in 2021 when it became clear that there was insufficient time remaining
 to finalize the demonstration sites within the remaining project life. The restructuring was processed to
 extend the project life and allow for those activities to be completed toward achievement of the PDO. The
 team reacted to the delays in implementation during the first year of the project, caused by weak
 management capacity and slow disbursement procedures, and recruited technical experts to support the
 PMU and offering relevant trainings.

 The MTR took place in Dec 2018, and there was agreement on the withdrawal of the Shenyang Chemical
 Plant from the project. However, this was not reflected in the first restructuring of 2021, to give enough time
 to identify new sites (to replace the Shenyang Chemical Plant and 2 more sites still pending
 identification). It was in the second restructuring of 2023 that the final group of sites was reflected.




                                                                                                        Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



 The central PMU demonstrated commitment and autonomy, from hiring of consultants/international experts
 to playing a key role in integration and collaboration with and between the two provincial PMUs and the
 Bank.

 A shortcoming is that the team did not take the opportunity, at either of the restructuring occasions, to
 address the shortcomings in the design of the RF to add concrete targets and more adequate indicators to
 better reflect the improved capacity so that they would be measurable and comparable against a plan. The
 ICR acknowledges that the difference between the original and end-targets is explained by the fact that
 these targets were conservative estimates at the time of project preparation and more accurate figures
 were expected during implementation based on more detailed site investigations. However, the targets
 were not updated. Supervision is hence rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO, “to improve the country's capacity for managing site contamination and demonstrate
 environmentally sound identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with persistent organic pollutants
 (POPs) and other hazardous chemicals”, is pitched at intermediary outcome and outcome level. The first
 part of the PDO (achievement of greater management capacity) is a means to a more ultimate outcome of
 a sustained reduction in contamination levels and improved public health. The second part of the PDO
 (demonstration of sound identification and cleanup) refers to obtaining concrete demonstrative examples
 that also contribute to the improved capacity and are pitched at output level.

 The RF does not include output level indicators that are specific (they do not have target values) and the
 indicators identified at outcome-level mainly represent outputs. More adequate indicators showing how the
 practitioners were making use of the new learned techniques are missing, in order to assess improved
 capacity. The progress toward achieving the PDO was to be monitored and collected by the national PMU
 and the other two local PMUs, from project beneficiaries, stakeholders and contractors. Additional studies
 were included as optional in case of need, in order to obtain effective data for justifying achievements of
 the PDO. Capacity building on M&E was to be provided to the PMUs as needed. The cost for the M&E
 activities were included in Component 1. A mid-term review was planned for 2018 (PAD, page 57).

 The RF has significant shortcomings in its design in that several of the indicators lack specific and
 quantifiable targets, and expected project outcomes lack appropriate indicators at outcome level. The
 management capacity (Objective 1) lacked indicators to measure use and application of the new
 approaches (guidelines, policies, etc.) and subsequent changes in practice. This causes difficulties in
 measuring project achievements against targets, and in measuring and demonstrating how and to what



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



 degree the project has contributed to its objective to improve the capacity of site contamination
 management.



b. M&E Implementation
  The MTR was conducted as planned (in 2018). The central and provincial/local PMUs conducted regular
  M&E of project implementation, identified and addressed issues, and formulated corrective actions. The
  World Bank provided the necessary training to facilitate smooth oversight, monitoring, and reporting. Data
  on the results indicators were regularly collected by the PMUs from beneficiaries, stakeholders, and
  contractors, and validated by third parties. In addition, a technical support and management team was
  established with domestic and international experts to support the PMUs with the design of activities,
  quality review of results, and environmental and social aspects. The World Bank participated in these
  technical discussions, and brought in additional international experience, as required. The option of
  commissioning additional studies to justify achievements (planned at appraisal if necessary) was not
  used.

  The shortcomings in the design of the RF and its indicators were not corrected during implementation
  (description of indicators including specific targets, inclusion of indicators at outcome level). The ICR
  acknowledges that some targets were conservative estimates at the time of project preparation and more
  accurate figures were expected during implementation based on more detailed site investigations, but
  these were never updated.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings facilitated some adaptation of the activities. For instance, the indicator measuring
  progress on remediation allowed for timely adjustments and changes in strategy, as was the case for the
  Chongqing and Liaoning provinces. The local PMUs collaborated with the central PMU to address
  issues and formulate next steps. This process was embedded in the project design, given the need to
  adjust remediation plans depending on successes or challenges of the remediation testing and trials.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was a Category A – Full Assessment due to the complexity of the targeted contaminated sites
   and the potential environmental and health risks, thereby triggering the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) policies (due to the possibility of chance findings at the
   treated sites during excavation). The Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12) policies were also triggered provisionally, since not all project sites were known at the time of
   appraisal. During implementation, the project did not identify any ethnic minorities, cultural or historical sites,
   either within or in the vicinity of the project sites. However, Involuntary Resettlement was triggered, as there

                                                                                                       Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



  was need for land acquisition at one of the project sites during project implementation (Chongqing Jingkou).
  To ensure the land acquisition was compliant with the relevant national and municipal regulations, under the
  ESMF, the local PMU conducted a due diligence on land use of the site, particularly to resolve the land
  rights issues. A Resettlement Due Diligence Report was prepared as well as an Involuntary Resettlement
  Action Plan, both of which were satisfactory to the World Bank. Throughout project implementation,
  particular attention was paid to the prevention and control of secondary pollution during the remediation
  process, in accordance with the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). Specialized
  agencies were hired to conduct environmental and social impact assessments during site remediation, as
  well as detailed analysis of potential environmental and health risks during construction processes, and
  based on this, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was formulated. A process was
  developed to screen the locations of remediation sites based on environmental and social criteria. The
  measures identified in the ESMP and it related M&E and reporting system had a strong reference value for
  professionals in China’s Contaminated Site remediation field. The full assessment was disclosed on May
  31, 2014, the executive summary of the environmental assessment was disclosed on October, 15, 2014,
  and volumes dedicated to specific sites were disclosed during the life of the project and before works
  began.

  When 10 new activities for on-site pollution prevention were introduced at the second restructuring (March
  2023) the project engaged a third-party expert. Guided by the World Bank’s Environmental and Social
  Framework (ESF), General Guidelines on Environmental Health and Safety, the Office of Export and
  Secure Research Compliance Advisory Note Technical Assistance, and the ESMF for this project, terms of
  reference were developed for the new activities, environmental and social risks were identified, and
  environmental and social impact assessments were conducted to eliminate or mitigate any negative
  impacts.

  The project complied with environmental and social safeguards.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The central PMU had prior experience managing World Bank-financed projects and ensured the correct
  application of procurement policies and procedures. The provincial and local PMUs had more limited
  capacity and experience, which resulted in procurement delays during the first few years of the project.
  The World Bank provided specialized management training during project initiation and throughout
  implementation, and technical experts were enlisted by the PMUs to enhance the PMU’s capacity in
  procurement and contract management. This led to accelerated procurement performance in the later
  stages of implementation.

  Financial management

  The project maintained a stable financial management team that was well versed with the use and
  methods of grant-based funding and managed it in accordance with World Bank requirements. Initial
  delays in disbursement caused by limited capacity at the provincial and local PMUs were overcome
  through frequent coordination with the central PMU. Audit reports were issued annually and found to be


                                                                                                Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



   compliant, with unqualified opinions. The required Interim Financial Reports were generally submitted on
   time and no unusual activity was identified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR reports that as a consequence of the communication of the project’s good experiences to
   legislative bodies in a timely manner throughout implementation, the project contributed to the
   establishment of the Soil Pollution Prevention and Control Law, the establishment of a database of polluted
   sites, a demonstration information management platform, and set the technical standards that
   would support implementation of the new law.



d. Other
   Mobilizing Private Sector Financing

   The project involved the private sector in the remediation process by way of the remediation technology –
   pilots, testing, and implementation – and redevelopment of the sites. Examples of private sector
   interventions include the piloting of treatment technologies in Chongqing real estate for the new residential
   development at Northeast Pharmaceutical Group in Liaoning province. The project has also enabled
   planning for development under a public-private partnership of a knowledge and remediation center in
   Chongqing and supported research on potential financing options (including public-private partnerships)
   and market incentive measures for remediation.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The Efficacy rating is
                                                                                 Substantial, as there are
                                                                                 shortcomings in the evidence
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Moderately Satisfactory    provided for some of the
                                                                                 outcome indicators, and relevant
                                                                                 indicators to measure outcome
                                                                                 is lacking.
                                                                                 There are shortcomings at entry
                                                                                 level regarding the lack of target
                                                                                 values and relevant indicators.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 These shortcomings were not
                                                                                 addressed during supervision or
                                                                                 at restructurings.
                                                                                 There were significant
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Modest                     shortcomings in the Results
                                                                                 Framework (lack of target values


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



                                                                                   and lack of relevant outcome
                                                                                   indicators) leading to difficulties
                                                                                   in measuring and demonstrating
                                                                                   expected project outcomes.
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have been drawn from IEG:

When indicators to measure behavioral changes and increased performance of public
officials are lacking it is not possible to measure to what degree performance is changing, in
order to assess the improved management capacity of the institutions. In this project,
indicators in the RF measured the production and availability of guidelines, policies and training
materials, but failed to measure the changes in behavior (the applied new skills) that would better
show the changes in the capacity among officials and other stakeholders, regarding the approach of
risk-based analysis for site remediation.

When target values are lacking in the Results Framework, it is not possible to assess project
success as the degree of project achievement cannot be compared to target values. In this
project, relevant target values for output indicators were not set and neither updated during
implementation. This made it not possible to assess project achievement against targets.

The following lessons from the ICR (rephrased) are considered particularly relevant:

Balancing technical, economic, and social dimensions of the project can increase the
probability of success of remediation approaches. The remediation of contaminated sites is a
complex environmental issue that requires the consideration of the trade-offs. The implementation of
stakeholder engagement appeared essential to ensure timely remediation and build trust within the
population toward the remediation plan. Similarly, the ESMP has proven an efficient instrument to
effectively avoid or mitigate potential social conflicts.

Ongoing audits and controls during the remediation process can contribute to building a
demonstration effect. It was in the pilot nature of this project to allow for flexibility and changes in
the technical approaches selected for site remediation. Due to the controls on the counterpart side
the inspections revealed important data (on levels of contamination, for instance) that allowed for
reconsidering the approaches and to learn from the process.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)



The ICR is well structured, parses the PDO logically and describes the components adequately. The report is
consistent and presents a logical linking and integration of its various parts. The sections on relevance and
efficiency are complete. The ICR provides good coverage of the implementation experience. It is focused on
results and provides substantial information beyond the indicators to provide a complete picture on the project's
results. The ICR’s lessons are useful. The team provided written responses to IEG’s questions to supplement
the information provided in the ICR.

There are some shortcomings regarding the discussion on achievements, which failed to identify shortcomings
in lacking target values and relevant outcome level indicators. Overall, the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
