     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024217

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P127676                                    HYDROMET 2

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Russian Federation                         Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82910                                 31-Dec-2018                                          54,851,673.11

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Sep-2013                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           60,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            54,851,673.11                                                0.00

 Actual                                        54,851,673.11                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan             Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to assist the Borrower to further enhance its national capacity
   to deliver reliable and timely weather, hydrological and climate information to the Russian public and
   economic sector and to enhance its capacity to integrate into the global system of meteorological services”
   (Loan Agreement, page 6). The PDO was stated in the PAD with a slight modification in its wording, as
   follows: “to further enhance national capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather, hydrological and climate



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



   information to the Russian public and economic sector and enhance Russia's capacity to integrate in the
   global system of meteorological services” (PAD, page 19)

   For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) review, the objective will be
   assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To assist the Borrower to further enhance its national capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather,
   hydrological and climate information to the Russian public and economic sector.

   PDO 2: To assist the Borrower to enhance its capacity to integrate into the global system of meteorological
   services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Original components

   Component A. Strengthening Information Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure and
   systems delivering weather, climate and hydrological data and information (cost at appraisal:
   US$45.40 million; actual cost: US$56.84 million) was to strengthen the ICT infrastructure,
   hydrometeorological products, climate change studies, and data access. There were three sub-
   components:

   Sub-component A1. Strengthening technical capacity for operational hydrometeorological
   forecasting and for research on climate change financed a supercomputer for the Russian Federal
   Service for Hydrometeorology and Environmental Monitoring (Roshydromet), enabling access to data and
   the analysis for weather forecasting and climate studies.

   Sub-component A2. Development of regional data storage and archive systems for improved
   operational user access to Roshydromet information resources financed servers and communication
   infrastructure, databases, and equipment in Roshydromet offices.

   Sub-component A.3. Improvement of Roshydromet’s integrated information and telecommunication
   system aimed at facilitating access to data and would cover modernized communication system, unified
   data collection and dissemination; and improved access to data.

   Component B. Modernization of observation networks (cost at appraisal: US$73.60 million; actual
   cost: US$90.46 million) was to modernize the Roshydromet’s observation networks, overall and
   specifically in the Volga river basin. There were four sub-components:




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



  Sub-component B1. Improvement of meteorological observation networks was to finance: (i) the
  installation of modern automatic weather stations (AWSs) and laboratories for meteorological networks; (ii)
  modernization of agro and marine hydrometeorological networks.

  Sub-component B2. Improvement of upper air observation network was to finance the installation of
  upper air stations in remote locations and strengthen the remote sensing.

  Sub-component B3. Upgrading of regional operational forecasting units was to strengthen satellite
  data reception capacity to obtain meteorological data.

  Sub-component B4. Modernization of hydrological network was to support the improvement of
  hydrological services in the Volga river basin.

  Component C. Institutional and regulatory strengthening, improvement of service delivery to clients,
  and better preparedness for emergencies (cost at appraisal: US$13.95 million; actual cost: US$18.30
  million) aimed at improved performance of Roshydromet service. There were four sub-components:

  Sub-component C1. Roshydromet’s institutional strengthening was to update regulatory and technical
  documents and procedures; develop new costing, budgeting, and asset management; and upgrade regional
  training centers, train staff, and finance study tours.

  Sub-component C2. Improvement of service delivery to clients was to reduce the gap between the
  needs and service provision. The activities would include sociological surveys evaluating Roshydromet
  performance, interaction with mass media, and marketing of the Roshydromet activities.

  Sub-component C3. Improvement of emergency preparedness system would support improved
  interaction with the Ministry of Emergency Situations and other bodies responsible for early warning of
  extreme events. Financing would cover emergency information products and deployment of
  hydrometeorological situational centers.

  Sub-component C4. Strengthening operational capacity, research and development of Roshydromet
  system would support Roshydromet’s scientific potential and include training.

  Component D: Project Management cost at appraisal: US$6.55 million; actual cost: US$9.29 million)
  would finance consultants’ services, equipment, and operating costs.

  Revised Components:

  The components remained unchanged.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$139.5 million, and the actual disbursement was US$174.89
  million.

  Project Financing: The Project was financed by an IBRD loan. The appraisal estimate was US$60.0
  million, and the actual disbursement at closure was US$54.85 million.


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



   Borrower/Recipient contribution: The appraisal amount was US$79.50 million, and the actual
   disbursement at closure was US$120.04 million.

   Project Dates: The Project was approved on September 17, 2013, and became effective on May 8, 2014.
   The MTR review was on December 7, 2016. The Project was restructured twice: (i) on February 21, 2018,
   and (ii) on December 16, 2020. The original closing date was December 31, 2018. The Project was
   extended twice, in total for forty-eight months (or four years), to December 31, 2022, which was the date of
   the Project’s actual closure.

   Restructurings: The project had two restructurings:

   Restructuring 1 (February 2018) involved the following main changes: (i) increase in costs due to the
   Borrower’s additional funding of US$40 million to strengthen activities with costs overruns and implement
   new activities; (ii) a 36-month extension of the closing date from December 31, 2018, to December 31,
   2021; and (iii) related changes to the Results Framework (RF).

   The extension was required for two main reasons:

        i. To complete the implementation of complex and strategic activities under Subcomponent B4
           Modernization of Hydrological Network on Volga River Basin. The technical concept had to be
           revised to minimize the O&M costs and account for new regulations on software acquisition.
       ii. To prepare and implement new activities suggested by Roshydromet as part of the Project’s scale-
           up, including modernization of remote stations in the Arctic region.

   Restructuring 2 (December 2020) involved a Loan Agreement amendment and the following main
   changes: (i) Borrower’s additional funding of US$0.37 million; (ii) a 12-month extension of the closing date
   from December 31, 2021, to December 31, 2022, due to the impact of COVID-19; and (iii) related changes
   to the RF.

   Other changes. On March 19, 2022, the World Bank suspended, and later cancelled, loan disbursements
   of US$5.15 million (or 8.6 percent of the loan), as per Section 7.02(e) of the General Conditions Applicable
   to the Loan Agreements, considering the deteriorating operational environment. As a result, two contracts
   (under Subcomponents A3 and B1) were not signed. However, the work under ongoing contracts
   continued, and savings in counterpart funding were redirected to offset the resulting funding gaps. Also, to
   finalize the activities, the Borrower provided additional funding in the amount of US$0.17 million.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context, and Government Strategies. At Project appraisal, considering the
expected climate change impact on the economy and population, Russia strived to increase national
preparedness for weather, hydrological and climate change events. The 2009 Climate Doctrine of the
Russian Federation stressed that global warming poses a significant challenge to national security. The
2010 Government’s Hydrometeorology and Climate Change Action Strategy to 2030 (Strategy 2030) and
the 10-year plan of its implementation aimed to improve hydrometeorological safety and support greater

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



               international cooperation on climate change, requiring modernization of the national weather, hydrological,
               and environmental monitoring systems. At the same time, the capacity of Roshydromet to provide services
               in Russia and globally was negatively affected by years of underfunding: during the 1990s and early 2000s,
               annual funding covered up to 40 percent of the needs. Investment needs for the priority hydromet
               observation infrastructure were estimated at above US$500 million. Bridging the investment needs gap
               called for a series of projects. The reviewed Project was to continue the efforts made by the World Bank’s
               Russia First National Hydromet Modernization Project (RHM-1).

               At closure, the Project remained aligned with Strategy 2030 and with recent decisions on strengthening
               hydromet services and environmental monitoring, including the following: the 2018, 2020, and 2021
               Amendments to the Federal Law On Hydrometeorological Service; the February 8, 2021 Presidential
               Decree #76 On Implementation of the State Science and Technology Policy in Ecological Development of
               the Russian Federation and Climate Change; and the December 25, 2019 National Plan of Actions of the
               1st Stage of Adaptation to Climate Change to 2022. The Government commitment to climate change action
               was evidenced by its participation in the 2027 Conference of the Parties (COP27) of the United Nations
               Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).

               Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at closure. There was no updated WBG Country
               Strategy at Project closure. The World Bank’s 2016 Russia Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
               highlighted the need to address environmental challenges and climate change, thus reaffirming Project’s
               alignment with the WBG’s strategic view. It stated that climate-related hazards could generate public
               damage and losses costing US$32 billion, an equivalent of 2.1 percent of Russia’s gross domestic product
               (GDP). The World Bank’s most recent strategic document, the 2021–2024 Russia Knowledge Exchange
               Program, stressed Russia’s critical role in global weather and climate modeling and stated that Russia’s
               largest potential contribution to the global public goods agenda, by far, was on climate change.

               Previous sector experience. The reviewed Project was prepared as a follow-up operation on the World
               Bank’s RHM-1 project (P082239, approved in FY2005, completed in FY2013) (ICR, page 7).

               The objectives were pitched at the correct level considering the country needs and capacity. Based on the
               above, relevance of objectives is rated high.

               Due to the deteriorating operational environment in February-March 2022, the World Bank suspended
               access to the loan on the basis of Section 7.02(e) of the General Conditions Applicable to the Loan
               Agreements (the ‘extraordinary situation’ clause).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1

                                                                                                                Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HYDROMET 2 (P127676)




Objective
PDO 1: To assist the Borrower to further enhance its national capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather,
hydrological and climate information to the Russian public and economic sector.

Rationale
There was no theory of change (ToC) in the Project’s PAD because it was not required at that time. Project’s
ToC was prepared for the ICR; it was sound, listed issues to be addressed, as well as constraints, and linked
Project activities, outputs, and intermediate results to the short-term and PDO outcomes. To achieve the two
PDO objectives, the Project supported the following activities: (i) strengthening ICT infrastructure and
systems to deliver weather, climate, and hydrological data; (ii) modernizing observation networks; and (iii)
strengthening institutions and regulations, and improving service delivery and preparedness for emergencies.
The intermediate outcomes were as follows: (i) improved computational power and operational access to
data; (ii) increased density and coverage of observation sites and devices to measure soil moisture and heat;
and (iii) developed and updated regulations and procedures, retraining, improved interface for external users,
and improved quality of service. The achievement of the intermediate outcomes would result in the following
short-term outcomes: (i) increased accuracy and timeliness of weather forecasts; (ii) increased accuracy of
seasonal river flow forecasts; (iii) increased number of users of hydromet data; and (iv) increased satisfaction
of users of hydroment data. The short-term outcomes would support the achievement of the following two
PDO outcomes: (i) enhanced capacity to deliver reliable and timely weather, hydrological, and climate
information; and (ii) enhanced capacity to integrate in the global system of meteorological services.

The ICR’s ToC provided an excellent description of the logic of Project interventions: a clear summary of
activities and outputs; a comprehensive yet succinct description of intermediate results (reflecting how
outputs would be applied to solve the problem); and well-structured short-term outcomes, linked to the PDO
outcomes. The critical assumptions were listed and mapped on the ToC chart; they covered all main risks and
included the following: (i) flexibility of technical solutions to keep up with evolving technologies; (ii) sufficiency
of government funding to sustain O&M costs and retain talent; and (iii) willingness of users to employ
improved data services.

Project efficacy under Objective 1 is assessed using the following indicators (this is the full indicator list):

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes:

1. “Accuracy of warnings on natural hazards, %”. The achievement at closure was 95.8 percent, against the
target of 93 percent and the baseline of 88 percent. The target was exceeded.

2. “Increased level of spatial resolution of weather forecasts with the lead time of up to three days (for large
cities), km”. The achievement at closure was 5 kilometers, against the target of 5 kilometers and the baseline
of 15 kilometers. The target was achieved.

3. “Number of oblast and territorial Roshydromet Centers providing remote client access to archived data”.
The achievement at closure was 10 centers, against the target of 10 centers and the baseline of zero centers.
The target was achieved.

4. “Roshydromet centers providing operational access to observational data and products for internal and
external Roshydromet clients, %”. The achievement at closure was 100 percent, against the target of 100
percent and the baseline of zero. The target was achieved.


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



5. “Increased number of automated observation sites in pilot regions of the North-West of Russia, %”. The
achievement at closure was 92 percent, against the target of 92 percent and the baseline of 83 percent. The
target was achieved.

6. “Availability of modern devices for measurement of soil moisture and heat regime of agricultural lands in
the pilot regions (North Caucasus, West Siberia), % of the total # of stations”. The achievement at closure
was 100 percent, against the target of 80 percent and the baseline of zero. The target was exceeded.

7. “Modernization of upper air observation network, % of the total # of stations”. The achievement at closure
was 100 percent, against the target of 87 percent and the baseline of 64 percent. The target was exceeded.

8. “Reduction of error of water flow data in the Volga River basin, %”. The achievement at closure was 15
percent, against the target of 15 percent and the baseline of 20 percent. The target was reached.

9. “Percentage of the Volga River basin territory corresponding to the minimum required number of
hydrological observation sites, %”. The achievement at closure was 100 percent, against the target of 100
percent and the baseline of 81 percent. The target was reached.

10. “Developed (updated) regulatory, organizational and administrative documents aimed at improving the
organizational, methodological, financial and economic activities of Roshydromet, Number of documents”.
The achievement at closure was 10 documents, against the target of 9 documents and the baseline of zero
documents. The target was exceeded.

11. “Re-training and professional upgrading of specialists from the Roshydromet’s organizations, Number of
people”. The achievement at closure was 11,910 people, against the target of 9,300 people and the baseline
of 169 people. The target was exceeded. Note: the original target for this indicator was 3,550 people; it was
increased to 9,300 people at Restructuring 1 of February 2018.

12. “Number of scientists and specialists who participated in internships in leading universities and agencies
outside Russia, persons per year” (this indicator measured the number of specialists from Roshydromet who
completed internships or secondments in leading institutions of the WMO system). The achievement at
closure was 10 people, against the target of 28 people and the baseline of zero. The target was not reached.

Note: This indicator was dropped at Restructuring 2 in December 2020 due to low achievement: despite a
proactive and repeated outreach by the Roshydromet to relevant institutions, only two specialists had been
able to obtain internships. Therefore, Roshydromet focused on targeted technical training for its staff.
(Restructuring Paper, December 2020, page 7).

13. “Accuracy of warnings on hazardous hydrometeorological events delivered to regional authorities and the
Ministry of Emergency Situations, %”. The achievement at closure was 91 percent, against the target of 89
percent and the baseline of 81 percent. The target was exceeded.

14. “Number of Roshydromet institutions where situation centers are deployed, # of centers”. The
achievement at closure was 126 institutions, against the target of 102 institutions and the baseline of 25
institutions. The target was exceeded.

PDO outcomes:



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



1. “Increased lead times of basic weather forecasts for major Russian administrative centers with reliability
over 70%, hours”. The achievement at closure was 168 hours, against the target of 168 hours and the
baseline of 120 hours. The target was reached.

2. “Increased reliability of forecasts of seasonal water inflow to reservoirs in the Volga River basin, %”. The
achievement at closure was 92 percent, against the target of 85 percent and the baseline of 75 percent. The
target was exceeded.

Note: Based on the Project’s experience, PDO indicators 1 and 2 (above) have been included in the system
of national statistical accounts as official measures of Roshydromet’s performance. (ICR, page 18)

3. “Increased number of Roshydromet sectoral data users, annual increase, %”. The achievement at closure
was 129.1 percent, against the target of 123 percent and the baseline of 100 percent. The target was
exceeded.

4. “Increased satisfaction of users with Roshydromet services, composite index, % from 0 (unsatisfied) to 100
(fully satisfied)”. The achievement at closure was 83 percent, against the target of 80 percent and the
baseline of 65 percent. The target was exceeded.

Rating. The Project achieved or exceeded all its intended Objective 1 results except one IRI (on participation
in internships/secondments in leading WMO institutions), and its efficacy rating is Substantial. The ICR stated
(ICR, page 18) that the achievement of Objective 1 was contingent on improved accuracy of forecasts, which
was to be accomplished through modernization of Roshydromet’s technical and institutional base and
improved access to information. This was comprehensively monitored by the RF at the levels of PDO and
intermediate outcomes, as well as outputs. The validity and sufficiency of the RF indicators measuring the
achievement of Objective 1 was adequate, and the outcomes were attributable to the Project.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To assist the Borrower to enhance its capacity to integrate into the global system of meteorological
services.

Rationale
Please see the discussion of the ToC under Objective 1.

The ICR reported that at approval, no indicators were included in the RF to measure Objective 2 because it
was deemed impossible “to measure Russia’s global hydromet integration that would be truly independent of
its specific hydromet capacity improvements” (ICR, page 18). The ICR measured the achievement of
Objective 2 through the key dimensions of Russia’s hydromet services of high regional and global value
(following the approach in the PAD) (ICR, page 21), specifically:



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 17
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               HYDROMET 2 (P127676)




                                 i. The operation of one global and two regional centers charged with producing daily forecasts
                                    for global and regional weather models and developing global forecasting techniques. This
                                    work was supported by the Project-financed installation of a supercomputer in Roshydromet
                                    (Component A). As a result, a new sub-seasonal version of the global atmosphere model for long-
                                    range predictions was developed, and the first outputs were made public in September 2022 under a
                                    WMO project. In addition, Project-financed hardware and software allowed to produce new global
                                    forecasting models for the Polar Prediction Project (WMO) and other WMO programs, as well as to
                                    provide contributions to the eight-country Consortium on Small-scale Modeling (COSMO) for non-
                                    hydrostatic limited-area atmospheric models. Supported by the Project, Roshydromet’s Moscow hub
                                    met the 2021 WMO members’ compliance criteria.
                                ii. The functioning of the observations networks (reference and upper-air stations in the Global
                                    Climate Observing System (GCOS)), critical for global and regional weather forecasts. Project-
                                    financed modernization of the observation networks and remote weather stations network
                                    (Component B) allowed Roshydromet to establish in 2018, and update in 2022, Russia’s official list of
                                    the Regional Basic Observing Network stations for WMO Regions VI (Europe) and II (Asia), which
                                    were important contributions to regional and global forecasting capabilities.
                               iii. The quality of hydromet services in Central Asia. Project’s investments in new hardware and
                                    software (Component A) strengthened technical capacity of the North EurAsia Climate Center
                                    (NEACC), thereby significantly improving the quality of weather forecast for the region, especially in
                                    the Central Asian countries.

                            The ICR concluded that the Project-financed improvements supported Russia’s enhanced capacity to
                            integrate into the global hydromet system (ICR, page 21).

                            While the RF did not include indicators to measure Objective 2 PDO outcomes, the achievement of several
                            RF targets under Objective 1 effectively constituted pre-requisites for reaching Objective 2. The discussion of
                            the achievement of Objective 2 in the ICR (summarized above) was based on both the achievement of
                            specific RF targets (described as pre-requisites for reaching Objective 2) and the PDO outcome level
                            evidence outside of the RF, triangulating information from these two sources. The evidence was presented
                            clearly, and the arguments were valid.

                            Rating. The Project substantially achieved its intended Objective 2 results, and its efficacy rating is
                            Substantial. The Project-financed installation of the supercomputer, as well as other hardware and software,
                            and modernization of the observation networks enhanced Roshydromet’s modeling capacity and its
                            contribution to global forecasting, thus supporting Roshydromet’s compliance with the WMO requirements
                            and Russia’s integration into the global system of meteorological services.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                              Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



  For Objective 1, the rating for efficacy is Substantial. The Project achieved or exceeded all its intended results
  except one IRI (on participation in internships/secondments in leading WMO institutions).

  For Objective 2, the rating for efficacy is Substantial. Project investments enhanced Roshydromet’s modeling
  capacity, supporting Russia’s integration into the global system of meteorological services.

  Thus, the overall efficacy is rated as Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
a. Economic Analysis:

At appraisal. The economic analysis conducted at appraisal used cost-benefit analysis (CBA) approach and
produced estimates for three scenarios: low, medium, and high. All benefit-cost ratios (BCRs) showed that the
Project was economically viable; they were as follows: 2.5 for low scenario; 4.0 for medium scenario; and 32-39
for high scenario. The main characteristics of each scenario were as follows: (i) low: discount rate was five
percent, time horizon was 20 years, and the benefit considered was reduced economic losses; (ii) medium:
discount rate was eight percent, time horizon was 30 years, and the benefits considered were reduced
economic losses and productivity gains; and (iii) high: discount rate was 12 percent, time horizon was 40 years,
and the benefits considered were reduced economic losses, productivity gains, and benefits to general public.
(ICR, page 22)

At closure. Two sets of calculations were conducted at closure. First, the appraisal CBA approach was
replicated. The BCRs showed that the Project was economically viable; the BCR estimates were as follows: 2.5
for low scenario; 3.9 for medium scenario; and 7-11 for high scenario. The three scenarios were defined the
same way as at appraisal, however, the three types of benefits were slightly different, as follows: (i) reduced
economic losses in the weather-sensitive sectors, such as agriculture and energy; (b) productivity gains
resulting from improved hydromet services; and (c) benefits to the general public, arising from better daily
decisions due to improved weather forecasts. Second, a new CBA analysis was conducted, resulting in the BCR
of eight (pointing to an economically viable project) and using one scenario only, with the time horizon of 20
years (based on stakeholders’ views) and the World Bank’s 2016 guidelines regarding the discount rate (six
percent). The BCR of eight is consistent with similar World Bank projects in other countries (Bangladesh, Sri
Lanka, and Nepal). (ICR, pages 22-23)

The main reason for having similar BCRs at appraisal and closure despite the increased cost of the Project was
the following: (i) the ex-ante analysis assumed that the benefits only occur in the first five project years, and (ii)
the ex-post analysis assumed a gradual take-up of the benefits due to the late installation of new equipment and
a longer time horizon. (ICR, page 23)

Since all BCRs, both at appraisal and at closure, were above one, the Project was economically viable.



                                                                                                        Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



b. Administrative Efficiency

The ICR reported that the Project used implementation arrangements of RHM-1, including the implementation
agency (Roshydromet), the project implementation unit (PIU), and the Project Management Committee (PMC).
Project preparation was funded by RHM-1, and the PIU was fully staffed and directly involved in Project
preparation. The leadership of Roshydromet and the PMC was strong and efficient. The Project was supported
by highly skilled Roshydromet specialists. Legislation and regulatory environment were generally conducive to
the Project. Counterpart funding was reliable. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and financial management were
consistently satisfactory.

However, there were delays in Project implementation, resulting in the extension of its closing for forty-eight
months. The internal reasons included shortcomings in the review and approval of technical reports and
procurement documents, leading to delays in decision-making by the PMC. This was reflected in the Moderately
Unsatisfactory Project performance ratings in 2015–2016 and 2019–2020. In 2017, the decision-making process
was revised, allowing for a significantly accelerated implementation.

External circumstances outside of Project control caused additional delays. The international sanctions imposed
on Russia since 2014 led to prolonged procurement of critical contracts, including a 15-month delay in the hiring
of the systems integrator consultant, whose role was essential due to the adaptive design of the Project and
included coordination of large IT contracts, which were delayed in turn. The new international sanctions imposed
on Russia in 2022 also caused inefficiencies, although procurement was mostly completed at that time.
Separately, COVID-19 caused supply chains’ disruptions and lockdowns, leading to the second project
extension.

On balance, considering the economic viability of the Project, mostly efficient implementation, and proactive
mitigation of the delays, which were mostly caused by external circumstances outside of Project control,
Project’s efficiency rating is Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HYDROMET 2 (P127676)




The overall Relevance of Objectives is rated as High. Efficacy is Substantial, while Efficiency is Substantial.
Thus, the overall outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political. The sanctions imposed on Russia since February-March 2022 created two main risks to Project
outcomes. First, the exit of global vendors and related disruption of supply chains puts the provision of
warranty services and maintenance of the high-value equipment, financed by the Project, at risk. Second, the
sanctions involved a suspension of bilateral and multilateral mechanisms for hydromet data exchange with
Russia, creating constraints for the country to contribute to the global hydromet system.

Financial. Based on past experience, there is a risk that funding of the hydromet services and the O&M
costs of maintaining Project-financed assets by Roshydromet will not be sufficient. This risk was exacerbated
by the sanctions imposed on Russia. (ICR, page 33).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The ICR reported that the Project benefited from the design based on a successful precursor operation,
  RHM-1, including its strategic and robust technical approach; a logical RF; reliable economic justification;
  and strong environmental, social, and fiduciary arrangements. Due to the technical complexity of the
  Project, adaptive design in IT procurement was critically important (as the precursor project
  demonstrated), and a systems integrator was hired for this task, as per a dated covenant. The World
  Bank team was adequately staffed and resourced. The absence of a clearly measurable target for PDO2
  was a methodological shortcoming, however, due to the logical link between PDO1 and PDO2, it was
  possible to use the PDO1 indicators, combined with evidence outside of the RF, to evaluate the
  achievement of PDO2. Project design also benefited from knowledge engagement with global leaders in
  the hydromet sector, including the WMO and the weather services of the United States and United
  Kingdom. (ICR, pages 31-32)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



 The ICR reported that Project supervision was continuous, comprehensive, and proactive. Implementation
 support missions were carried out every six months and included visits to key Project sites across the
 country: in Moscow, Rostov, Vladivostok, Khabarovsk, and St. Petersburg. There were also virtual
 checkups and communication on specific issues. The COVID travel restrictions in 2020–2021 did not have
 a significant impact on Project performance because regular virtual missions and checkups proved to be
 efficient. The team was proactive in identifying activities to accelerate procurement. Supervision benefitted
 from continuity: the task team leaders (TTLs) changed only twice, both times smoothly; and most of the
 team was based in Moscow and maintained good working relationships with the counterparts. The team
 included a lead hydromet specialist, who was in contact with the borrower, enabling timely response on
 complex technical matters. The suspension of disbursements in March 2022 and subsequent suspension
 of missions affected the team’s ability to support the Project, however, the activities necessary to achieve
 the Project objectives were completed. During the final two years of Project implementation, the ISRs’
 Project performance ratings were Moderately Satisfactory, however, they were to be upgraded to
 Satisfactory based on the last mission of October 2021. However, due to the suspension of disbursements,
 the team could not file ISRs or carry out further missions. As a result, the final project performance ratings
 remained Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, page 29 and 32-33).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RF reflected the logic of Project interventions in the PAD, was linked to the PDO and the ToC, and was
 complex yet manageable. The indicators were technical and measured objective results; there was also a
 beneficiary satisfaction indicator. All of the RF indicators were quantitative, time-bound, and attributable to
 the Project. The ICR reported that the PDOs were clearly stated, and the logic behind the theory of change
 was clear and valid. The system of intermediate results indicators adequately captured the contribution of
 project outputs toward outcomes. Monitoring arrangements and data collection methods were integrated
 with Roshydromet’s institutional reporting requirements. The absence of direct indicators for PDO2 was a
 methodological shortcoming; however, it did not hinder the analysis of the achievement of outcomes under
 PDO2 because they were contingent on reaching the PDO1 targets, and evidence outside of the RF was
 available, enabling triangulation of information. (ICR, page 30)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR noted that data management is at the core of Roshydromet’s institutional mandate and that
  Project’s M&E implementation used the experience of the precursor project RHM-1, which had
  demonstrated high level capacity for data collection and analysis. Such capacity was reaffirmed during by
  the reviewed Project and is likely to be sustained after its closing. The RF remained largely unchanged,

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



  except for the following: (i) seven indicator targets were increased at Restructuring 1 in February 2018 to
  reflect the scale-up of activities; and (ii) one nonessential IRI, on participation in internships in leading
  WMO institutions, was dropped at Restructuring 2 in December 2020 due to difficulties with obtaining
  internships. M&E data were collected from the start of the Project, analyzed in a sound manner, as per
  the M&E design and Roshydromet’s data quality standards, and reported in all ISRs. The M&E
  implementation was rated as Satisfactory throughout the Project, except for one supervision cycle in
  2018 when it was Moderately Satisfactory. (ICR, page 30)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR reported that the utilization of the Project’s M&E system was high, as it was fully embedded into
  the Roshydromet’s own public reporting system. The Project’s M&E results were made public through
  the agency’s annual reports presented on its website. M&E data successfully supported Restructuring 1
  in February 2018. Data from the user satisfaction surveys of 2017 and 2019 were used to inform the
  scale-up of project activities, and the 2022 final survey results were utilized by Roshydromet for strategic
  planning after Project closing. In consultation with the Ministry of Economic Development, two Project’s
  PDO indicators (lead time of weather forecasts and reliability of forecasts of seasonal water flows) were
  adopted as official key performance indicators (KPIs) for Roshydromet. (ICR, page 30)

  Based on the above, the M&E Quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. At appraisal, the Project was classified as Environmental
   Category C, with no Environmental Assessment required. This did not change during implementation. As a
   mitigation measure against the unlikely negative environmental impacts related to the installation of
   observation and monitoring infrastructure, the Project Operational Manual required that standard
   environmental and safety provisions be applied to all bidding documents for installation of new equipment
   and disposal of obsolete equipment. The Project closed fully meeting the World Bank’s safeguards policies
   and national environmental, occupational, and labor requirements. (ICR, page 31)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The Project had Satisfactory FM ratings during the last two years of
   implementation. There were no pending FM actions at closing. Throughout Project implementation, the
   project implementation unit (PIU) carried out the FM and disbursement functions in a satisfactory manner.
   The PIU was well staffed and employed experienced FM and accounting employees. Quarterly interim
   unaudited financial reports and annual audit reports were submitted on time and were satisfactory to the

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



   World Bank. The auditors issued unmodified audit opinions, noting no significant internal control issues.
   (ICR, page 31)

   Procurement. Procurement performance was consistently rated Satisfactory throughout Project
   implementation. Procurement risk was Moderate to Low. There were no cases of mis-procurement. Post
   reviews identified no violations of policy. Complaints were resolved by the PIU in due time. However, there
   had been significant procurement delays caused by slow approvals of specifications/terms of references
   and by multiple cases of re-bidding due to the following: (i) the noncompliance of bids and bidders with
   requirements of bidding documents; (ii) challenges to deliver equipment in the required time, and (iii) price
   above the planned budget. The delays were mitigated by proactive revision of Procurement Plans and
   close monitoring of contract implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (ICR, pages 28-29):

1. Follow-up projects, anchored in the precursor operations’ M&E framework, offer a valuable
opportunity to measure longer-term outcomes and validate the theory of change. The
reviewed Project followed the component structure and Results Framework of its predecessor,
including the same key outcome indicator (lead time of weather forecasts) over a cumulative time of
17 years. A long and consistent time series of data provided evidence of investment impacts and
justified the mid-course activity corrections (including changes in the specifications and scope of
supercomputer procurement). This indicator was institutionalized by the borrower as an official
sectoral KPI to help guide the agency’s further operations and development.

2. An adaptive management approach is beneficial for the procurement of high-value ICT
assets, with the systems integration taking precedence over the pre-identified individual

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HYDROMET 2 (P127676)



procurement packages, even if it leads to delays in implementation. In the procurement of high-
value ICT systems (hardware and software), systems integration requirements are key, and an
adjustment of individual procurement packages to make sure system requirements are satisfied is
often required, calling for adaptive procurement management approach. This is because the rapidly
evolving technology and changes in sectoral regulations make it difficult to lock in large ICT
procurement packages at start, and it may be preferential to revise and possibly delay the planned
ICT procurement if an associated systems integration solution is not yet ready. In such cases,
postponed procurement can deliver higher-performing ICT assets (for example, supercomputers
with more than double capacity) and help to avoid a premature installation of high-value ICT assets
before the system’s full operational readiness. The reviewed Project benefited from adaptive
procurement management and from hiring a systems integrator expert to supervise it, based on the
lessons learned from the predecessor project.

3. In technically complex projects involving multiple reviews and revisions of the proposed
solutions, clear guidelines and timelines for decision-making processes are critical for their
efficient implementation. An up-front agreement with the borrower on the terms of reference for
the project management body, such as a steering committee, can be beneficial. The reviewed
Project experienced delays because such guidelines were not prepared: the PMC’s terms of
reference did not spell out its performance standards, which allowed for delays in decision-making.
Once the agency’s senior leadership instituted clear and tight decision-making standards, the
implementation sped up.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides rich technical details to understand the value-added of the activities and the outcomes of the
Project; a good justification of the PDO relevance; comprehensive and robust evidence on all aspects of
Project’s evaluation; and a clear linking of evidence to findings. The ICR is technical, analytical, and has
internal consistency. The lessons learned are closely linked to the information presented in the previous report
sections and are useful for future lending operations. The ICR is written very logically and clearly, despite the
complex nature of the discussed issues. The arguments about Project’s efficacy are valid, based on deep
technical knowledge, well-articulated, and supported by facts.

A minor shortcoming is that the length of the main text is double the OPCS recommended length of 15 pages.

The ICR quality is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
HYDROMET 2 (P127676)




                                                                  Page 17 of 17
