     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024147

1. Program Information



 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Mauritania                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                          Approved Operations
 0                                           0

 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P167348                                     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D4920                                  30-Jul-2020                                        49,718,364.06

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jul-2019                                30-Jul-2020
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                              50,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                          49,718,364.06                                             0.00




P171238_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Mauritania                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P171238                                    Mauritania 2nd Competition & Skills DPF ( P171238 )




                                                                                                  Page 1 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D4920,IDA-D8880                        31-Jul-2022                                           29432208.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Jul-2021                                31-Jul-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         29,432,208.00                                              0.00



 P171585_TBL
 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Mauritania                                 Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P171585                                    Mauritania Third DPO 2021 ( P171585 )


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-72020,IDA-D8880                        30-Jun-2023                                           30070881.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jul-2022                                30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                         30,070,881.00                                              0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Vandana Chandra             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey         Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL

                                                                                                  Page 2 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



a. Objectives

The Project Development Objective (PDO) for the Mauritania Competition and Skills Programmatic Development
Policy Credit (DPO) is defined as, “(i) improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion, (ii)
improve access and affordability of digital broadband services, (iii) strengthen the institutional framework for
climate resilience, and (iv) improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training,” (DPO3,
PD, p. 2).

The financing agreements for the three DPOs do not contain the PDO.

The PDO evolved between DPO1 and DPO3. The original PDO focused on supporting the Government of
Mauritania (GoM) in improving the regulatory environment and worker skills for boosting competition and
inclusiveness of the private sector: “Improving the regulatory environment and skills for boosting competition and
inclusiveness of the Mauritanian private sector,” (DPO1 PD, p. 2). The PDO of DPO2 was revised to include new
reforms on digital finance and climate resilience to respond better to the COVID-19 pandemic: “Strengthening the
business environment and accelerating the development of digital broadband services, while boosting climate
resilience and human capital for private sector led growth,” (DPO2 PD, p. 3). The PDO was slightly rephrased for
DPO3 but fundamentally remained consistent with the aims outlined in DPO2.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the objectives of the DPO series against which outcomes will be assessed are
taken to be:

        PDO1: To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion.
        PDO2: To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services.
        PDO3: To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience.
        PDO4: To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three pillars targeting the main development challenges highlighted within the sector context.

The first pillar was designed to strengthen the SMEs' business environment by improving commercial justice,
and access to reliable information on firms and collateralized assets. It was relevant for making Mauritania more
attractive to domestic and international investors through a transparent commercial justice system, streamlined
contract enforcement for SMEs, improved commercial dispute resolution, strengthened insolvency regimes, and
enhanced access to credit.

The second pillar supported reforms in broadband digital infrastructure to increase the economy's overall
productivity and to open new business opportunities for the development of the private sector. Its actions
focused on promoting investment, competition, and equitable ICT access by (i) opening the internet retail and
wholesale market up for competition and new entrants, (ii) promoting access to dominant operators’ essential
infrastructure and reducing the costs for deploying digital infrastructure, and (iii) boosting sustainable financing
and more projects in underserved areas especially rural ones.

The third pillar focused on reforms in education and vocational training that are essential to improve the quality
and relevance of skills provided by the national education system, by upgrading teacher quality, governance,


                                                                                                        Page 3 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



and private sector alignment for competitive, productive skills. Its actions were relevant for improving the
autonomy of schools and teachers’ competencies and aligning the training with labor market demands.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total program cost for the programmatic series of three single-tranche DPF operations was US$110 million
of which US$109.2 million was disbursed with the differential explained by exchange rate changes. The IDA
credit amount was US$50 million for DPO1, US$30 million for DPO2, and US$30 million for DPO3. All three
credits were fully disbursed.

DPO1 was approved on July 24, 2019, became effective on July 25, 2019, and closed as scheduled on July 30,
2020.

DPO2 was approved on July 22, 2021, became effective on October 12, 2021, and closed as scheduled on July
31, 2022.

DPO3 was approved on July 28, 2022, became effective on January 20, 2023, and closed as scheduled on
June 30, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 At appraisal, Mauritania’s economy was characterized by an overly heavy reliance on the extractives sector
 that accounted for over 25 percent of GDP and generated around 80 percent of export revenues and over 20
 percent of fiscal revenues. During commodity booms (2009 – 2014), the sector fueled higher growth
 averaging over 4 percent per annum and financed public investment in infrastructure, but in times of low
 commodity prices, such as in 2014, it triggered a collapse in growth and job creation, exacerbating
 macroeconomic distortions and putting Mauritania at a high risk of external debt distress. The absence of
 economic diversification stifled private sector-led development, job creation and sustained growth.

 Supported by an IMF Extended Credit Facility (ECF) program in 2016-2017, Mauritania implemented
 macroeconomic reforms focused on exchange rate flexibility, monetary policy effectiveness, and fortification
 of the supervisory framework for the financial sector that helped to revive growth and restore fiscal discipline
 that enabled a surplus of 0.3 percent of non-extractive GDP (NEGDP) by 2017. The improvement in the
 macroeconomic environment provided the government an opportunity to focus on the neglected agenda of
 economic diversification that was necessary to reduce the economy’s natural resource dependence and
 support private sector-led growth.

 Despite some improvements in the business climate between 2016 and 2019, Mauritania’s potential for
 private sector development (PSD) was hampered by structural challenges. The private sector grappled with
 informality and 80 percent of all formal enterprises comprised small and medium enterprises (SMEs). SMEs
 lacked access to finance, especially digital financial services. A dominant state presence in the
 economy created an unlevel playing field particularly in sectors like telecommunications. Mauritania’s
 commercial justice system created legal uncertainty and additional costs for businesses. The local workforce


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



had limited skills, the bureaucracy was challenged by inefficiency and corruption. These constraints limited
the ability of new firms to enter markets and hindered existing firms to grow, constraining PSD.

Rationale for Bank Involvement

The programmatic DPF series was closely aligned with the government’s priorities outlined in the National
Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Shared Prosperity (Stratégie de Croissance Accélérée et de Prospérité
Partagée-SCAPP) covering 2016-2030. The SCAPP emphasizes achieving robust, sustainable, and inclusive
economic growth and its citizens’ well-being aligned with the 2030 Sustainable Development Goals.

The DPF was also aligned with the GoM’s COVID-19 Recovery Plan for 2021-2022 (ProPEP) whose primary
objective was to empower the private sector as a catalyst for inclusive growth, and emphasized enhancing
digital infrastructure for better service delivery, implementing educational system reforms to enhance quality
and inclusivity, and creating green job opportunities.

WBG’s 2017 Systemic Country Diagnostic (SCD) highlighted the limited engagement of the private sector
and the challenge of low human capital, including inadequate labor skills in Mauritania, and was a key input
into WBG’s FY18-FY23 Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The DPF was aligned with the broad
objectives of the CPF.

Moreover, the DPO was fully aligned with existing WB investment project financing (IPF) operations and the
DPF's reform agenda leveraged the successes of various WBG projects, including the Public-Sector
Governance Project, the Public-Private Partnership Capacity-Building Project, the Nouadhibou Economically
Competitive Seafood Cluster, the West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (WARCIP) on
ICT, the Support of Basic Education project (PASEB, P126902) ), and the vocational training project. The
Education Sector Support Project (P163143) that accompanied the DPF series reform program reinforced
reforms to the governance, efficiency, and quality of the education system through teachers’ recruitment,
training, and management as well as school-based management and finance.

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, (i) Mauritania benefited from a grant of SDR3.8 million (US$5.2
million) from the World Bank’s (WB) Crisis Response Window Resources in April 2020 to fund its COVID-19
Strategic Preparedness and Response Project. (ii) It received a US$70 million stand-alone COVID-19
Emergency DPO (P174155) that in July 2020 that was designed to help Mauritania respond more effectively
to the health and economic crises caused by the pandemic. It also complemented the reforms of this DPO
series by supporting SMEs to drive the economic recovery post-COVID.

Following extensive consultation with private sector representatives, the DPF series was prepared in
coordination with other development partners including the IMF and the African Development Bank.

Relevance of the PDO

In turning to the critical agenda of economic diversification around 2019, the government prioritized reforms
related with key structural constraints to PSD. DPO1 focused on three structural issues: the regulatory
environment, broadband digital infrastructure and basic education and vocational training reforms. The
COVID-19 crisis in 2020 exposed further structural vulnerabilities related with human capital deficiencies and
highlighted the need for building Mauritania’s resilience to withstand future shocks including climate change,
while improving the quality and relevance of education and vocational training to support private sector-led
growth. The PDO of DPO2 was revised to include new reforms on digital finance and climate resilience. The
DPF program focused on enhancing broadband services through improved competition and regulation,

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



tackling regulatory gaps. The emergence of these challenges led to changes in the DPO’s priorities that
focused support for a private sector-led economic recovery.

PDO1: PDO1 was highly relevant as it addressed two critical investment climate reform areas that severely
constrained PSD in Mauritania. Large parts of Mauritania’s commercial justice system were ineffective, and
created legal and judicial uncertainties for businesses, especially SMEs. The commercial judicial services
were costly, inefficient, unreliable, and not accessible to all firms. More than 40 percent of firms identified the
commercial judicial system as a leading constraint. Out of a total of 137 countries included in The Global
Competitiveness Index (2017-2018), Mauritania ranked 130/137 in lack of efficiency of the legal framework in
settling disputes, 134/137 in the lack of efficiency of the legal framework in challenging regulations, and
116/137 in the lack of judicial independence. The DPO targeted reforms to solvency laws to reduce the
financial and time costs of resolving business disputes. The business and collateral registry was fragmented,
paper-based and ineffective in providing lenders and banks the financial information they required to process
firms’ loan applications. This affected business confidence and firms’ access to finance. The DPO introduced
laws that developed a digital business registry and initiated electronic payment services and means of
payment, thus contributing to financial inclusion in Mauritania.

PDO2: According to the International Telecommunications Union, around 70 percent of the Mauritanian
population did not have access to the internet in 2016. Mauritania lacked a fully competitive broadband
market, and its digital infrastructure was insufficient to allow for the development of a green job-creating
digital economy that was identified as a development priority following the COVID-19 crisis in 2020. Access to
the internet was low and costs were high. To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services,
and ensure universal broadband connectivity, the DPF leveraged a set of 7 PAs that contributed to enhancing
broadband services through improved competition and regulation, tackling regulatory gaps, and contributed
to bridge the digital divide by connecting the unconnected in both urban and rural areas.

PDO3: The recession triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine
underscored the urgency of strengthening the Mauritanian economy’s resilience to withstand future shocks
including climate change and disaster shocks. With around 1 million people facing food insecurity, GoM’s
response was to develop modern digital infrastructure to track relief efforts and foster appropriate workforce
skills for climate-resilient jobs. The government would establish an institutional framework for a response
mechanism for a timely, efficient, and coordinated response to climate-related challenges to safeguard food
and nutrition security, reduce the adverse impact on household welfare, and mitigate fiscal risks that arise
during economic downturns.

PDO4: The SCD 2017 noted that the shortage of skilled workers was a key constraint for long-term inclusive
growth in Mauritania. Despite sustained and a relatively high level of investment in primary education, the Net
Enrolment Rate of age-group (6-11 years) was barely 75 percent, well below the averages of Sub-Saharan
Africa and Arab countries. In 2017, only a quarter of grade 6 students scored above 50 percent on the end-of-
primary-school national exam, while only 1.7 percent of grade 4 students in public schools could read a
simple 8-word sentence in French and about 37 percent could not add two single-digit numbers (Service
Delivery Indicators – SDI 2018). Poor learning outcomes were attributed to weak competence levels among
teachers. PDO4 focused on reforms in basic education and vocational training that were essential to improve
the quality and relevance of skills provided by the national education system, by upgrading teacher quality,
governance, and private sector alignment for competitive, productive skills. The reforms would strengthen the
autonomy, responsibility, and efficiency of public schools and improve the presence of teachers




                                                                                                       Page 6 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



in classrooms by sanctioning unmotivated absences. Teachers would also be held to minimum standards of
competence.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Prior Actions (PAs) for Mauritania First, Second and Third Competition and Skills DPO

 Prior Actions for DPF1                 Prior Actions for DPF2               Prior Actions for DPF3
 PDO1: To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion
                                        PA2 (PA1 DPF2): To improve
                                        access to reliable information on
 PA1(PA1 DPF1): The Recipient’s         companies and collateralized
 Council of Ministers has submitted to assets, the Recipient’s Council of
 Parliament a draft revised Arbitration Ministers has approved a decree
 Law.                                   regulating the organization and the
                                        functioning of the local and central
                                        business and collateral registries.
                                                                             PA5 (PA1 DPF3): To
 PA3 (PA2 DPF1): The Recipient has
                                                                             improve access to finance, the
 issued Ministerial Decree No. 2019- PA4 (PA2 DPF2): To improve the
                                                                             Recipient enacted a law to unify its
 032 and Ministerial Order No.          efficiency, reliability and
                                                                             legal framework applicable to
 0000138 establishing and regulating transparency of the creditor and
                                                                             moveable collateral backed security,
 the High Council for Improving         debtor regimes, the Recipient has
                                                                             generalize security interest on
 Business Environment (vested with promulgated amendments to the
                                                                             moveable collateral with or without
 executive power) and its technical     Insolvency Law section of the
                                                                             transfer of ownership, and
 body, the Business Reforms             Commercial Code.
                                                                             strengthening its enforceability and
 Monitoring Committee.
                                                                             its implementation mechanism.
                                        PA6 (PA3 DPF2): To increase
                                                                             PA7 (PA2 DPF3): To
                                        financial inclusion and encourage
                                                                             increase financial inclusion and
                                        banking and nonbanking actors to
                                                                             promote the digitization of
                                        offer electronic money and
                                                                             financial services, the Central Bank
                                        payment services, the Recipient’s
                                                                             of Mauritania
                                        Council of Ministers has submitted
                                                                             has adopted the implementing
                                        to Parliament a draft law on
                                                                             legislation for the law on electronic
                                        electronic payment services and
                                                                             means of payment services.
                                        means of payment.
 PDO2: To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services
                                        PA9 (PA4 DPF2): To increase          PA10 (PA3 DPF3): To reduce the
 PA8 (PA4 DPF1): Pursuant to its
                                        competition on the retail and        cost of deployment of
 Telecom Law, the Recipient’s
                                        wholesale broadband markets, the broadband Digital communication
 National Regulatory Council has
                                        Recipient’s telecom regulator        network, the Recipient has
 adopted a regulatory decree
                                        (ARE) has published a new            transmitted to its National Assembly
 (decision No. 026/19/ANE/CNR/DTP)
                                        regulation policy for attributing    a draft law to mandate the


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



subjecting internet service providers authorizations to new internet      disclosure of upcoming civil works
to a general authorization regime.    service providers.                  by the public utilities’ managers,
                                                                          the provision of access to the digital
                                                                          communication network operators,
                                                                          and the coordination of shared
                                                                          public infrastructure projects.
                                       PA12 (PA5 DPF2): To better
                                       regulate access to the dominant PA13 (PA4 DPF3): To reduce the
PA11 (PA5 DPF1): Pursuant to its       operators’ essential infrastructure, cost of digital infrastructure
2013 Telecom Law, the Recipient’s the Recipient’s telecom regulator deployment, the Recipient
National Regulatory Council has        (ARE) (i) has adopted and            has defined the
adopted a regulatory decree            published two decisions that set conditions and fees of public domain
(decision No.                          the technical and financial           occupancy applicable to the
                                       conditions under which dominant operators of
225/18/ARE/CNR/DTP) to                 players must rent access to their
operationalize telecom infrastructure- digital infrastructure for           digital communication networks.
sharing between operators.             competitors, and (ii) has approved
                                       the dominant players’ wholesale
                                       catalogs.
                                       PA15 (PA6 DPF2): To improve the
PA14 (PA6 DPF1): The Recipient’s
                                       institutional mechanisms and
Council of Ministers has adopted a
                                       involve the private sector in the
national strategy and an action plan
                                       governance of the digital sector,
for universal access to broadband,
                                       the Recipient has adopted a
and the Committee on Public
                                       decree and two arrêtés,
Investment has formally integrated it
                                       establishing and operationalizing
into the Public Investment Program.
                                       the High Digital Council.
PDO3: To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience
                                                                            PA17 (PA5 DPF3): To optimize the
                                                                            use of financial resources in
                                       PA16 (PA7 DPF2): To better
                                                                            response to food and
                                       manage the impact of climate-
                                                                            nutrition security crisis and reduce
                                       related shocks, the Recipient has
                                                                            the impact of climate-related
                                       adopted a decree establishing the
                                                                            shocks on vulnerable households,
                                       institutional framework to respond
                                                                            the Recipient has created
                                       to shocks affecting food and
                                                                            the National Fund for Food
                                       nutrition security.
                                                                            Security and Nutrition Crisis
                                                                            Response (FNRCAN).)
PDO4: To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.
PA18 (PA8 DPF1): The Recipient’s PA19 (PA8 DPF2): To strengthen PA20 (PA6 DPF3): To strengthen
MNEVTT (Ministry of National           the autonomy, responsibility and the autonomy, accountability and
Education and Vocational and           efficiency of schools, the           efficiency of schools, the Recipient
Technical Training) has adopted        Recipient’s MF and MNEVTT have has adopted an order establishing a
Decrees No. 2019-038 and No. 2019- adopted a joint arrêté establishing performance evaluation system for
039 to (i) create and define the       a direct funding mechanism to        school management committees
mandate of School Management           schools based on defined criteria. (SMCs) that specify the criteria and
Committees (COGES); and (ii)

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



regulate absenteeism in primary and                                        frequency of the independent
secondary public-school teachers.                                          evaluation of their performance.




PA21 (PA9 DPF1): The Recipient’s PA22 (PA9 DPF2): To improve
MNEVTT has adopted Decree No.           teachers’ quality, the Recipient   PA23 (PA7 DPF3): To improve the
2019-040 instituting a strategic skills has adopted a decree instituting quality of teaching,
review for primary school teachers      the restructuring of ENIs (Teacher the Recipient has defined competen
and requiring that all teachers meet Training Schools) and enhancing cies required for prospective
minimum standards of competence in the recruitment and training of         teachers to graduate from the ENIs.
order to continue teaching.             teachers.
                                        PA25 (PA10 DPF2): To improve
                                        the quality of TVET (Technical and PA26 (PA8 DPF3): To improve
                                        Vocational Education Training)     governance of the Technical and
                                        services, the Recipient’s MNEVTT Vocational Education and Training
PA24 (PA10 DPF1): The Recipient’s
                                        has adopted a decree abrogating (TVET) system, the Recipient has
MEF has adopted Ministerial Decree
                                        and replacing Decree 037-19 to     strengthened the certification
No. 2019-036 creating and defining
                                        institutionalize performance       of TVET instruction by: (i)
the functioning of a new Technical
                                        contracts in technical and         adopting a National Quality
and Vocational Support Fund (2FTP).
                                        vocational training and introduce Framework and (ii) introducing
                                        actions to promote the fight       apprenticeship training and dual
                                        against climate change as criteria training.
                                        for allocating 2FTP funding.

PDO1: To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion.

The DPO series aimed at achieving PDO1 through a set of 7 PAs. Given the multiple distortions in the
business environment, the DPO selectively focused on resolving two leading constraints: reforming
Mauritania’s commercial justice system by establishing a first-time alternative dispute resolution mechanism,
and new solvency laws. These reforms would increase firms’ access to commercial courts and reduce the
time and financial cost of dispute resolution and insolvency. The path to financial inclusion was stymied by
the absence of a business registry with current and credible financial and business information on individual
firms that discouraged lending agencies from extending loans to businesses, especially SMEs. The PAs
fostered financial inclusion by establishing a digital registry and electronic payments services. At the end of
the DPF series, the systems for ADR mechanisms, insolvency and business registry were expected to be
institutionalized and operational.

PA1 (DPF1 PA1) and PA2 (DPF2 PA1): PA1 was relevant for supporting efficient arbitration through a legal
reform to establish an alternative dispute resolution mechanism (ADM) that offered a cheaper and faster
alternative to the commercial courts, thus reducing their caseload. Implementation of the ADM would
increase the number of cases solved monitored by the International Mediation and Arbitration Center of
Mauritania (CIMAM) and the Ministry of Justice. However, the ICR notes that while a multifaceted approach
and ADM seemed timely, the foundational analysis for ADM reforms was lacking and its implementation plan


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



was not developed and funded (“Improving Commercial Justice” (2018), SCD and CPF). It was introduced at
the last minute by a minister who was replaced by a minister who opposed it. It was also not supported by the
WBG. PA2 was highly relevant as Mauritania did not have a reliable, transparent, and centralized database
of business and collateral information for lenders to use to facilitate access to finance. The existing registry
was fragmented, ineffective, and paper based. PA2 introduced legal reforms and regulations to establish
local and central business registries to improve access to reliable information on businesses and
collateralized assets to facilitate arbitration and commercial dispute resolution. A reliable commercial registry
could foster the emergence of a collaterals market that businesses and commercial banks could use to
expand credit to firms. The availability of such a registry would also support the PA on financial inclusion.
Relevance of PA1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS). Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3 (DPF1 PA2), PA4 (DPF2 PA2) and PA5 (DPF3 PA1): The PAs were crucial regulatory reforms for
Mauritania’s judicial system (and the CPF) as they sought to reduce the time and cost of doing business for
firms in financial difficulties. They revised the existing insolvency law to align it with international best
practices, thus making Mauritania more attractive for investors. The amended law strengthened existing
procedures and added new tools to help more firms resolve financial difficulties efficiently through
enhancements including simplified liquidation procedures for small firms; mechanisms to identify financial
difficulty early; making amicable settlement confidential and more attractive by incentivizing provision of fresh
financing; refining procedures to group creditors into classes and better regulating insolvency administrators.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, PA3 and PA4 reforms were expected to help struggling small firms to
liquidate quickly, enabling their entrepreneurs to put the firms’ assets back to productive use. PA3 - PA5
would positively impact access to finance for businesses as banks would become more confident to lend.
Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of
PA5: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA6 (DPF2 PA3) and PA7 (DPF3 PA2): PA6 and PA7 focused on legal reforms to harness digital
development of financial services to promote financial inclusion for businesses and contributed directly to
PDO1. The introduction of electronic money and payment services would improve the business environment
by significantly reducing the time and transactions costs firms, businesses, banks, and non-bank entities
incurred in conducting business transactions with paper money. The PAs complemented WBG’s IPF and
ASA operations in place, were a strategic component of the CPF, and supported the IMF’s ongoing banking
sector reforms aimed at reducing transactions costs, promoting financial inclusion, and combating money
laundering and terrorism financing. Relevance of PA6: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA7:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2: To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services.

PDO2 would be achieved by the DPO through three sets of policy reforms that were logically sequenced in
the programmatic series, focused on removing barriers to investment and competition in the internet
broadband market and facilitated equitable access to information, communication, and technology (ICT)
services, thus paving the path to PDO2. One set of PAs centered on opening the market to competition and
investment across all segments of the broadband infrastructure by removing and revising regulations that
were obstacles. Another set of reforms focused on promoting private investment in digital infrastructure
through regulation on infrastructure sharing, and regulatory measures aim at reducing the cost of
infrastructure deployment by telecom operators. The third set of PAs would facilitate equitable access to ICT
services by effectively implementing the universal access policy.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



PA8 (DPF1 PA4), PA9 (DPF2 PA4) and PA10 (DPF3 PA3): The three complementary PAs were highly
relevant in supporting PDO2 by introducing a revised legal and regulatory framework to remove hurdles,
attract new entrants and foster competition across all segments of Mauritania’s broadband digital
infrastructure supply chain. The main constraint to broadband expansion was insufficient regulation that
deterred competition in the cost-sharing arrangements between incumbents and new entrants (mutualization
of costs). Despite three telecom operators, the broadband market was highly concentrated with Mauritel, the
incumbent operator. PA8 introduced a more flexible regulatory regime to facilitate the market entry of new
broadband service providers. PA9 modernized the existing licensing regime by adopting standard guidelines
to facilitate technical, administrative, and operational requirements to increase new internet service providers
and competition in the retail and wholesale broadband markets. Lack of clarity in mutualizing the costs of
public domain occupation and the “dig once” policy blocked expansion of private broadband infrastructure in
semi-urban and rural areas. Rules and costs authorizing telecom operators to use the public domain were not
transparent and discouraged coordination between civil works and telecom operators in the deployment of
underground telecom cables for network expansion. PA10 created a wholesale market for leasing excess
fiber capacity and passive infrastructure owned by public utilities to expand opportunities for new entrants to
use the digital infrastructure and compete with existing operators, thus reducing the costs of deployment of
digital infrastructure. Relevance of PA8: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA9: Highly Satisfactory
(HS); Relevance of PA10: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA11 (DPF1 PA5), PA12 (DPF2 PA5) and PA13 (DPF3 PA4): PA11 – PA13 were highly relevant for
supporting PDO2 because they introduced legal reforms that encouraged the sharing of existing broadband
infrastructure and facilitated greater cost cutting by telecom operators, thus building on PA10 that helped the
expansion of digital infrastructure. Mauritel owned most of the strategic digital infrastructure. Despite
available excess capacity on those strategic digital assets, weak regulations discouraged infrastructure
sharing, and open access did not apply to all telecom infrastructure markets affected by Mauritel’s
dominance, and where it applied, the costs were excessive. Moreover, obligations imposed on dominant
players were limited and weakly enforced. PA11 supported reforms to operationalize telecom infrastructure-
sharing between operators, while PA12 set the technical and financial rules that required dominant operators
to rent access to their digital infrastructure so that competitors could use the excess capacity to expand
internet coverage. PA13 established the rules and fee structure applicable to the operators of digital
communication networks for public domain occupancy. These regulatory reforms would create an open
access wholesale market for fiber optic infrastructure, and significantly boost competition by offering
alternative options to non-dominant players. Relevance of PA11: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of
PA12: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA13: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA14 (DPF1 PA6) and PA15 (DPF2 PA6): The adoption of a national strategy and action plan to promote
universal access to broadband is important for the achievement of PDO2 (PA14), however, it was not clearly
articulated what the national strategy’s formal integration into the Public Investment Program implied.
Similarly, the implications of establishing and operationalizing a High Digital Council for PDO2 were not well
articulated. Relevance of PA14: Satisfactory (S). Relevance of PA15: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3: To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience.

PA16 (DPF2 PA7) and PA17 (DPF3 PA5): Mauritania’s high exposure to climate-related shocks exacerbated
environmental fragility and placed additional stress on household welfare and food security (CPF Focus Area
1, and SCD) increasing fiscal risks. The PAs sought to institutionalize a mechanism to protect the poorest in
society from severe environmental decline while reducing the overall economic and social impact on society.
PA16 and PA17 would directly support PDO3 by institutionalizing a mechanism (National Fund for Food

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 29
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



Security and Nutrition Crisis Response (FNRCAN)) that would leverage modern digital infrastructure to track
relief efforts, and produce a timely, efficient and coordinated response to protect the poorest from future
climate-related shocks and severe environmental decline and optimize the use of financial resources in
response to food and nutrition security crises. These measures would collectively safeguard food and
nutrition security, reduce the adverse impact on household welfare, and mitigate fiscal risks that arise during
economic downturns. Relevance of PA16: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA17: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PDO4: To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.

PDO4 was supported by 9 PAs that focused on various aspects of reforms in basic education and vocational
training. One set of PAs tackled reforms to improve the classroom environment and quality of teaching to
encourage school attendance. A second set of reforms focused on improving education quality by focusing
on teachers’ training and competence, recruitment systems, and effective deployment. And a third set of PAs
was centered on measures to overhaul the Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) governance
systems especially for financing, training, and curriculum. The idea was to leverage public financing to crowd-
in the private sector in TVET decision making to boost the relevance of the training offered and align it with
labor market demands including the development of skills that would prepare students to cope with climate
change.

PA18 (PA8 DPF1), PA19 (PA8 DPF2), PA20 (PA6 DPF3): Given Mauritania’s extremely low education
indicators, high dropout rates, particularly among the poorest, and poor learning outcomes, the three PAs
focused on overhauling the basic education system to support PDO4. Through the establishment of School
Management Committees (SMCs), PA18 and PA20 sought to improve accountability and basic educational
outcomes by involving teachers, parents, and students in school management and decision making.
Measures to improve the quality of the teaching environment by reducing teacher absenteeism (PA18) and
the educational system through school evaluations (PA20) would be particularly effective for improving
school outcomes for the poorest and most vulnerable students (PA19 and PA20). However, the ICR notes
that a deficiency of these reforms was the lack of specific attention to the gender dimension of schooling that
was urgently needed. For this reason, the relevance rating is marked down to satisfactory. Relevance of
PA18: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA19: Satisfactory (S); Relevance of PA20: Satisfactory
(S).

PA21 (DPF1 PA9), PA22 (DPF2 PA9) and PA23 (DPF3 PA7): PA21 – PA23 were highly relevant for PDO4
as they introduced reforms to overhaul and uplift the quality of teaching to raise educational attainment in
Mauritania. PA21 reforms instituted a strategic review of the content of primary school teacher training
programs with the aim of ensuring that teachers satisfied minimum competency standards, while PA22
focused on restructuring the teacher training schools (ENIs). PA23 set new competency standards for
teacher training in the ENIs so that future generations of teachers graduating from the reformed ENIs met
higher competency standards and uplifted the overall quality of teaching. Relevance of PA21: Highly
Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA22: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA23: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PA24 (DPF1 PA10), PA25 (DPF2 PA10) and PA26 (DPF3 PA8): PA24 – PA26 sought to overhaul the TVET
system to improve the access and quality of vocational education including reforms to prepare students to
cope with climate resilience that received special attention in DPO2 and DPO3 following the COVID-19 crisis.
PA24 established a Fund for TVET (2FTP) that allocated TVET funding to public and private training
institutions and firms. In the past, climate change adaptation or mitigation were not a part of the national


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



 TVET strategy’s response to labor market challenges caused by climate change. PA25 rectified this by
 changing the selection criteria for training financed under the 2FTP (DPO2 PD, para 78) to favor performance
 contracts for training that promoted climate change adaptation and mitigation. The emphasis on greening
 jobs would contribute to improving the quality and relevance of skills provided by TVET. The ICR does not
 explain how the PA would align financial support for TVET with labor market demand. PA26 sought to raise
 TVET quality and relevance by revamping its governance and introducing a National Quality Framework and
 apprenticeship training. WBG’s Mauritania Youth Employability Project (P162916) also supported the policy
 reforms under the TVET pillar. Relevance of PA24: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of PA25:
 Satisfactory (S); Relevance of PA26: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators (RIs) for Mauritania First, Second and Third Competition and Skills DPO
                                                                           Actual
                                                                           Change in
                                                                           Results
                   Associated
                               Relevance                       Actual      Indicator   Achievement
Results Indicator Prior                     Baseline Target
                               Rating                          Value       Relative to Rating
                   Action
                                                                           Targeted
                                                                           Change, in
                                                                           Percent
PDO1: To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion.


RI1: Number of                               Baseline            Current
                                                         Target                            Modest
cases solved                                 (2018): 0           (2023): 1
                      PA1       MS                       (2023):             33%
through ADR
                                                         3
mechanisms.
                                                                 Current
                                                         Target
RI2: Number of                               Baseline            (2023):
                                                         (2023):
insolvency cases                             (2018): 2
                      PA3-PA5   HS                       7                   100%          High
brought to the                                                   7
courts.

RI3a: Percentage
of the adult                                            Target Current                     [High]
                                             Baseline
population owning PA6, PA7      MS                      (2023): (2023):      153%
                                             (2016): 4%
a money mobile                                          15%     20.8%
account.


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



RI3b: Percentage
of women having                         Baseline             Current
used a mobile                           (2017):      Target (2023):
                                                                        76%
phone or the         PA6, PA7 MS        1.6%         (2023): 11.8%                        Substantial
                                                                        achieved
internet to conduct                                  15%
a financial
transaction.
PDO2: To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services
                                        Baseline             Current
RI4: Average
                                HS      (2018):      Target (2023):
monthly retail price
                     PA8 – PA15         US$2.3       (2023): US$1.1     92%               Substantial
of a one megabit
                                                     US$1
mobile internet.
RI5: Average                                 Baseline   Target Current                    High
monthly retail price                         (2018):    (2023): (2023):
of one megabit       PA8 – PA15 HS           US$11.6    US$3    US$1.1      122%
fixed internet
subscription.
                                             Baseline   Target Current
RI6: Percent of
                                             (2017):    (2023): (2023):
rural households
                   PA8 – PA15 HS             18%        35%     34.45%      96.7%         Substantial
with access to the
internet.
PDO3: To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience.



RI7: Percent of                         Baseline           Current
                                                   Target
individuals affected                    (2018): 0%         (2022):
                                                   (2023):                          High
by climate-related
                     PA16, PA17 HS                 30%                 216%
shocks supported                                           65%
by the annual
response plan.
PDO4: To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.


                                                                                          High
RI8a: Public                                                    Current
                                             Baseline   Target
primary school                                                  (2023):
                  PA18          HS           (2017):    (2023):             218%
teachers’ absence
                                             29%        18%
rate.                                                           5%
                                                                Current
RI8b: Effective                              Baseline   Target
                                                                (2023):
transition rate for                          (2017):    (2023):
                    PA18 –
girls from primary              HS           57%        63%                 63.3%         Modest
                    PA20                                        60.8%
school to lower
secondary school.


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



RI9: Share of in-
                                                                 Current
service teachers                                        Target
                                             Baseline            (2022):
who score at or                                         (2023):                              High
                                             (2017): 4%
above the bar on a PA21         HS                      18%                    221%
                                                                 35%
competence test
and are therefore
apt to teach.
RI10a: Number of
                                                        Target Current
TVET graduates                               Baseline
                                                        (2023): (2023):                      Modest
from institutions                            (2017): 0
                    PA25        HS                      4,700    2,839         60.4%
having signed
performance
contracts.
RI10b: Percentage
                                                                 Current
of female TVET
                                                        Target (2023):
graduates from                               Baseline
                    PA25        HS                      (2023): 50.9%          131%          High
institutions having                          (2018): 0%
                                                        45%
signed performance
contracts.
                    PA2, PA19,
                    PA20,
RIs missing         PA22,                                                                    Negligible
                    PA23,
                    PA24, PA26
Note: An achievement rating in [..] denotes a downgrade for the Overall Efficacy rating due to a low
relevance rating.

PDO1: To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion

RI1: RI1 was partially relevant for measuring the contribution of PA1 to PDO1 as the success of the ADM
reforms depended upon (i) efficient design and implementation of the ADM, and (ii) easy access to reliable
information on companies and collateralized assets which PA2 sought to achieve through a decree regulating
the organization and functioning of the local and central business and collateral registries. However, there was
no indicator/RI to measure the PA2 reforms. While RI1 measured the number of cases resolved through the new
ADM system, it could not specify whether a low number of cases was attributable to weak implementation of the
new ADM system (PA1 reforms) or weaknesses in establishing the companies database of collateralized assets
(PA2 reforms). The RI for PA2 is missing. Relevance of RI1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI2: RI2 was an appropriate indicator for measuring and tracking the progress made by PA3 – PA5 towards
PDO1. These judicial system-related PAs made significant amendments to the existing debtor and creditor
regimes, and the commercial code including its implementation and enforceability. An efficient indicator of their
impact was the post reforms increase in the number of disputes resolved in the commercial court as it reflected
the businesses’ confidence in the reformed judicial system. RI2 provided a quantifiable measure of the
government's success in introducing fast track liquidation procedures for struggling small companies enabling
firms’ assets to quickly return to productive use. This, in turn, positively impacted access to finance for
businesses as banks became more confident to lend. RI2 was measurable, specific and a relevant indicator with



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



an appropriate target set at 250 percent of the pre-reform (2018) baseline of 2 cases. Relevance of RI2: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

RI3a and RI3b: PA6 and PA7 sought to increase financial inclusion through legislation approving electronic
payments for businesses and individuals. Given that only 4 percent of the men in 2017 owned a money mobile
account, and only 1.6 percent of the women were using mobile phones or the internet, RI3a and RI3b were
inadequate in measuring whether low uptake in financial inclusion was due to the high costs of conducting
financial transactions electronically or the high costs of using mobile phones and the internet (especially for
women). The PAs implicitly assumed that legalizing electronic payments was sufficient to expand access to the
computers/mobile phones that were necessary for executing electronic payments, when in fact, these were
separate issues given that the use of mobile phones and computers was extremely low. As such, it is difficult to
attribute all progress in electronic payments (RI3a and RI3b) to PA6 and PA7 that supported PDO1 because a
part of the progress could be attributable to PA8 – PA15 (improved access to mobile phones and the internet)
that supported PDO2 (broadband reforms). Nevertheless, since an increase in financial inclusion was not
possible without the legal frameworks facilitated by PA6 and PA7 that were critical for expanding financial
inclusion, the relevance of RI3a and RI3b is considered moderately satisfactory instead of moderately
unsatisfactory. Relevance of RI3a: Moderately Satisfactory (MS); Relevance of RI3b: Moderately
Satisfactory (MS)

PDO2: To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services.

RI4, RI5 and RI6: These three RIs were highly relevant in measuring the collective impact of PA8 – PA15 that
focused on revamping Mauritania’s limited broadband network to reduce the cost of usage and expand access
to all parts of the country. RI4 and RI5 tracked the reduction in the average monthly cost of the fixed internet
subscription and RI5 measured the average monthly cost of the mobile internet service needed for mobile
phones. The RIs were measurable and transparent, and efficient for tracking the progress in reducing usage
costs and making the internet more affordable. RI6 was highly relevant in measuring and tracking how
successfully the broadband reforms supported by PA8 – PA15 closed the digital divide between the urban and
rural regions of Mauritania and moved towards PDO2. Relevance of RI4: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance
of RI5: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of RI6: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO3: To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience.

RI7: PA16 and PA17 supported PDO3 by enabling the government to efficiently administer the newly
established national fund (FNRCAN) and respond to vulnerable households during climate-related shocks when
their food and nutrition security was low. RI7 was highly relevant in measuring the contribution of these PAs by
registering the share (percent) of individuals who were affected by the climate-related shocks and received
government support. The data generated by the RI was also useful for government’s budget preparation and in
optimizing the use of fiscal resources. Relevance of RI7: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO4: To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.

RI8a and RI8b: PA18 – PA20 focused on overhauling several aspects of Mauritania’s primary and secondary
public school system to support PDO4. RI8a and RI8b measured two aspects of the basic education system that
adversely affected school quality and access and were relevant. RI8a tracked progress in PA18 by measuring
the reduction in teacher absenteeism that was widely prevalent in primary and secondary schools and affected
the quality of education. RI8b measured the share of female students who graduated from primary to secondary



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 29
               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
               MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



  schools, thus providing policy makers valuable information regarding female enrollment in secondary schools.
  Relevance of RI8a: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of RI8b: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

  The RIs for PA19 and PA20 related with a direct funding mechanism for schools and other important outcomes
  (enrollment, graduation, and achievement rates) were not measured by the DPO.

  RI9: PA21 focused on reforms to increase the quality of basic education and RI9 was a highly relevant indicator
  for tracking the share of teachers who met minimum standards of competency, thus measuring the PA’s
  contribution in reaching PDO4. By transparently measuring the scores of the teachers who passed the
  competency test and could retain their jobs, RI9 provided useful information to policymakers by flagging the
  schools that most needed measures to improve the quality of teaching. The RIs for PA22 and PA23 focused on
  major reforms of the existing teacher training schools (ENIs) were not measured by the DPO and are missing.
  Relevance of RI9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

  RI10a and RI10b: To support PDO4, PA24, PA25 and PA26 addressed a variety of TVET reforms to improve
  TVET quality including creating a new fund (2FTP), introducing performance-based contracts, introducing a new
  criterion for funding that focused on TVET skills to fight climate change, and governance of the TVET system.
  RI10a was highly relevant in measuring how performance contracts (PA25) affected the total number of
  graduates who attended those schools that signed the performance contract. RI10b measured progress in the
  percentage of female TVET graduates from institutions that had signed performance contracts and was useful in
  indicating whether female students had access to schools that were trying to improve their education quality.
  Both RI10a and RI10b informed potential students and policymakers about schools that were striving to improve
  the quality of their TVET education. Relevance of RI10a: Highly Satisfactory (HS); Relevance of
  RI10b: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

  The RIs needed to measure the impact of other aspects of the TVET reforms supported by PA24 and 26 are
  missing.

  Overall, the relevance of the 13 RIs measuring the impact of PA1 – PA26 is rated Satisfactory with 10 of the 13
  RIs rated High Satisfactory and the other 3 rated Moderately Satisfactory. The MS ratings were due to lack of
  clarity in linking the RI score to a particular PA as the score could be affected by more than one PA. However,
  the ICR lists 7 PAs of which 6 supported important reforms for PDO4 (improving the quality and access to basic
  and TVET education). IEG believes that to gauge the full impact of the 26 PAs on the overall outcome, it was
  critical for the PAs to have at least 7 more RIs that could indicate their impact and progress towards the PDO.
  Some of the PA simply constituted announcements of new legislation and are excluded. However, other PAs
  instituted important regulations and institutional changes but do not have RIs. If these missing RIs are assigned
  a relevance rating of HU, the overall relevance of the RIs drops to Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To improve the business environment and strengthen financial inclusion.

Rationale
RI1: The number of commercial dispute cases resolved through the new ADM system was 1 compared to the
baseline of 0 in 2018 and the target of 3 for 2023. The ICR notes that private sector consultations revealed
that businesses were unaware of the introduction of the ADM reforms, especially mediation centers. The
failure is due to both lack of awareness and lack of funding for the mediation centers. Some of this is also
explained by the weak implementation as the ADM system was not an integral part of the judicial reforms
discussed in WBG’s CPF and SCD and lacked sound foundational analysis. It did not receive adequate
budgetary financing which may explain why its implementation was weak. The success of the ADM system
rested on the easy availability of reliable information on companies and collateralized assets which was to be
achieved by PA2 reforms. However, in the absence of an RI for PA2, it is unclear how much of RI1’s
achievement, or lack thereof, is attributable to the slow progress in the PA2-related reforms. Achievement
rating of RI1: Modest.

RI2: The target for the number of insolvency cases resolved in the commercial courts under the reformed
judicial system was fully achieved, indicating that the PA3 – PA5 reforms indeed redressed the constraints to
efficient dispute resolution. The number of insolvency cases increased from 2 in 2018 to 7 in 2023 and were
expected to continue rising as businesses developed confidence in the reformed judicial system.
Achievement rating of RI2: High.

RI3a and RI3b: While the target for increasing financial inclusion by raising the share of the adult population
able to conduct electronic transactions was exceeded by 153 percent in 2023 (RI3a), increasing the share of
the adult population with a money mobile account to 21 percent compared to the baseline of 4 percent in
2016, it is difficult to distinguish whether this progress was due to the expansion in the use of affordable
internet services and mobile phones/computers or the financial inclusion reforms. The achievement rating of
High for RI3a is therefore marked down in the overall achievement rating to reflect this. The target for RI3b
was achieved by 76 percent compared to the baseline of 1.6 percent in 2017, indicating the extremely low
rates of mobiles phones or internet usage among women for financial transactions. The ICR notes that while
some of this was attributed to progress in increasing women’s access to the internet and mobile phones,
there was room for more progress in financial inclusion for women. Achievement rating of RI3a:
Substantial; Achievement rating of RI3b: Substantial.

The achievement rating for PDO1 is Moderately Satisfactory (MS) after considering a missing RI for PA2 that
introduced a critical set of reforms related with the development and easy availability of reliable information on
companies and collateralized assets in a local and central business registry that would facilitate commercial
dispute resolution and foster financial inclusion.

Achievement rating of PDO1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS)



Rating



                                                                                                   Page 18 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve access and affordability of digital broadband services.

Rationale
RI4, RI5 and RI6: RI4 and RI5 focused on making internet services more affordable and more accessible for
mobile phones and computers. The ICR notes that heightened competition and the entry of private operators
fostered by the PA reforms that supported PDO2 in part explain why the price of internet services declined,
making them more affordable. The average monthly cost of the mobile internet dropped substantially between
2018 and 2024, achieving the target of US$1 for one megabit by 92 percent (RI4). The corresponding target
for the fixed internet subscription (RI5) was exceeded by 122 percent. Both reforms were critical for fostering
financial inclusion, improving the business environment and economic development across the board in
Mauritania. In addition, more affordable prices also facilitated the uptake of the internet in rural areas as the
broadband expansion reforms encouraged internet operators to extend the network beyond urban areas. The
target for RI6 was achieved by 97 percent in 2023, indicating that 34 percent of the rural households had
access to the internet compared to only 18 percent in 2017. Achievement rating of RI4: Substantial;
Achievement rating of RI5: High; Achievement rating of RI6: Substantial.

Achievement rating of PDO2: Satisfactory (S).



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience.



Rationale
RI7: The ICR notes that RI exceeded its target by 216 percent in 2022, one year ahead of schedule. Prior to
the establishment of the FNRCAN, the government had no way of identifying and tracking its relief efforts
related to the alleviation of food and nutritional insecurity among vulnerable households during climate
shocks. The establishment of the framework and regulations governing the FNRCAN Fund enabled it to
ensure that 65 percent of the population was protected by an annual response plan in the face of the climate
change threat in 2022. Achievement rating of RI7: High.



                                                                                                  Page 19 of 29
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



Achievement rating of PDO3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



Rating
Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To improve the quality and access to basic education and vocational training.


Rationale
RI8 and RI8b: RI8a measured the improvements in the quality of teaching in primary and secondary public
schools and exceeded its target by 218 percent in 2023. There was a drastic reduction in teacher
absenteeism from 29 percent in 2017 to 5 percent in 2023, boosting progress toward the PDO4 of better-
quality education. The basic education reforms also focused on improving access to education, particularly
from primary to secondary schools. RI8b centered on increasing the transition rate for girls and showed only
modest progress by reaching 61 percent in 2023 relative to a baseline of 57 percent in 2017. The 2023 target
of 63 percent is flagging the significant challenges Mauritania faces in improving access to female education
at the secondary level. Achievement rating of RI8a: High; Achievement rating of RI8b: Modest.

RI9: RI9 also focused on the quality of basic education by targeting teacher competency and using it as a
screening device in retaining qualified teachers. The RI exceeded its target by 221 percent in 2023. RI9 was
an important metric as it indicated that while 35 percent of the in-service teachers passed the competency
test and were qualified to retain their jobs, the government had to recruit almost twice as many qualified
teachers to make the school system viable. Achievement rating of RI9: High.

RI10a and RI10b: These RIs reflected the impact of the new performance contract system in raising the
numbers of TVET graduates attending schools that signed the contracts. As signing the contract opened a
school for assessment of its students’ performance, the performance contracts were a measure that
the government could leverage to incentivize TVET schools to apply for government funding and improve
the quality of their education. RI10a measuring the number of graduates from TVET schools that signed
performance contracts fell 40 percent short of its target of 4700 students in 2023 compared to 0 students in
such schools in 2017. RI10b which measured the share of female graduates from TVET institutions having
signed performance contracts exceeded its target by 131 percent in 2023, reaching a share of 51 percent.
The ICR does not explain these differences in the achievements of RI10a and RI10b. Achievement rating of
RI10a: Modest; Achievement rating of RI10b: High.

The achievement rating for PDO4 is Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). The achievement rating for PDO4
is affected by the missing RIs for 6 PAs that focused on important aspects of the basic and TVET education
reforms to improve education quality and access. As their contribution cannot be determined due to missing
indicators to measure their progress, they pull down the achievement rating for PDO4. Of the 11 RIs including
6 missing RIs, 45 percent are rated Modest or higher but the high share (54 percent) of negligible ratings for


                                                                                               Page 20 of 29
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



                  the missing RIs compromise the rating for PDO4. The achievement rating for PDO4 is Moderately
                  Unsatisfactory (MU).



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The achievement rating is Moderately Satisfactory (MS) for PDO1, Satisfactory (S) for PDO2, Highly Satisfactory
(HS) for PDO3 and Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) for PDO4. The overall achievement rating for all 20 RIs
including missing critical RIs falls between MS and MU. Given that the achievement of PDO1 – PDO3 was
relatively better than the achievement of PDO4, and the rating of PDO4 is pulled down by the missing RIs, IEG
assigns an Overall Efficacy rating of Moderately Satisfactory (MS) for the DPO series.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of the PAs being Highly Satisfactory (HS) and the Efficacy of the DPO being Moderately
Satisfactory (MS), the Overall Outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory (MS).


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks to sustainability is low with some reforms still benefitting from additional time to implement. For
example, the alternative dispute resolution mechanism (ADM) was previously unknown to the private sector.
This may explain its inability to reach the target despite success in implementation of the PAs as per the design


                                                                                                           Page 21 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



of the program. If a comprehensive communication plan were implemented that highlighted its existence and the
benefits of using it, the uptake of ADM services may improve. The RIs that did not achieve their target were on
track to be met. Risk to other reform areas remains low owing to the anchoring of the program at the design
phase to diagnostics and the government national strategy via the CPF and SCD. This ensured that there was
high buy-in from the government for the majority of the reform areas.

The DPO was anchored in the Bank’s broader portfolio and drove reform uptake. The anchoring effect was
due to ensuring that all policy dialogue and engagement with the client by the Bank in the country office was
focused on the same goals which the DPO was driving. Thus, the DPO complemented other instruments, and
those same instruments complemented the DPO. Therefore, despite the political economy factors and country
and global context in 2020, many of the reforms delivered good results. Several stakeholders interviewed during
the ICR mission had said that without the DPO, none of the successes would have happened.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The three-part Mauritania First Competition and Skills DPO series had solid analytical foundations except for
one aspect of the commercial justice component (ADM) and was further enriched with useful lessons from
previous WBG projects.

The DPO was strongly supported by the SCD and CPF that laid out the priorities for its overall design.

The DPO was also aligned with the government priorities as outlined in the SCAPP (Stratégie de Croissance
Accélérée et de Prospérité Partagée).

Almost every policy area was supported by relevant analytical work, technical assistance (TA), and WBG and
IFC trust funds, and several IPFs which ensured sufficient financing and supervision support. The following
analytical sources informed the DPO:

Reforms of the SME Business Environment

      Dollmann, C. (2018). Improving Commercial Justice, Developing Alternative Dispute Resolution
       Mechanisms, and Modernizing the Commercial Registry in Mauritania.
      Ouattara, M. (2018). ICT Capacity Assessment for the Computerization of Mauritania's Business
       Registry.
      Chouari, A. (2018). Diagnostic and Recommendations for the Modernization of the Business and
       Collateral Registry (draft).
      Boli/Djibo, B. (2018). General Report – Support to Mauritania’s International Arbitration and Mediation
       Center.

Reforms of the Broadband Digital Infrastructure


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



      West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (WARCIP) TA (completed in October 2018)
         to support identification and implementation of key legal and regulatory telecom reforms.

Basic Education and Vocational Training Reforms

      World Bank. 2018. “World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize Education’s Promise.”
      World Bank 2016. Islamic Republic of Mauritania Public Expenditure Review (PER): Surfing the wave:
         public spending during the commodity super-cycle and beyond.
        The World Bank 2018 (to be published): Mauritania Service Delivery Indicators in Education.
        The World Bank 2016: SABER Country Report-Engaging the Private Sector in Education.
        République Islamique de Mauritanie 2015: Rapport d’état sur le système éducatif national (RESEN).
        République Islamique de Mauritanie 2018 : Rapport du groupe de travail sur l’accès équitable à une
         éducation de qualité.
        République Islamique de Mauritanie 2018 : Rapport du groupe de travail sur la formation et la
         professionnalisation des enseignants.
        Consulting Ingénierie Développement 2017: Identification d’un mécanisme de financement de la
         formation technique et professionnelle (FTP).

The DPO was built on lessons learned from the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICRR) of the
previous DPF series “Fiscal Consolidation and Private Sector Reforms” in 2016 and 2017. The main lesson was
that ensuring strong Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), having strong ownership from the government, and
supporting reforms with existing TA or WBG projects are critical ingredients of success. This DPO incorporated
the following lessons learned for the design: ensuring that each result indicator (RI) selected was well defined
and approved by the government entities responsible for the M&E of the policy actions, and the pillars of the
DPO were anchored in strong sectoral dialogue with the government through complementary ongoing projects
and/or TA.

The ICR notes that the sequencing of some reforms, such as TVET for professional and vocational skills, could
have been better, however, this was the result of political pressure. For example, the TVET reforms related to
dual training and apprenticeship training in PA26 (DPF3) were included at the insistence of the government that
received financial support from a bilateral donor but were against the advice of the WBG.

The main design flaw was related to limitations around the defined Ris:

      The DPO contained four areas of critical reforms that could be logically organized under four PDOs and
         were covered by a set of 26 prior actions (PAs). Yet, for a DPO of this scale, the operation had only 13
         RIs that were not fully adequate for assessing the contribution of the PAs to their respective PDOs. While
         a few PAs were reform/legislation announcements that did not require dedicated RIs, there were other
         critical reform areas that had no corresponding RI to measure progress. For example, PDO4 related to
         improving the access and quality of basic education and TVET had 9 PAs but only 5 RIs of which 2 RIs
         were related with gender inclusion. One of the PAs helped to establish a TVET (2FTP) to restructure the
         TVET system and make it more appropriate for contributing to green jobs. This was a critical reform for
         Mauritania, but due to the absence of measurable indicators, it is not possible to assess the PA’s
         progress/impact.




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



PDO1 and PDO2 covered long-term reforms with transformational potential. Yet, the available RIs for the PAs
for PDO1 and PDO2 were not always clearly defined making it difficult to distinguish whether increased access
to electronic payments was attributable to successful financial inclusion or improved internet access.

      The ICR notes that some design flaws became apparent during the implementation and evaluation
       phases. For example, data for RI6, RI8b and RI9 in 2023 was constrained due to government’s need to
       conduct national surveys. For several RIs, either the data did not exist, or existed but was not easily
       available for political economy reasons.

Risk Assessment and Mitigation and Donor Coordination: The WBG team appropriately assessed the
overall risks to achieving PDOs as Substantial in DPO1, DPO2 and DPO3. The WBG identified several risks
during preparation, such as substantial macroeconomic, political, institutional, and fiduciary risks. The COVID 19
pandemic and the uncertainty associated with the duration of the pandemic further exacerbated those risks.
However, its economic, social, and health ramifications although not identified in the PD and in DPO1, were well
integrated in DPO2 and DPO3. The overall risk for the DPO was rated as substantial. The WBG incorporated
several mitigation measures that proved adequate as the DPO’s performance was not undermined by the risks
identified at appraisal. In each key reform area, the design of the first DPO involved the establishment of the
legal and regulatory framework followed by the financing mechanisms to support smooth implementation. The
efficient sequencing of the various phases of the broadband, financial inclusion and education reforms from the
design stage ensured smooth implementation, timely completion and achievement of outcomes despite the
risks. The introduction of the PA16 and PA17 reforms (building government’s responsiveness to climate shocks)
into the design of DPO2 was timely and efficient. In adding the new PDO3, the design of DPO2 also ensured
that the institutional framework needed for a government response to climate shocks was in place before
launching the financing mechanism (FNRCAN) and other measures necessary for implementation in DPO3.

The DPO anchored the Bank’s broader portfolio and drove reform uptake. The anchoring effect was due to
ensuring that all policy dialogue and engagement with the client by the WBG in the country office was focused
around the same goals, which the DPO was driving. Thus, the DPO complemented other instruments and those
same instruments complemented the DPO. Therefore, despite the political economy factors and country and
global context in 2020, many of the reforms delivered good results.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The unexpected financing gap created by the COVID-19 pandemic was addressed with supplemental financing
and was important to the program’s success as it helped to maintain program relevance and reform results
without downscaling the PDO and related policy actions. Adjustments helped adapt the program to the new
context, increasing the amounts disbursed to better support the country in response to difficulties created by the
pandemic during implementation (ICR).




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



The DPO reforms were fully aligned with existing WB investment project financing (IPF) operations and the
DPF's reform agenda leveraged the successes of various WBG projects, including the Public-Sector
Governance Project, the Public-Private Partnership Capacity-Building Project, the Nouadhibou Economically
Competitive Seafood Cluster, and the Support of Basic Education project (PASEB, P126902). The Education
Sector Support Project (P163143) and the Mauritania Youth Employability Project (P162916) which
accompanied the DPF series reform program reinforced reforms to the governance, efficiency, and quality of the
education and vocational training through teachers’ recruitment, training, and management as well as school-
based management and finance. Through the Social Safety Net Project II (P171125), the World Bank is
assisting the government in expanding the scope and coverage of cash transfers to mitigate the impact of
climate and food-related shocks on vulnerable populations. Finally, the West Africa Regional Communications
Infrastructure Project (WARCIP) supported the implementation of information and communication technology -
ICT reforms under pillar 2.

The implementation of the DPO faced several challenges that were addressed by the WBG team as far they
were within the WBG’s control: an inter-departmental implementation committee was created by the government
to maximize coordination and mitigate capacity constraints. Even though the lessons learned from WBG’s
previous operations were integrated into the design of the DPO series, in some cases, their implementation was
limited and not entirely within WBG’s control. The collection, quality control, and sharing of administrative data
across the various government agencies was problematic, and in the case of government data sharing, was not
fully under the control of the WB.

The ICR notes that implementation of some reforms was impacted by changes in staffing on the Bank and the
counterpart sides. However, some of these implementation problems were beyond the WBG’s sphere of control.
The ICR notes that in the design phase, a PA for a law to support the commercial justice system of the DPO was
developed collaboratively. However, counterpart staff changes impacted the implementation of the PA despite
the WBG team’s best efforts, and the law was not passed. The WBG team tried its best including a strong
ground presence, regular missions and leveraging as many tools in its arsenal as possible.

Monitoring and evaluation were strong. Several instruments, including TA, IPFs, or IFC’s projects were used to
support progress in the reform areas which allowed for strong monitoring. However, the ICR notes that some
reform areas received limited enthusiasm from the government. The National Quality Framework (NQF) for
TVET is one example. The WBG implementing team never saw the performance contracts, making it difficult to
attribute any progress in the NQF area to the DPO. Data for the ICR was difficult to collect and not all the data
for the target year was submitted, affecting the overall score for the relevant section of this ICR. The RIs were
well selected, and the data and information required should have been easily attainable, however, substantial
effort was required to obtain information on the status of the RIs from the authorities. Additionally, turnovers in
the government personnel led to a loss of project knowledge and oversight by departing staff, thereby
complicating the acquisition of further information. Due to this limitation, the interactions between the ICR team
and the authorities were focused on requests for information about the RIs, rather than facilitating more in-depth
discussions on the program’s implementation and its potential transformative impact.

The ICR notes that implementation of the reforms could have been better coordinated between the development
partner community and the WBG team. Given the government’s longstanding interest in vocational training,
multiple development partners tried to engage on this topic. The WBG was the only development partner
providing budget support and the DPO series was seen as an appropriate vehicle for reforms.




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With Bank performance at design rated as Moderately Satisfactory (MS), and implementation rated as
Satisfactory (S), the overall Bank Performance rating is Satisfactory (S).


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Among the various reforms supported by this DPF series, those related to improved access to the internet,
financial inclusion and resilience to shocks seem to have had the greatest impact. The price drop of more than
56 percent for the mobile internet service, and of more than 90 percent for the fixed internet service made
possible by the broadband network reforms that increased competition among network operators made the
internet more affordable for all, while the extension of the network to the rural areas helped to narrow the digital
divide between urban and rural areas. Still, in 2023, only 34 percent of the rural population had access to the
internet, indicating the need for continued reforms. Greater access to the internet complemented the financial
inclusion initiative that increased the share of adults with a money mobile account from 4 percent in 2016 to 21
percent in 2023, enabling them to make electronic payments. Despite impressive progress, the internet
affordability and access, and financial inclusion reforms only reached about half the population of Mauritania.
The largest impact on the population was made by government’s FNRCAN initiative that enhanced its ability to
reach 65 percent of the individuals affected by climate-related shocks and alleviate their food and nutrition
insecurity.

However, some reforms had a limited social impact by 2023, such as the internet reforms in delivering high-
quality ICT services to boost business growth or popularity of ADR mechanism that could have reduced the
costs of dispute resolution.

The social impact of large-scale reforms to improve the access and quality of basic education through teacher-
focused reforms, and efforts to improve TVET quality and making it better at preparing the workforce to cope
with climate shocks remains unknown.



b. Environmental



                                                                                                      Page 26 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



The reforms and policy actions supported by the proposed operation are not likely to have a significant impact
on the environment, forests, and natural resources. All the actions supported throughout the operation are
policy-oriented and do not support direct investments or involve policy actions that may have significant effects
on the country’s environment, forests, and natural resources. The policy action aimed at increasing financial
inclusion and promoting the digitization of financial services will be instrumental to build resilience to climate
change as access to financial services via mobile money can help the rural poor better cope with climate-related
income shocks. Mauritania is well prepared to ensure the safe deployment of ICT infrastructure that could result
from additional investments stemming from reforms under Pillar 2 (Developing competitive and inclusive
broadband infrastructure services). While the development and deployment of new retail broadband
infrastructure (fiber optic network, telecom towers, etc.) comes with potential negative environmental and social
risks and impacts, the country has systems in place for reducing such adverse effects.

The establishment of the National Fund for Financing Food Security and Nutrition Shock-Response will directly
enhance Mauritania’s capacity to respond to climate change impact. The reform on ameliorating the quality of
the TVET sector will ensure that climate change adaptation and “green sectors” are key criteria when assigning
funding for training programs.



c. Gender

The DPF series helped narrow gender disparities through improved financial inclusion by helping to increase the
share of women using a mobile phone or internet to conduct a financial transaction from 1.6 percent in 2017 to
11.8 percent in 2023, thereby enhancing gender inclusiveness. While small, these changes were made possible
by the contribution of the financial inclusion laws that legalized electronic payment transfers as well as the
broadband network expansion reforms that made the internet more accessible and affordable, even though the
scope for more reforms and progress is large. Unfortunately, the gender impact of the broadband extension
reforms is unknown, so it is unclear how much women have benefited from greater access to the internet and
mobile phones. Still, while most women remain excluded, the financial inclusion reforms opened the door to
bridging the financial inclusion gap and empowering women with a secure and convenient means to manage
their finances.

The DPF reforms which aimed to enhance gender inclusiveness by improving access and quality of basic
education and TVET had mixed success. The impact of quality enhancement reforms in public schools to
motivate more women to transition from primary to lower secondary school made only modest progress. The
transition rate for female students nudged up from 57 percent in 2017 to only 61 percent in 2023, signaling the
immense and neglected challenges in achieving this goal. In contrast, the percentage of female graduates from
TVET schools that had signed performance contracts increased from 0 in 2018 when such contracts were
unavailable to 51 percent in 2023 when government established a new Technical and Vocational Support Fund
(2FTP) to institutionalize performance contracts in institutions to make TVET more market relevant. The success
showed that female students valued schools that were willing to be held to higher standards. Unfortunately, due
to missing results indicators, the gender inclusiveness of a large number of basic education and TVET reforms
that were a part of the DPO series cannot be determined.



d. Other

---

                                                                                                   Page 27 of 29
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. It presents a coherent and clear discussion of the three-part DPO
series, shows how the PAs with dedicated RIs made progress towards the PDOs and is candid in pointing to the
design and implementation challenges that emerged when multiple donors were providing TA or inputs to the
government without being involved substantively in the design or implementation of the DPO. A deficiency of the
ICR is that it does not discuss the status or effectiveness of the PAs that did not have dedicated RIs to measure
their impact, thus not allowing IEG to validate whether some or no progress was made in this part of the DPO’s
reform agenda.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
                                  Moderately
 Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                    Several major implementation
                                  Moderately                                        challenges were overcome
 Bank Performance                                        Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory                                      successfully despite the COVID-
                                                                                    19 crisis.
 Relevance of Results
                                  ---                    Moderately Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR of the Mauritania First Competition and Skills DPO presented 7 lessons. While IEG agrees with the
ICR’s lessons, it adds below its own lesson drawn from the design of the DPO.

DPOs need to ensure a full set of result indicators that measures the efficacy of the DPOs prior actions
in support of policy reforms. Each prior action should have a clear results logic that links it to at least one
relevant and clearly defined results indicator. This will allow the adequate measurement and attribution of
outcomes to the supported policy reforms. The four PDOs of the Mauritania First Competition and Skills DPO
(P167348) had several reform areas with potential for transformational economic and social change such as
financial inclusion, internet access and affordability, and TVET education for climate-resilient skills training. Yet,
inadequate or missing results indicators for several key prior actions do not allow IEG to validate whether some
or no progress was made in these important areas of the DPO’s reform agenda.



                                                                                                        Page 28 of 29
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MRT First Competition & Skills DPO (P167348)



13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                  Page 29 of 29
