     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024214

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P165147                                     Financial Sector Strengthening Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Kosovo                                      Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-64160                                   31-Dec-2023                                         26,769,051.70

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-May-2019                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          26,769,051.70                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Antonio M. Ollero           Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (page 16) and the Financing Agreement (page 4), the
   project development objective (PDO) of the Kosovo Financial Sector Strengthening Project was to improve
   access to finance for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) by strengthening the financial and
   technical capacity of the Kosovo Credit Guarantee Fund (KCGF). The KCGF was established in 2016 to issue
   portfolio loan guarantees to financial institutions to cover up to 50 percent of the risk of loans to MSMEs.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had two components.

   Enhancing the Credit Guarantee Framework (Euro [EUR] 21.4 million estimated at appraisal, EUR 21.4
   million disbursed by closing) supported: (a) the expansion of the capital base for the general window of the
   KCGF by EUR 17.7 million (the leverage ratio would be maintained at 2.5:1); and (b) the creation of a new
   window at the KCGF to provide partial credit guarantees to underserved and strategic businesses that were
   important for sustainable economic growth, including start-ups, young enterprises, and women businesses,
   and the capitalization of this new window by EUR 3.7 million (the leverage ratio would be maintained at
   1.5:1). Separately, a temporary Economic Recovery Package window was opened at the KCGF during
   project implementation in December 2020 -- part of the Government's Economic Recovery Program (from
   the COVID-19 pandemic) -- and was partly capitalized by the project funds allocated for this project
   component (the project was not restructured for this purpose).

   Project Implementation and Institutional Strengthening of the KCGF (EUR 0.9 million estimated at
   appraisal, EUR 0.45 million disbursed by closing) supported the institutional strengthening of the KCGF in
   eight areas: (a) project implementation; (b) information technology (IT); (c) risk assessment policies and
   procedures; (d) internal control and financial reporting; (e) monitoring and evaluation, including of
   environmental and social safeguards; (d) design and development of new financial products for MSMEs; (e)
   marketing and communications strategy; and (f) the training of loan officers.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost and Financing. The project was estimated to cost EUR 22.3 million (US$25 million
   equivalent) at appraisal. The project was financed by a credit from the International Development
   Association (IDA) to the Republic of Kosovo for EUR 22.3 million (US$25 million equivalent). EUR 21.85
   million of the IDA credit (98 percent) was disbursed -- the allocation of EUR 21.4 million for the first project
   component was frontloaded and disbursed in a single tranche in December 2020 three months following
   project effectiveness in September 2020, prompted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic
   and financial downturn. The undisbursed amount for the second project component and changes in the
   US$/EUR exchange rate account for the difference between the final disbursed amount in US$ term, at
   US$26.8 million, and that estimated at appraisal, at US$25 million.

   Borrower Contribution. There was no financial contribution to the project from the Government.

   Dates. The project was approved on May 14, 2019, became effective on September 21, 2020, and closed
   as scheduled on December 31, 2023.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Binding Constraint to Development. This project aimed to address a critical constraint faced by MSMEs -
- limited and difficult access to finance. According to the Republic of Kosovo Systematic Country Diagnostic
Update (World Bank, 2022) and related reports: (a) MSMEs dominated the private sector in Kosovo,
accounting for more than 97 percent of all formal firms in the economy and 65 percent of total employment,
according to Jobs Diagnostic - Kosovo (World Bank, 2017); (b) but MSMEs faced a poor access to finance -
- 33 percent of MSMEs were financially constrained, with the MSME financial gap (the difference between
the amount of finance that MSMEs need and the amount of finance that is available to them) estimated
at EUR 342 million in 2017, around 5 percent of GDP (World Bank and International Finance Corporation,
2017, MSME Financing Gap: Assessment of the Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises in Emerging Markets); (c) financial intermediation, by a financial system dominated by
foreign banks, remained low, with credit to the private sector at 39.6 percent of GDP (modest relative to the
country's income level); (d) MSMEs, in particular, faced high collateral requirements and risk-averse lending
practices by commercial banks, which preferred lending to large enterprises, relied on non-interest income,
and maintained high interest rate spreads; (e) the KCGF was created in 2016 to backstop lending to
MSMEs which had little credit history or lacked collateral, thereby expanding lending by banks to MSMEs;
(f) the KCGF had provided guarantees to loans totaling EUR 87.1 million by 2018 (1.3 percent of GDP in
2018), and demand for partial credit guarantees was expected to grow, but the institution's capital base,
which had grown from EUR 8.6 million in 2016 to EUR 15 million by 2018, was inadequate to meet the
expected demand.

Traditional Credit Line versus Partial Credit Guarantees. To expand access to finance for MSMEs, the
World Bank considered using a traditional credit line approach under which long-term loans to financial
intermediaries would be on-lent by the financial intermediaries to MSME sub-borrowers. A EUR 22.1 million
IDA credit to Kosovo (the amount provided by this operation) would provide loan financing of EUR 22.1
million to MSMEs, in at least the first round of on-lending by financial intermediaries. Alternatively, a partial
credit guarantee scheme, capitalized at EUR 22.1 million, and using a guarantee coverage limit of 50
percent and a maximum leverage ratio of 5:1, would provide loan financing of around EUR 200 million to
MSMEs.

Country Development Priorities. The project objective to improve access to finance for MSMEs by
strengthening the financial and technical capacity of the KCGF was consistent with the country's
development priorities at project appraisal. The Republic of Kosovo National Development Strategy 2016-
2021 (NDS) articulated four thematic pillars: Human Capital, the Rule of Law and Good Governance,
Development of Competitive Industries, and Development of Infrastructure. The project objective was
consistent with the third pillar, specifically with the NDS objective to "increase access to finance for SMEs.

Bank Group Country Strategy. The project objective was also aligned with the Bank Group country
strategy for Kosovo at project closing. The Country Partnership Framework for the Republic of Kosovo for
the Period FY23-FY27 (CPF) committed Bank Group support for the country's development priorities
organized around three high-level outcomes: Greater Public Service Efficiency and Quality, More Formal
Private Sector Jobs, and Increased Environmental Resilience. The project objective was aligned with the
second high-level outcome, specifically with "CFP Objective 2.1 - To enhance business climate and access



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



               to finance" and "CPF Objective 2.2 - To remove barriers to the economic empowerment of women and the
               youth."

               Overall, the PDO was pitched at an appropriate level of ambition and well aligned with the Bank and
               country strategy.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to finance for MSMEs by strengthening the financial and technical capacity of the Kosovo
                             Credit Guarantee Fund.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. To help credit-constrained MSMEs to enhance their access to finance from the formal
                             financial system -- commercial banks and microfinance institutions -- the project would strengthen the
                             financial and technical capacity of the KCGF to issue more partial credit guarantees to MSMEs by injecting
                             new capital into the institution and helping the institution develop new financial products and improve its
                             management systems. The achievement of the objective to improve MSME access to finance would be
                             evidenced by a greater number and a greater amount of guaranteed loans to MSMEs. The results chain was
                             credible because the partial credit guarantee scheme in Kosovo and the capacity of the KCGF to deliver
                             credit guarantees had been tested, with the KCGF providing guarantees to loans to MSME totaling EUR 87.1
                             million from 2016 to 2018 (1.3 percent of GDP in 2018). While the KCGF's capital had doubled from EUR 8.6
                             million in 2016 to EUR 15 million in 2018, it now remained inadequate relative to the rising demand. The
                             project would inject new capital of EUR 21.4 million into the KCGF to enable the institution to not only expand
                             its regular window but to also open new windows serving start-ups, young entrepreneurs, and women
                             businesses. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuring economic downturn expanded the
                             KCGF's mandate midway during project implementation to include extending partial credit guarantees to
                             MSMEs that had established credit histories but faced credit constraints due to tightened financial conditions.
                             The underlying soundness of the partial credit guarantee scheme for MSMEs in Kosovo gave credence to the
                             notion that the project would meet this additional dimension to the project objective.

                             Outputs. The project partially achieved the targets for two and fully achieved the targets for six
                             outputs defined for the objective to improve access to finance for MSMEs by strengthening the financial and
                             technical capacity of the Kosovo Credit Guarantee Fund.

                                        The number of MSMEs receiving guaranteed loans through the project reached 1,953 by December
                                          2023 and to 2,220 by April 2024, exceeding the target of 2,000, after project closing.


                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)




      The share of guarantees issued to firms with no credit history remained at 25 percent in December
         2023, as it was in December 2018, partially meeting the target of 30 percent. According to the ICR,
         the result was diluted by the large number of MSMEs needing and receiving credit guarantees
         following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic -- the KCGF issued the highest number of credit
         guarantees in its history in 2021, in response to tightened financial conditions following the pandemic,
         including to MSMEs which already had a credit history.
        The share of the number of guarantees issued to women owned or managed MSMEs reached 18
         percent by December 2023 and 19 percent by April 2024, exceeding the target of 5 percent. The
         share of the amount of guarantees issued to women owned or managed MSMEs reached 16 percent
         by April 2024 (there were no targets set for this output indicator). The KCGF launched the permanent
         windows for women in business and startups in 2023. Earlier, women in business and startups were
         served by the temporary Economic Recovery Program window which opened and operated in 2021 in
         response to the pandemic.
        The ratio of outstanding guarantees to equity stood at 1.71 percent in December 2023 and 1.9 percent
         in April 2024, meeting the target that the ratio remains below 2.5 percent. The achievement meant that
         the financial quality of credit guarantees issued was maintained at satisfactory levels -- the
         KCGF left room for further growth in guarantees while maintaining a cautious position with the
         leverage ratio remaining less than 2.5 percent.
        The proportion of guarantee claims paid out stood at 0.44 percent in December 2023 and 0.28 percent
         in April 2024, meeting the target that the ratio remains under 5 percent.
        The percentage of beneficiaries that felt that the project activities reflected their needs (a citizen
         engagement indicator involving partner financial institutions and MSMEs and pertaining to the KCGF
         products) reached 71 percent by December 2023, partially achieving the target of 75 percent (the data
         was obtained from a KCGF survey).
        The procurement, financial management, and environmental monitoring functions at the KCGF
         were in place by December 2023, meeting the target that procurement, financial management, and
         environmental specialists be hired. The ICR added that: (a) the KCGF improved its IT infrastructure,
         modified its systems to accommodate new credit guarantee modules, and enhanced its ability to
         prepare International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) financial statements; and (b) partner
         financial institutions established environmental and social management systems (ESMS) to
         continually identify, assess, manage, and monitor environmental and social risks and impacts of
         projects financed by their portfolios.
        The number of loan officers trained by the KCGF (i.e., on KCGF products and on ESMS) was 1,538
         by December 2023, exceeding the target of 600.

Outcomes. The project partially achieved the target for one and fully achieved the target the other of
two outcomes defined for the objective to improve access to finance for MSMEs by strengthening the financial
and technical capacity of the Kosovo Credit Guarantee Fund.

      The total amount of guaranteed loans through the project reached EUR 121.3 million by December
       2023 and EUR 141.6 million by April 2024, exceeding the target of EUR 130 million, after project
       closing. Of the EUR 141.6 million of guaranteed loans by April 2024: (a) EUR 51.6 million were
       guaranteed loans under the regular window; (b) EUR 84.7, under the Economic Recovery Package
       window (2021); (c) EUR 1.9 million, under the new Start-Up window (2023-2024); and (d) EUR 3.4
       million, under the new Women in Business window (2023-2024).
      The number of guaranteed loans was 2,279 by December 2023 and 2,632 by April 2024, partially
       meeting the target of 3,700 loans, after project closing. Of the 2,632 guaranteed loans by April 2024:

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



                                    (a) 859 were guaranteed loans under the regular window; (b) 1,573, under the Economic Recovery
                                    Package window (2021); (c) 66, under the new Start-Up window (2023-2024); and (d) 134, under the
                                    new Women in Business window (2023-2024). The ICR adds that as the KCGF continues to
                                    successfully operate and enhance its guarantee operations, the target for the number of guaranteed
                                    loans will be achieved soon.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project is rated substantial. While the project exceeded the target for the volume of
                            guaranteed loans, it fell short of achieving the target for the number of guaranteed loans. The ICR notes the
                            increased likelihood of meeting the target for the number of loans as KCGF continues to successfully operate
                            and enhance its guarantee operations.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. The PAD calculated a positive net present value (NPV) for the project of EUR 100
   million, suggesting a profitable investment. The ex-ante analysis assumed that: (a) the EUR 21.4 million of
   additional capital for the KCGF would be used to provide partial credit guarantees to around 3,700 firms; (b) on
   a 2.5:1 leverage ratio for the guarantee portfolio, the average loan size to MSMEs would be around EUR
   35,000; and (c) the partial credit guarantee coverage ratio would be set at 50 percent. The total amount of loans
   provided by partner financial institutions to MSMEs would reach EUR 130 million over four years, the NPV of
   which would be EUR 100 million, using a 10 percent annual discount rate.

   The ICR did not present a similar ex-post NPV analysis. Rather, the ICR cited the economic benefits accruing to
   MSMEs from the project, based on an "impact study" conducted the World Bank using Tax Authority, Central
   Bank, and KCGF data. The study found that MSMEs supported by partial credit guarantees from the KCGF: (a)
   increased their turnover -- by about 10 percent greater than the comparison group of MSMEs that were not
   served by the KCGF; (b) became more productive -- by 5.8 percent; (c) expanded employment -- by 2.8 percent
   (i.e., the project created 3,600 new jobs); (d) were less likely to stop operations -- by about 5 percent; but (e)
   grew only modestly than before the project.

   Operational Efficiency. The project funds were fully disbursed, with the EUR 21.4 million capitalization of the
   KCGF general and new windows frontloaded and disbursed three months after project effectiveness (see

                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



Section 2.E). The project was completed by the closing date, although project effectiveness was delayed by a
year (Parliament was dissolved in August 2019, which delayed Parliamentary ratification of the Financing
Agreement, and a vote of no confidence in the Government installed in February 2020 led to the formation of a
new Government in June 2020, delaying project effectiveness further).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objectives is rated high, efficacy, substantial, and efficiency, substantial. The outcome of the
project is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risks to the development outcomes achieved by this project are low to moderate.

The institutional risk is low to moderate: (a) the KCGF is an independent institution protected by a robust
legal framework (Law No. 05/L-507 of 2016 as amended in 2021); (b) the institution is technically capable,
having received extensive technical and capacity building assistance since its creation from international
development partners, including USAID, KfW, and SIDA; (c) apart from the capital injection of EUR21.4
million from the proceeds of this IDA credit, the KCGF received an additional equity contribution of EUR40
million from the proceeds of an EIB loan to Kosovo in June 2021 (see Section 8); (d) the international
development partners have seats in the Board and are part of the corporate governance structure; and (e)
the KCGF has a history of successful implementation of partial credit guarantee operations, providing
guarantees to loans totaling EUR87.1 million and helping create over 3,500 jobs through end-2018.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



Because the KCGF stands as a dependable and professionally managed institution, it is unlikely that the
capital of the institution will be eroded. The recent capital injections into the KCGF are expected to remain
permanent, allowing the institution to continue with partial credit guarantee operations benefitting MSMEs.

The macroeconomic and fiscal sector risks to continued credit guarantee operations are low to moderate in
the near to medium term. Economic growth in Kosovo is projected to stabilize at around 4 percent in the
medium term, supported by increasing real incomes and higher investment, according to the Macro Poverty
Outlook for Europe and Central Asia (World Bank, April 2024). Meanwhile, the banking system remains
sound, with banks well capitalized with ample provision coverage, highly liquid, and profitable, according to
the Republic of Kosovo Second Reviews under the Stand-by Arrangement and the Arrangement under the
Resilience and Sustainability Facility (International Monetary Fund, June 2024). Non-performing
loans remain low and real credit growth has been robust.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Analytical Foundations. The design of the project conformed with the Principles for Public Credit
  Guarantee Schemes for SMEs (World Bank and FIRST Initiative, 2015), which set the standards for the
  design, implementation, and evaluation of public credit guarantee schemes supported by the World Bank
  and other development partners globally. The standards covered the legal and regulatory, corporate
  governance, risk management, operational, monitoring and evaluation aspects of public credit guarantee
  schemes directed at SMEs. Other analytical work that informed the design of the project included: (a)
  Jobs Diagnostic - Kosovo (World Bank, 2017); (b) Republic of Kosovo Enterprise Survey (World Bank
  and International Finance Corporation, 2013); and (c) MSME Financing Gap: Assessment of the
  Shortfalls and Opportunities in Financing Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in Emerging Markets
  (World Bank and International Finance Corporation, 2017).

  Lessons Learned from Similar Operations. The project design adopted the "combined long-term
  funding and institutional strengthening services" strategy used in similar credit guarantee operations
  supported by the World Bank, including in Croatia, Lao PDR, Sri Lanka, Jordan, Ghana, and the Eastern
  Caribbean Currency Union, according to the PAD. Moreover, following the conclusion of the preceding
  Kosovo Financial Sector Technical Assistance Project and its extension, the Kosovo Financial Sector
  Strengthening and Market Infrastructure Project, in 2014, the World Bank conducted a diagnostic
  assessment of the KCGF to determine the agency's internal capacity to implement the proposed
  expansion of the public credit guarantee program in Kosovo.

  Implementation Arrangements. The World Bank required implementation arrangements that were
  adequate to ensure the effective implementation of the project: (a) the Ministry of Finance would enter
  into a Subsidiary Agreement with the KCGF to make the project funds available to the KCGF and to
  facilitate the implementation of the project; (b) the KCGF would enter into Partial Credit Guarantee
  Agreements with partner financial institutions, with the charges for the partial credit
  guarantee commitments set in accordance with the KCGF legislation and with partner financial institution
  credits made subject to terms and conditions satisfactory to KCGF; and (c) the KCGF would adopt a
  Project Operations Manual, acceptable to the World Bank, that, among others, set the terms of
  guarantees provided by the KCGF to partner financial institutions, the eligibility criteria and selection

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



  procedures for partner financial institutions, the selection of eligible MSMEs, and the terms for partial
  credit guarantees provided by partner financial institutions to MSMEs.

  Collaboration with Development Partners. The World Bank worked closely with the U.S. Agency for
  International Development (USAID), the Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW), and the Swedish
  International Development Cooperation Agency (SIDA) -- three international development partners with
  seats at the Board of the KCGF, albeit on an observer status -- to coordinate their developmental
  assistance to the KCGF, identify project complementarities, and prevent the duplication of their
  operations. The USAID helped establish the KGCF in 2016 and funded current expenditures until 2018,
  the KfW extended capital and technical assistance to the KCGF, while the SIDA provided a secondary
  guarantee to the institution (SIDA's "re-guarantee" covered 50 percent of KCGF’s losses while KCGF, in
  turn, covered 50 percent of partner banks’ eventual losses). The World Bank also coordinated its project
  design efforts with the International Finance Corporation, which worked with private banks in Kosovo to
  complement the partial credit guarantee schemes of the KCGF.

  Operational Risk and Mitigation Measures. The World Bank assessed the overall project risk to
  be substantial and offered credible mitigation measures for most risk categories. Political risk was
  considered high. Any prolonged political uncertainty, like the one that struck after the 2017 elections,
  could delay the project effectiveness date. Governance risk was also considered high. Project activities to
  enhance the institutional capacity of the KCGF would address this risk. However, frequent political
  changes could affect the representation of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Trade and Industry
  at the Board of the KCGF, rendering the KCGF prone to external interference. The robust legal statue
  upholding the independence of KCGF and the donor presence in the Board of the KCGF would mitigate
  this risk. Fiduciary risk was rated substantial. Although the procurement activities and financial
  management functions envisaged in the project design were simple, rudimentary systems and the
  KCGF's limited experience with World Bank procurement and financial management procedures
  elevated the project fiduciary risk. The World Bank would provide implementation support to the KCGF to
  mitigate this risk.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Implementation Support. The World Bank supervised the project regularly, producing seven
 Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) over the four-and-a-half-year duration of the project, or
 two a year, the average for Investment Project Financing operations. The ISRs rated the project
 performance as satisfactory throughout project implementation, except in April 2023, when the ISR
 considered the project performance to be moderately satisfactory due to delays with the introduction of the
 new credit guarantee window at the KCGF.

 According to the ICR, the World Bank collaborated closely with the Government on many aspects of project
 implementation including on the performance of the credit guarantee windows, the compliance by partner
 financial institutions of the project terms and conditions, procurement, financial management, and the state
 of the financial sector.


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



 Adaptation. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020 and the resulting economic downturn
 (real GDP contracted by 5.3 percent in 2020) prompted the Government to plan an Economic Recovery
 Law (subsequently passed by Parliament in December 2020) and an Economic Recovery Program that,
 among others, provided for the opening at the KCGF of an Economic Recovery Package window of partial
 credit guarantees at terms more favorable than in the regular window -- a larger loan size of eligible loans
 by partner financial institutions, a and a higher guarantee coverage ratio.

 The World Bank provided needed technical assistance during project implementation to the Ministry of
 Finance, Labor, and Transfers and to the KCGF for the preparation of this Economic Recovery Package
 window, as well as with the analysis of the risks associated with the utilization by this window of the project
 funds. Part of project funds for the capitalization of the KCGF, released in a single tranche after project
 effectiveness, would support partial credit guarantees issued by the Economic Recovery Package window,
 which would operate for a year during the pandemic -- in 2021 -- and subsequently expire.

 The reallocation of the contributed capital to the KCGF for the regular window and the new windows (for
 start-ups and women businesses) after the Economic Recovery Package window closed in end-2021
 proved problematic for several reasons: (a) the KCGF Law was amended in 2021 to conform with the
 Economic Recovery Program Law, passed in 2020; (b) the KCGF received new capital from the proceeds
 of a European Investment Bank loan of EUR 40 million to Kosovo in June 2021, which affected
 the utilization of the IDA project funds; (c) it took time to design and introduce the new windows -- the new
 windows for start-ups and for women businesses were not opened until 2023; and (d) the KCGF had to
 revamp its legal framework and operational processes to adjust to the post-COVID-19 economy, in which
 banks had only slowly become less risk averse than during the height of the pandemic. The World Bank
 assisted the KCGF in designing the new windows, paying particular attention to MSME eligibility criteria
 under the new windows for start-ups and women businesses.

 Shortcomings with Supervision. The ICR suggests that the World Bank could have restructured the
 project as the Economic Recovery Package window was introduced: (a) first, to modify the results targets
 in view of revisions to the average MSME loan size and the guarantee coverage ratio (from 50 to 80
 percent) for the Economic Recovery Package window; and (b) second, to utilize more of the funding of the
 second component (only half was utilized) (see Section 2.E) -- the option would have been to add new
 activities in support of the goal to strengthen the institutional capacity of the KCGF.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The World Bank defined a results framework for the project of eight output (intermediate results) and two
 outcome (PDO-level) indicators to measure the degree of achievement of the project objectives. The

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



 results indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time bound. However, the results
 framework had deficiencies: (a) there were no results indicators for three outputs defined in the theory of
 change -- increased capital base of the KCGF, the establishment of a strategic window at the KCGF, and
 new financial products; (b) the number of MSMEs benefitting from partial credit guarantees could have
 been added as an outcome indicator.

 The M&E plan required the KCGF, as the project implementing entity, to submit a Project Report to the
 World Bank within 45 days from the end of each calendar semester.



b. M&E Implementation
  The KCGF implemented the M&E plan as designed.

  Additionally, the KCGF conducted surveys of partner financial institutions and MSMEs to gather data
  about the project economic benefits. The KCGF joined the World Bank, the Central Bank of Kosovo, and
  the Ministry of Finance, Labor, and Transfers in preparing an impact study to assess the effects of the
  guaranteed loans on MSMEs performance. According to the ICR, the KCGF's participation in the impact
  study also helped the institution build capacity for evaluation.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data helped the KCGF to (a) estimate demand for credit guarantees under its regular window.;
  and (b) to design its new credit guarantee windows, including those serving women businesses,
  startups, green projects, and exports.

  According to the ICR, the M&E data and reports also helped the KCGF mobilize additional capital from
  other development partners. The European Investment Bank contributed EUR 40 million to the regular
  window of the KCGF in June 2021.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project was classified as an Environmental Assessment
   category FI project ("the project provides funds to a bank, or credit institution, for on-lending at the financial
   intermediary’s own risk [OP/BP 8.30 – Financial Intermediary Lending]") at appraisal and triggered
   safeguards policy OP/BP - Environmental Assessment. The Government prepared an Environmental
   Assessment Management Framework for the project and supported 11 partner financial institutions to
   prepare Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS). The KCGF trained more than 1,500 loan
   officers at partner financial institutions to apply the ESMS and enlisted the expertise of an environmental
   specialist to help build capacity for environmental management at financial institutions. Meanwhile, the

                                                                                                       Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



   partner financial institutions supported only those MSME sub-projects that were classified as category B
   ("some type of environmental assessment/review/plan is required, but limited in scope and flexible in
   structure, reflecting the limited environmental impacts of the project and the anticipated relatively
   straightforward mitigation") or category C ("no environmental review is required") and appointed an
   environmental specialist to oversee the environmental and social risk management of their portfolios.
   Compliance with OP/BP 4.10 and with Overall Safeguards was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout
   most of project implementation, including in the last ISR of April 2023.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The KCGF was not subject to government procurement laws, which, when aligned with
   World Bank guidelines, are usually relied upon elsewhere to ensure compliance with World Bank rules.
   The KCGF also had little experience with World Bank procurement guidelines and experienced a
   notable turnover in procurement staff. Project procurement activities were consequently delayed, and
   procurement risk was rated Substantial throughout most of project implementation. Nonetheless,
   procurement performance turned out to be Moderately Satisfactory, including in the last ISR of April 2023.

   Financial Management. The World Bank found the project financial management and disbursement
   arrangements to be adequate, including those for project planning and budgeting, accounting and financial
   reporting, internal control, and audit. The KCGF was, by law, subject to public financial reporting and
   independent audit requirements, which it complied with. There were no major issues with financial
   management, which was rated Satisfactory in the last five ISRs, including in the final one in April 2023.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)




Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

Partial credit guarantee schemes offer an effective and efficient way to expand SME finance
by encouraging banks and nonbank financial institutions to serve the SME market especially
at a time of economic stress. In this operation, the Economic Recovery Package window at the
KCGF provided guarantees worth EUR 59.9 million to backstop 1,574 loans amounting to EUR 84.7
million in 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic. The temporary one-year window benefitted 1,370
MSMEs. This represented the highest number of guarantees the KCGF ever issued in any one year
since its creation in 2016 and helped the SME-dominated economy rebound to a 10.8 percent
growth in 2021 after contracting by 5.3 percent in 2020. Partial credit guarantee schemes were
frequently employed to support SME activities elsewhere globally during the pandemic, according to
the ICR, and the KCGF and its special window were often cited as examples of an
efficient institution and effective instrument.

Close coordination among development partners helps avoid the duplication of assistance to
credit guarantee institutions and helps optimize the use donor resources aimed at enhancing
access to finance for MSMEs. In this and related operations, the development partners directed
their capital assistance to the KCGF at separate segments of the credit guarantee market, with the
World Bank focusing on the regular window and the new windows for start-ups and women
businesses and the EIB on the regular window alone. Meanwhile, the KfW focused on agricultural
lending, the Millenium Challenge Corporation on green lending, and SIDA on re-guarantees. The
development partners collaborated extensively during the pandemic, according to the ICR,
particularly to amend the KCGF Law and to design the Economic Recovery Package window with
more liberal terms than under the regular window operating in normal times.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is consistent with OPCS guidelines on ICRs for investment project financing operations. The efficacy
assessment is outcome-oriented and based on the degree of achievement of the results targets (Annex 3).
The efficiency assessment is supported by adequate evidence, principally the findings of a World Bank impact
assessment of the operation (Annex 4). The ICR presents ample evidence to support its assessment of the
Bank’s performance at design and implementation. The inclusion of the Borrower's ICR (Annex 5) provides
useful information about the preparation and implementation of the project, including the rationale for choosing
the partial credit guarantee scheme over the traditional credit line approach to supporting MSME finance. The



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Financial Sector Strengthening Project (P165147)



ICR draws lessons that would be valuable to the design of future projects focused on MSMEs. Overall, the
quality of the ICR is rated as substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 14 of 14
