     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024165

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 3                                          3

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P168566                                    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-63360,IDA-D3870                       30-Nov-2019                                     1,192,202,874.42

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Oct-2018                               30-Nov-2019
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                        1,200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                         1,200,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                     1,192,202,874.42                                             0.00




P169079_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 Ethiopia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P169079                                   Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness DPF2 ( P169079 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)




L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
IDA-63360,IDA-65640,IDA-67010,IDA-        26-Feb-2021                                          747401494.67
D3870,IDA-D5740,IDA-D6720

Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
19-Mar-2020                               26-Feb-2021

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

Original Commitment                          750,000,000.00                                              0.00

Revised Commitment                           750,000,000.00                                              0.00

Actual                                       747,401,494.67                                              0.00



P169080_TBL
Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
Ethiopia                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

Operation ID                              Operation Name
P169080                                   COVID19 Supplemental to Ethiopia DPF2 ( P169080 )


L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
IDA-65640,IDA-67010,IDA-D5740,IDA-                                                                             0
D6720

Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
08-Jun-2020

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00



Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
Patrick Shawn Hettinger    Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




                                                                                                Page 2 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The DPF was originally designed as a series of three operations (DPF1-3). The Project Development Objective
(PDO) for the Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness was originally defined in DPF-1 as: (i) maximizing finance for
development; (ii) improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector; and (iii) enhancing
transparency and accountability,” PD (p. 16) and ICR (para. 16).

The PDO was not stated in any of the three financing agreements (FAs).

In December 2019 while DPF-2 was being prepared, a three-year, US$2.9 billion IMF ECF/EFF program was
approved which supported the transition to market-determined exchange rates over a three-year period, as well
as fiscal consolidation, revenue mobilization, SOE reforms, and the phased elimination of monetary deficit
financing and financial repression. In June 2018, a debt-reprofiling agreement with China reduced the debt
burden by US$4.5 billion, including US$2.5 billion owed by the railway SOE. In the context of the changes in
circumstances, the PDO for the second DPF series was reformulated as:

This DPO series aims at boosting economic transformation in Ethiopia by increasing private sector participation
and promoting good governance practices.

This modification in the PDO was seen to retain the three substantive elements of the original DPF, but the
revised framing was intended to sharpen the series’ focus on accelerating Ethiopia’s economic transformation to
complement the IMF program more closely and restructuring of bilateral debt.

The Supplemental DPF provides financing in continuation of a reform program that is proceeding on schedule
and in accordance with the agreed policy agenda, so there are no new Prior Actions (PAs) or changes in the
PDO. However, in this case the COVID-DPO presented the PDO as:

“This DPO series aims at boosting economic transformation in Ethiopia by increasing private sector participation
and promoting good governance practices, including moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s
development”.

The last DPF in the series, DPF-3, was dropped.

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDOs of the series are taken to be:

      PDO1: moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s development.
      PDO2: improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector.
      PDO3: enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good governance.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The series had three pillars as follows:

     i. maximizing finance for development;
    ii. improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector; and
                                                                                                  Page 3 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



   iii. enhancing transparency and accountability.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

DPO-1 was approved on August 28, 2018, became effective on December 5, 2018, and closed on November
30, 2019. An IDA credit for US$600,000,000 was approved and US$596,101,437 was disbursed. An IDA grant
for the same amount (US$600,000,000) was approved and US$596,101,437 was disbursed. The difference
reflects exchange rate movements.

DPO-2 was approved on March 19, 2020, became effective on April 14, 2020, and closed on February 26,
2021. An IDA credit for US$187,800,000 was approved and US$185,861,368 was disbursed. An IDA grant for
US$312,200,000 was approved and US$309,042,215 was disbursed. The difference between the approved and
disbursed amounts reflects exchange rate movements.

The Supplemental COVID DPO was approved on June 8, 2020. An IDA credit for US$125,000,000 was
approved and US$126,248,956 was disbursed. An IDA grant for the same amount (US$125,000,000) was
approved and US$126,248,956 was disbursed. The difference reflects exchange rate movements.

DPO-3 was originally envisaged with Indicative Triggers (IT) in the programs of DPO-1 and DPO-2 but was
subsequently dropped.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context

 At the time of the first DPO’s appraisal, Ethiopia urgently needed to address macroeconomic vulnerabilities
 and revive a stalled structural transformation process. Although GDP growth rates had been high between
 2014 and 2018 under the country’s state-led public investment-intensive development model, structural
 transformation and productivity growth had been weak, while macroeconomic imbalances had increased,
 including heightened debt vulnerabilities, increasingly binding fiscal constraints, depleted liquidity buffers, and
 foreign-exchange (FX) shortages. Government policies controlling the allocation and use of FX created
 incentives to route FX demand through informal channels, increasing premiums in the parallel market. An
 overvalued exchange rate combined with trade protectionism enabled cheaper imports but undermined
 external competitiveness. As previously contracted non-concessional loans matured, debt-service obligations
 increased, leading to Ethiopia’s risk of debt distress increasing from moderate to high risk in 2017. Financial
 repression, monetary financing of the fiscal deficit, and directed lending to state-owned enterprises (SOEs)
 contributed to substantial credit and investment misallocations, high inflation, and undermined the solvency of
 state-owned banks. A complex, restrictive, and unpredictable regulatory environment slowed the growth and
 entry of private firms. Foreign investment in several key sectors, including telecoms, transportation, and
 finance, was prohibited or severely restricted.

 Ethiopia had dominant SOEs in key sectors, including energy, trade logistics, and telecom, which undermined
 the business environment, worsened operational efficiency, and inflated consumer and fiscal costs,


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



while limiting opportunities for private sector investment and financing. Weak institutional, governance, and
oversight arrangements impeded their performance, posing substantial fiscal risks. Many of the largest SOEs
failed to fulfill their mandates and provided inadequate returns on investment, resulting in inefficient service
delivery, financial losses, and debt accumulation. The state-dominated banking sector channeled resources
to SOEs, while the private sector faced tight credit constraints. SOEs were the financial sector’s main
borrowers. As a result, asset-liability mismatches, risk concentration, and loan quality risks linked to the
general operational inefficiency of SOEs were beginning to threaten the solvency and liquidity of state-owned
banks. Weak institutional and governance arrangements, including fragmented oversight mechanisms,
contributed to a lack of operational autonomy, transparency, and disclosure among SOEs, weakening
accountability for the use of public resources. Additionally, public-sector dominance and regulatory
restrictions severely constrained the role of the private sector and crowded out both foreign and domestic
investment. Ethiopia also had a weak regulatory framework, institutional capacity, and foreign exchange
environment for public-private partnerships (PPPs), further limiting private sector participation in key sectors.

The energy sector’s weak fundamentals constrained its ability to ensure household energy access, support
faster growth, and enable energy exports. Ethiopia’s electrification rate was just 43 percent. With no nominal
tariff adjustments since 2006, the tariff rate was the second lowest on the continent, so that inadequate cost
recovery compromised service quality and asset maintenance. The two key utilities, the Ethiopian Electric
Utility (EEU) and Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP), financed long-term power assets primarily with shorter-term
bonds, creating a cashflow problem and a significant debt overhang. These operational inefficiencies and
financial mismanagement resulted in the need for the government, as the sole stakeholder, to absorb the
utilities’ net losses by recapitalizing EEP thrice in the preceding decade.

Inefficient trade logistics increased costs and undermined Ethiopia’s external competitiveness. The sector
was dominated by the state-owned Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics Services Enterprise (ESLSE), which
was also the only operator of dry ports, and impeded the efficient provision of shipping and multi-modal
logistics services. The state-monopolized transportation and logistics sector was also unable to cope with
growing demand.

A highly inefficient SOE monopolized the telecom sector, limiting innovation, restricting network expansion,
and limiting the range of services available in Ethiopia, while also inhibiting the growth of mobile-money
platforms and other fintech products. Lack of competition and weak oversight resulted in very low mobile and
broadband penetration rates.

A complex legal framework for registering civil society organizations (CSOs) hampered their ability to support
public accountability and promote transparency. Restrictions on access to foreign funding and the types of
permissible activities contributed to a decline in the number of CSOs, further weakening public oversight in
the context of limited information disclosure and limited public participation in decision-making. Although
Ethiopian law acknowledged the rights of citizens to access information held by public bodies, it omitted
important provisions on data availability and disclosure requirements.

World Bank (WB) Strategy

The DPF was aligned with WB’s Ethiopia CPF 2018-2022, which had specific goals including enhanced
business and investment climate, improved access to finance for micro, small and medium enterprises,
adoption of new approaches for sustainable infrastructure financing and debt management and strengthened
citizen engagement and holding government entities accountable.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



The DPF series complemented activities already supported through WBG operations in Ethiopia on the social
and economic inclusion agenda, human capital development, and resilience.

The DPF was also targeting key challenges identified in the 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD),
which included the need for a sustainable financing model for growth and inadequate feedback mechanisms
for facilitating citizen engagement and government accountability. It also targeted binding constraints
identified in the SCD, including limited credit for private investment and the uncompetitive private sector.

The DPF series contributed to the objectives set in the IFC country strategy and supported recommendations
in the Country Private Sector Diagnostic by including measures to improve efficiency and promote private
sector development in key enabling sectors such as energy, logistics, and telecom, as well as measures to
streamline business licensing and other regulatory requirements, improve the corporate governance and
management of SOEs, and update the privatization legislation.

Country development agenda

The DPF supported the government’s 2016-2020 Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTPII) which
emphasized the need to maintain high rates of economic growth and expand the role of the private sector.
GTPII called for exploring alternative mechanisms for financing infrastructure, investment, and strengthening
economic governance.

The DPF played a strong role in supporting the Homegrown Economic Agenda Reform (HGERA) that was
launched in 2019 by the new government. The HGERA recognized the limitations of the state-led economic
model which was increasingly unsustainable. The plan prioritized macroeconomic, structural, and sectoral
reforms to address macroeconomic vulnerabilities, ease financial repression, and support-private sector-led
growth by opening strategic sectors to private investment and competition.

PDO relevance

The PDOs were relevant to the Ethiopian context at the time. PDO1 sought to support a more sustainable
financing model for Ethiopia’s development at a time when debt sustainability was decreasing. PDO2 sought
to reduce state intervention in the economy, increase the role for the private sector, and support initial steps
to strengthen access to credit, if only starting in DPO-2. These steps were expected to boost economic
transformation in Ethiopia. The PDO2 in DPO-1 sought to support a more market-determined exchange rate
in a context where there was no IMF program. However, by the time of DPO-2, an IMF program was in place
that intended to address this, and the trigger was dropped. The IMF program was signed in 2019 and there
was a staff level agreement on the first and second reviews, but it expired in 2021, thereby undermining
PDO2. PDO3 was also an important step forward to improve governance overall, especially of SOEs given
their significant role in the economy and increasing public accountability.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The two approved operations had a total of 15 PAs and, under DPF1, three (3) second tranche release
conditions (TRCs) as presented below. Supplemental DPF do not have additional PAs. For the PAs under
DPF, the below Table also indicates whether there was a change from the Results Framework (RF)

                                                                                                    Page 6 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



presented in DPF1, and whether the change was material. The Indicative Triggers (IT) for the proposed
DPF3, which was subsequently dropped, are not presented.

Table 1. PAs for Ethiopia Growth & Competitiveness DPL Series

PAs and Second TRCs under DPF1                            PAs under DPF2
PDO1: Moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s development
PA1 [DPF1-PA1]: Parliament has approved the PPP       PA2 [DPF2-PA1]: The PPP Directorate General
Proclamation, and MoF has issued the PPP Directive    issues PPP Implementation Guidelines with the
to establish a regulatory framework and institutions  required procedures and authorizations to undertake
that manage fiscal risks and enhance transparency,    PPP transactions, including an assessment of the
fairness, and long-term sustainability in implementingcontingent liabilities related to the sovereign
privately financed projects.                          contractual obligations. No change
                                                      PA4 [DPF2-PA2]: Under supervision of the EEA, the
                                                      EEU and Ministry of water, irrigation and energy
                                                      (MoWIE) have announced the implementation of a
                                                      second electricity tariff increase under the multi-year
PA3 [DPF1-PA2]: The Recipient's Council of Ministers
                                                      electricity tariff increase framework in December
has approved a multi-year electricity tariff increase
                                                      2019. Material change with strengthened PA.
framework with a detailed implementation schedule to
improve cost recovery while protecting the poor.
                                                       PA5 [DPF2-PA3]: The Government’s Macroeconomic
                                                      Committee has approved a phased restructuring of
                                                      EEP’s debt in the power sector and the Ministry of
                                                      Finance has implemented a conversion of loans on-
                                                      lent to EEP into equity. Material change with
                                                      strengthened PA
PA6 [DPF1-PA3]: The Ethiopia Investment Board has PA7 [DPF2-PA4]: The Government’s Macroeconomic
lifted restrictions limiting the logistics sector to  Committee has issued a decision that encourages
domestic participation only and permitted minority    competition by allowing the private sector, including
foreign investment in critical logistics services     foreign firms, to access and offer value added logistics
(including freight forwarding and shipping agency     services in dry ports.
services, warehousing, cargo consolidation, and
packaging) to foster competition.                     New PA
                                                      PA8 [DPF2-PA5]: (i) The Prime Minister has
                                                      appointed the Board for the Ethiopian
Second TRC#1: Council of Ministers has approved Communications Authority (ECA); (ii) The ECA has
the establishment and constitution of an independent convened a public consultation on the selection
regulator for the telecom sector.                     process for new telecom operator licenses.

                                                          Material change with strengthened PA
PDO2: Improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector
PA9 [DPF1-PA4]: The Ministry of Trade has reduced         PA10 [DPF2-PA6]: The Council of Ministers has
the number of licensing categories by half and            approved for submission to Parliament a draft
eliminated the requirement for annual competence          Investment Proclamation enabling foreign
certificates for at least 70 percent of trade-licensing   participation in a broader set of economic sectors

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



categories, to reduce the regulatory burden and           (shift from positive to negative list of sectors). No
simplify business entry, affecting over one million       change for investment proclamation; competition
businesses.                                               proclamation dropped

                                                          PA11 [DPF2-PA7]: The Board of the NBE has
                                                          repealed the 27 Percent Rule.

                                                          New PA that replaced Indicative Trigger (IT) on
                                                          reforming two state-owned banks (CBE and DBE)
                                                          PA12 [DPF2-PA8]: The Board of the NBE has
                                                          approved financing through instruments at market-
                                                          determined rates, and the first auction of treasury bills
                                                          was conducted in December 2019. Revised to make
                                                          more action- and time-specific, but key action to
                                                          support development of the secondary T-bill
                                                          market dropped from IT

PDO3: Enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good governance

                                                          PA13 [DPF2-PA9]: The Council of Ministers has
                                                          approved for submission to Parliament a Federal
Second TRC #2: The Council of Ministers has               Administrative Procedure Proclamation that provides
approved for submission to Parliament a draft CSO         for routine consultations on draft Directives, subject to
Proclamation to promote greater CSO and citizen           specified exemption(s), and consultation is one of the
participation in the development process.                 pre-requisites for adoption of Directives.

                                                            No material change
PA14 [DPF1-PA5]: The Council of Ministers has
                                                            PA15 [DPF2-PA10]: (i) The Council of Ministers has
approved Guidelines for privatizing SOEs that
                                                            issued Regulation No. 445/2019 authorizing the
establish the objectives and principles of the
                                                            creation of a holding entity for SOEs. (ii) The Council
privatization process, clear institutional responsibilities
                                                            of Ministers has approved for submission to
for managing private participation in strategic SOEs,
                                                            Parliament a draft Privatization of Public Enterprises
and transparency and accountability provisions.
                                                            Proclamation, which sets out a framework for the
                                                            privatization of public enterprises.

Second TRC #3: MoF has expanded the scope of its New PA
existing debt reporting arrangements to (i) provide
detailed coverage of domestic debt of SOEs including
by instrument and debt holder, on a quarterly basis
and (ii) disclose an annual report on public debt
(including SOE debt), consistent with good practice—
both by January 2019.

The program documents (for DPF1, DPF2, and the Supplemental DPF) provided a clear rationale for the
PAs, TRCs, and the expected results, as well as the rationale behind modifications and changes that were
implemented in DPF2.



                                                                                                        Page 8 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



PDO1: Moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s development

PA1 and PA2: At the time of appraisal, the government had implemented four PPP projects reaching
financial closure, and several projects for investments by the Independent Power Producer (IPP) were at an
advanced stage of preparation with more PPPs identified and under preparation. Yet Ethiopia lacked a sound
regulatory framework and the institutional capacity necessary for PPPs to leverage private financing for
infrastructure projects in a fiscally sustainable manner which had stalled several PPP projects that reached
advanced stages of preparation. The PAs were important steps to achieve a more transparent, competitive,
and efficient PPP selection process, help manage fiscal risks, improve long term sustainability, and increase
private sector participation in infrastructure service delivery amidst public resource constraints. Yet, issues
related to FX availability, convertibility, and transferability amid FX shortages and restrictions constituted
binding constraints to PPP reforms, posing severe hurdles to the achievement of PDO1. Foreign firms
bidding for government contracts required guaranteed access to FX for imported inputs to complete the
public infrastructure projects and repatriate profits overseas. At the time of DPO-1’s approval, the parallel
market premium had reached around 30% and was exacerbating the FX shortage. DPO-1 included an IT to
address the FX issue in DPO-3, and the IT was dropped by DPO-2 once an IMF program was in place that
included this in its program agreement. Relevance of: PA1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS); PA2:
Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA3, PA4, and PA5: Weak management of the energy sector constrained the expansion of household
energy access (from 43 percent), faster growth, and energy exports. Inadequate cost recovery compromised
service quality and asset maintenance. With no nominal tariff adjustments since 2006, the tariff rate had
fallen to the second lowest on the continent. Operational performance was weak, with system losses at 23
percent and collection rates at 85-90 percent. In addition, the two key utilities, the Ethiopian Electric Utility
(EEU) and Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP), financed long-term power assets primarily with shorter-term
bonds, creating a cashflow problem and a significant debt overhang. As the sole stakeholder, the government
had to absorb the utilities’ net losses by recapitalizing EEP thrice in the preceding decade. The approval of a
multi-year electricity tariff increase framework (PA3), implementation of a second tariff increase (PA4), the
approval of a phased restructuring plan for EEP’s debt and the conversion of loans on-lent to EEP into equity
(PA5) were necessary steps to increase revenue and improve sector debt dynamics and financial
sustainability. The PA in DPF-2 was strengthened relative to the indicative triggers by requiring the initiation
of debt restructuring for public energy utilities, but the indicative triggers comprising institutional strengthening
were dropped. The proposed Power Sub-sector Committee (which was a part of the indicative triggers) had
already been established, and some aspects of the indicative triggers were maintained for DPO-3, which was
eventually dropped. Relevance of: PA3: Satisfactory (S); PA4: Satisfactory (S); PA5: Satisfactory (S).

PA6 and PA7: Inefficient trade logistics undermined Ethiopia’s external competitiveness, posing an
especially serious constraint for a landlocked country. The state-owned Ethiopian Shipping and Logistics
Services Enterprise (ESLSE) enjoyed a de facto monopoly in the sector and was also the only operator of dry
ports, thereby impeding the efficient provision of shipping and multi-modal logistics services while inflating
costs. The state-monopolized transportation and logistics sector was unable to cope with growing demand
driven by Ethiopia’s integration into global value chains. In 2017, the cost of shipping a 20-foot container from
Ethiopia to Germany was 247 percent higher than the cost from Vietnam and 72 percent higher than from
Bangladesh. PA6 was a critical step to improve efficiency, reduce costs, and attract private investment. PA7
allowed for the private sector, including foreign firms, to access and offer value added logistics services in dry
ports, thereby increasing competition in activities including storage and warehousing, cold storage,
packaging, consolidation and deconsolidation of volumes, and import and export clearance. However, as the
PA did not address the regulations that required importers to use ESLSE services for shipping, they

                                                                                                        Page 9 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



preserved its monopoly status and were a key impediment to private investment. For both PA6 and PA7, FX
shortages inhibited investment that would only be addressed by DPO3. Relevance of: PA6: Moderately
Satisfactory (MS); PA7; Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

TRC1 & PA8: Ethiopia’s telecom sector was one of the last 3 in the world with a national monopoly on all
telecom services including fixed, mobile, internet, and data communications. The highly inefficient SOE -
Ethio Telecom – limited competition, which combined with weak oversight, reduced innovation, restricted
network expansion, led to a reduced range of services in Ethiopia relative to other countries, and resulted in
very low mobile and broadband penetration rates. The growth of mobile-money platforms and other fintech
products was also inhibited by the underdevelopment of the sector. In June 2018, the opening of the
telecommunications sector for foreign competition was announced. The Second TRC1 and PA8 provided
necessary reforms for progress in the sector. They were accompanied by significant complementary plans by
the government to privatize Ethio Telecom and supported by WBG TA to reduce its dominance in the sector.
Yet other obstacles including regulatory, tax, customs, and infrastructure sharing issues remained.
Relevance of PA8: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: Improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector

PA9 and PA10: The growth and entry of foreign and domestic private firms was inhibited by a complex,
restrictive, and unpredictable regulatory environment. Burdensome licensing and elevated registration costs
slowed the creation of new enterprises, and frequent changes to various licensing regimes created a
substantial compliance burden for existing businesses – thereby constraining investment and undermining
competition. Moreover, foreign investment in several key sectors, including telecoms, transportation, and
finance was prohibited or severely restricted. Reforms supported by PA9 and PA10 were a key step forward
to ease the regulatory burden, improve the business environment by simplifying business entry and
streamlining licensing requirements as well as enabling foreign participation in more economic sectors would
pave the way towards PDO2. Yet, DPF-2 dropped the approval of a Competition Proclamation (which had
been a trigger in DPF1). Unresolved foreign exchange market distortions and shortages deterred investors.
Relevance of: PA9: Moderately Satisfactory (MS); PA10: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA11: Ethiopia’s financial system was shallow and did not sufficiently support economic transformation.
Access to finance was identified as the main obstacle to doing business by 40 percent of firms in the 2015
Enterprise Survey, and credit to the private sector was just 13 percent of GDP in 2018. Access to long-term
finance was especially limited, and the banking system provided a limited range of financial products and
services, with a virtual absence of mobile money or other fintech innovations. The two state-owned banks,
Commercial Bank of Ethiopia (CBE) and Development Bank of Ethiopia (DBE), represented 63 and 6 percent
of total banking assets, respectively, as of end 2017 and served as a key source of finance for infrastructure
investments, SOEs and developmental projects. However, their business models, operating environment,
and funding modalities contributed to constraints within the financial system and restricted the flow of
financing to the private sector. In addition, private commercial banks were required to buy five-year NBE Bills
equivalent to 27 percent of all loans disbursed through a so-called “27 Percent Rule” in five-year bonds
issued by the NBE at nominal interest rates that delivered a negative real rate of return. This represented an
implicit tax on financial intermediation which reduced the resources available for private banks to lend
and increased the cost of financial intermediation and limiting resources for private sector investment. The
proceeds from this arrangement largely funded the DBE, which then provided lending for private sector
projects, and in doing so re-injected mopped-up excess liquidity back into the financial system and
undermined monetary policy implementation. The ITs for the second operation in the series were to approve
an action plan to improve the operations of CBE, including an operational, governance, and financial plan, as

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



well as a comprehensive reform plan for DBE; however, these two PAs were dropped in DPF2 due to delays
in their preparation. Instead, they were replaced with PA11 which led the Board of the NBE to repeal the 27
Percent Rule. This was a strong reform and highly relevant to support improving the investment climate and
developing the financial sector. Relevance of PA11: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA12: Ethiopia’s state-driven development strategy had relied on allocating financial resources to the public
sector and priority economic sectors through administrative measures and repressing interest rates.
However, selling T-Bills to captive public sector investors at below market rates (that were negative in real
terms) was unsustainable and had contributed to a misallocation of credit and concentration of risks in state-
owned financial institutions, thereby hindering financial deepening and slowing the development of financial
markets. The PA to issue new Treasury bills at market-determined rates via auctions was crucial to support
the development of the financial sector. The IT for DPF3 to publish a calendar of T-bill auctions for FY21 was
dropped. Relevance of PA12: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3: Enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good governance.

TRC#2 and PA13: Civil society organizations (CSOs) were limited in their ability to support public
accountability and promote transparency by the Ethiopian Charities and Societies Proclamation of 2009,
which imposed serious organizational, operational and regulatory limitations against CSOs. It restricted
permissible activities as well as access to foreign funding. This reduced the number of CSOs and weakened
public oversight in an environment with limited information disclosure and limited public participation in
decision-making. Ethiopia’s Freedom of Mass Media and Access to Information Proclamation (2008)
acknowledged the rights of citizens to access information held by public bodies but did not include provisions
on data availability and disclosure requirements. Public institutions provided limited information and rarely
disclosed performance information. In addition, procedures for consulting on regulatory issues were ad hoc.
TRC #2 would remove restrictions on CSO operations by relaxing funding constraints and expanding the
range of activities for CSO engagement. Approval of regulations to implement the CSO Proclamation which
would have supported implementation of the law were included as an IT for DPF2. An Access to Information
Proclamation was included as an IT for DPF2 and had undergone a first round of consultations with media
and government institutions but was under review by the Attorney General at the time of DPF2 and was
therefore added as an IT for DPF3. PA13 replaced the two ITs for DPF2 and led the Council of Ministers to
approve for submission to Parliament a Federal Administrative Procedure Proclamation that provided for
routine consultations on draft Directives, subject to specified exemptions. The implementation of this action
would further require effective regulations, which were included as an IT for DPF3 which was dropped.
Relevance of PA13: Satisfactory (S).

PA14, TRC#3, and PA15: Ethiopia’s economy was dominated by SOEs, accounting for about 30 percent of
GDP, and the 40 wholly state-owned public enterprises were present in key strategic sectors such as
infrastructure, industry, construction, and finance, and in competitive sectors such as hotel and tourism, and
printing and management services. Yet they faced weak institutional, governance, and oversight
arrangements and many performed poorly, with inadequate returns on investment, weak service delivery,
financial losses, and debt accumulation. There was a lack of operational autonomy, transparency (such
as lack of disclosure of financial statements), and disclosure among SOEs. This opacity undermined
efforts by the Ministry of Finance and line ministries to properly oversee the SOEs, as well as to assess fiscal
risks, and/or restructuring needs, undermining efforts to privatize and attract private sector financing.
Together, the three reforms supported by PA14, TRC#3 and PA15 marked a key step forward for Ethiopia




                                                                                                   Page 11 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



 and were relevant reforms to enhance public transparency and strengthen governance. Relevance of: PA14:
 Satisfactory (S); and PA15: Satisfactory (S).



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement.

                                                                               As % of
Results       Associated RI             Baseline     Target       Actual                RI achievement
                                                                               targeted
Indicator     PAs        Relevance      (year)       (year)       (year)                rating
                                                                               change
PDO 1: Moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s development.
RI1
Proportion of
PPP
contracts for
                                                                               Over
which more PA1, PA2        MU           0 (2018)     80 (2021)    100 (2021)             [High]
                                                                               100%
than four
bids are
received (Per
centage)
RI2 Power
sector has
              PA3, PA4,
achieved                   MS           31 (2018)    75 (2022)    40 (2022)    20%       Negligible
              PA5
cost recovery
(Percentage)
                                                                  7% (EEP)
RI3 Power
                                                                  No reduction Not
sector losses
                                                                  in technical reported
(commercial PA3, PA4,
                          MU            23 (2018)    18 (2021)    losses, 20% explicitly Negligible
and           PA5
                                                                  distribution in the
technical)
                                                                  loss         ICR.
(Percentage)
                                                                  (EEU,2022)
RI4 Power
sector debt
              PA3, PA4,
service                    MS           -1.84 (2017) 0.5 (2022)   0.15 (2022) 85%        Substantial
              PA5
coverage
(Ratio)

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



RI5 number
of days to
                                                                                Over
clear imports PA6, PA7     MU           13.5 (2018) 10 (2021)     6 (2021)               [High]
                                                                                100%
by customs
(Number)
RI6 Number
of days to
                                                                                Over
clear exports PA6, PA7     MU           5.5 (2018)   4 (2021)     1 (2021)               [High]
                                                                                100%
by customs
(Number)
RI7 FDI in
logistics
sector         PA6, PA7   S             0 (2018)     120 (2021)   22.5 (2021) 19%        Negligible
(cumulative)
(USD million)
RI8
Percentage
of type of
license,
permit,
certificate or
other
                                                                                Over
requirements PA6, PA7      U            0 (2018)     66 (2021)    66.6 (2021)            [High]
                                                                                100%
that are
automated
under the
Electronic
Single
Window
(Percentage)
RI9 Number
of licensees
operating in
Ethiopian      PA8         S            1 (2018)     3 (2021)     1 (2021)      0%       Negligible
Telecom
Sector
(Number)
RI10 Price of
1GB of data
per month as
                                                                                Over
percent of     PA8         MS           12.6 (2018) 5 (2021)      2.6 (2021)             [High]
                                                                                100%
GDP per
capita
(Percentage)
RI11 Usage PA8             MS           0.32 (2017) 5 (2021)      6.9 (2021)    Over     [High]
of mobile                                                                       100%
money,

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



share of age
15+
population
(Percentage)
PDO 2: Improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector


RI12 Share
of business
activities                                                                    Over
                PA9, PA10   S           100 (2018)   10 (2021)   1.9 (2021)             High
required to                                                                   100%
obtain
certificates of
competence
(Percentage)
RI13 Number
of investment
permits
issued in
sectors                                                                       Over
                PA9, PA10   S           0 (2018)     20 (2021)   84 (2022)              High
previously                                                                    100%
closed to
foreign
investors
(Number)
RI14 Credit
to the private
sector as a                                                                   Over
                PA11        MS          30 (2018)    37 (2021)   43 (2021)              [High]
share of total                                                                100%
credit
(Percentage)
RI15 Share
of instrument
at market
rate in the                                                                   Over
                PA12        S           0 (2018)     10 (2021)   90 (2021)              High*
total stock of                                                                100%
government
bonds
(Percentage)
PDO 3: Enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good
governance
             TRC2,          MU          0 (2018)     80 (2021)   100 (2021)   Over      [High]
             PA13.                                                            100%
RI16
Percentage
of CSOs

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



registered by
the Ethiopian
Charities and
Societies
Agency
under the
new
proclamation
(Percentage)
RI17 Number
of SOEs that
have
published on
their website
timely annual
              PA14, PA15, MU              1 (2018)      9 (2021)      0 (2021)      0%        Negligible
audited
financial
statements
prepared
using IFRS
(Number)

Note: Achievement ratings in the table reflect the level of achievement based on actual change relative to the
targeted change of the RI. Where the achievement rating is shown in brackets, the RI is not deemed adequate
for assessing achievement, and the ratings have been adjusted (noted in the Efficacy section).

Source: PD and ICR

PDO1: Moving towards a sustainable financing model for Ethiopia’s development

RI1: PA1 and PA2 intended to establish the regulatory framework and implementation guidelines to achieve a
more transparent, competitive and efficient PPP selection process. While RI1 - proportion of PPP contracts for
which more than four bids are received – would have captured a crucial stage of implementation of the PPP
process, to measure progress towards the PDO also relied on other factors to be in place, including the access
to foreign exchange and an accommodating business environment for the PPP process to move forward.
To measure a further step in the process, it could have considered the number of bids approved. Relevance of
RI1: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI2, RI3, RI4: PA3, PA4, and PA5 targeted implementing a tariff increase framework, a second tariff increase,
and a phased restructuring plan for EEP’s debt. As such, RI2, RI3, and RI4 – cost recovery in the power sector,
commercial losses, and the debt service coverage ratio would measure the impact of these reforms. However,
the impact of currency devaluation would increase financial costs. Given that ITs for institutional strengthening
were dropped, the approved reforms would only indirectly affect technical losses. Technical and commercial
losses are difficult to ascertain without sophisticated metering, billing, and collection systems in place, thereby
affecting the measurability of RI3. Relevance of: RI2: Moderately Satisfactory (MS), RI3: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU); RI4: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



RI5, RI6, RI7and RI8: PA6 removed restrictions to minority foreign investment in the logistics sector, intending
to expand foreign investment in critical logistics services to foster competition, improve efficiency, reduce costs,
and attract private investment. PA7 allowed for the private sector, including foreign firms, to access and offer
value added logistics services in dry ports, thereby increasing competition. The PAs did not address foreign
exchange issues or regulations that required importers to use ESLSE services for shipping—both of which we
were a key impediment to private investment. Measuring this by increased FDI in the logistics sector (RI7) is
reasonable. A reduction in the number of days to clear imports and exports by customs (RI5 and RI6) would be
affected by many other factors. RI8 (type of license, permit, certificate or other requirements that are automated
under the Electronic Single Window) was related to an IT for DPF3 which was dropped, although progress has
continued on the reforms. Relevance of: RI5 Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU); RI6: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU); RI7: Satisfactory (S); RI8: Unsatisfactory (U).

RI9, RI10, RI11: TRC1 supported an independent regulator for the telecom sector, while PA8 appointed the
Board for the Ethiopian Communications Authority (ECA) and included a reform for ECA to convene a public
consultation on the selection process for new telecom operator licenses. In doing so, they would both have a
direct impact on the number of licensees operational in the Ethiopian Telecom Sector (RI9), and indirectly on the
price of 1 GB of mobile data (RI10). The share of the 15+ population using mobile money would also be
impacted (RI11), although the impact would be indirect and broader factors would also affect this. Relevance of:
RI9: Satisfactory (S); RI10: Moderately Satisfactory (MS); RI11: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PDO 2: Improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector

RI12 and RI13: PA9 reduced the number of licensing categories by half and eliminated requirements for annual
competence certificates for at least 70 percent of trade-licensing categories, which would be clearly and directly
measured by the share of business activities required to obtain certificates of competence (RI12). PA10
intended to enable foreign participation in a broader set of economic sectors (shift from positive to negative list
of sectors), which would be measured directly by the number of investment permits issued in sectors previously
closed to foreign investors. Relevance of: RI12: Satisfactory (S); RI13: Satisfactory (S).

RI14: With PA11 repealing the 27 percent rule, this was directly expected to help commercial banks free up
loanable deposits which could be lent to the private sector. In doing so, this would increase credit to the private
sector as a share of total credit from commercial banks (as noted in the ICR) thereby helping develop the
financial sector, although this would continue to be constrained by other distortions in the financial sector and
government directives including borrowing constraints on SOEs and could be also determined by other
factors such as GDP growth. This could have been specified as credit “from commercial banks,” which would
have better captured the intent behind elimination of the “27 percent rule”. Relevance of RI14: Moderately
Satisfactory (MS).

RI15: PA12 issued new treasury bills at market-determined rates, which would further support financial
deepening and the development of financial markets. This would be directly measured by the share of
instrument at market rate in the total stock of government bonds, which would measure progress towards
achieving the PDO. Relevance of RI15: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3: Enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good governance

RI16: TRC2 and PA13 intended to increase the numbers of CSOs and their activity to increase public oversight,
as well as for consultations on government directives. RI16 measures the percentage of CSOs registered by the
Ethiopian Charities and Societies Agency under the new proclamation. While this measures a portion of the


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 27
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



  process for CSOs to increase government oversight, it does not measure activity beyond their registration that
  would contribute towards achievement of the PDO, such as activities that would hold the government
  accountable, and it also does not measure the contributions of consultations on government directives towards
  achieving the PDO. Relevance of RI16: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

  RI17: PA14, TRC3, and PA15 intended to provide guidelines and a framework for privatizing SOEs, expand
  SOE debt reporting, and create a holding company for SOEs which would strengthen SOE oversight. RI17
  measures the number of SOEs that have published timely annual audited financial statements using IFRS.
  While this measures a key step in the process for strengthening the governance of SOEs, it measures only part
  of the full intention of the series of reforms by not measuring progress in the other areas of reform, namely
  guidelines and a framework for privatizing SOEs and creating a holding company for SOEs. Relevance of RI17:
  Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Maximizing finance for development, PAs 1-8 and TRC 1

               Rationale
               RI1: Proportion of PPP contracts for which more than four bids are received reached 100%, far over 80%
               target. As discussed in the ICR, though the RI target was exceeded, with 100 percent of PPP
               contracts receiving at least four bids versus a target of 80 percent, the desired outcome of increasing the use
               of PPPs to maximize finance for development was not realized: the number of PPP contracts that reached
               financial closure has remained zero. A growing parallel-market premium with respect to the official exchange
               rate, FX capital-account restrictions, and challenges related to FX convertibility, liquidity, and transferability
               rendered PPP projects unattractive to private investors. As a result, a total of 29 PPPs were at various stages
               of preparation but had not progressed. Two solar PPP projects completed a bidding process (with five bids
               received), but the winning bidder could not secure FX convertibility guarantees from the central bank.
               Moreover, an amendment to the PPP Proclamation in February 2023 allowed the direct negotiation of
               government-to-government (G2G) PPPs, which undermined transparency and represented a policy reversal.
               Finally, the recent conversion of the PPP Directorate General into a department within the MOF could
               negatively affect its ability to manage PPP processes fairly and transparently. Downgraded from High to
               Modest due to MU relevance: Achievement Rating: Modest.

               RI2: Power sector has achieved cost recovery reached 40%, only 20% of the targeted improvement.
               Achievement Rating: Negligible.




                                                                                                                  Page 17 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



RI3: Power sector losses (commercial and technical) declined to 7 percent in 2022 against a target of 18
percent for 2021. There was no reduction in technical losses. There was a distribution loss of 20% in the
EEU. Achievement Rating: Negligible.

RI4: Power sector debt service coverage ratio improved from -1.84 percent in 2017 to 0.15% in 2021,
reaching 85% of the targeted improvement. Achievement Rating: Substantial.

RI5: Number of days to clear import by customs decreased from 13.5 to 6, a far greater improvement than the
10 days targeted. However, the achievement rating is downgraded from high to modest due to the MU
relevance rating. Achievement Rating: Modest.

RI6: Number of days to clear export by customs decreased from 5.5 to 1, far below the 4 days targeted.
However, the achievement rating is downgraded from high to modest due to the MU relevance rating.
Achievement Rating: Modest.

RI7: FDI in logistics sector (cumulative) reached only 22.5 million US$, far below the 120 million US$
targeted. Continued SOE dominance undermined the impact of the supported reforms, yet the ICR notes how
total FDI increased to US$275.7 million in 2023. Achievement Rating: Negligible.

RI8: Percentage of type of license, permit, certificate, or other requirements that are automated under the
Electronic Single Window reached 66.6%, over the 66% targeted. The achievement rating is downgraded
from high to negligible due to the unsatisfactory relevance rating. Achievement Rating: Negligible.

RI9: Number of licensees operating in the Ethiopian Telecom Sector did not improve – staying at 1 [or 2 as
discussed in the ICR writeup but not the results matrix] and did not reach the target of 3. As discussed in the
ICR, the RI for the number of licenses was initially unmet due to pandemic- and conflict-related delays in the
licensing process. Investor appetite has further declined amid worsening macroeconomic conditions and FX
pressures, and a third telecom license auction in late 2023 failed to attract bidders. Achievement Rating:
Negligible.

RI10: Price of 1GB of data per month as percent of GDP per capita fell from 12.6 to 2.6 percent, far below the
5 percent target. This is downgraded from high due to MS relevance: Achievement Rating: Substantial.

RI11: Usage of mobile money, share of age 15+ population increased from 0.32 to 6.9 percent, far above the
target of 5%. This RI is downgraded from high to substantial due to the MS relevance rating. Achievement
Rating: Substantial.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improving the investment climate and developing the financial sector

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)




Rationale
RI12: Share of business activities required to obtain certificates of competence declined from 100 to 1.9
percent, far below the 10 percent target. Achievement Rating: High.

RI13: Number of investment permits issued in sectors previously closed to foreign investors increased from
zero to 84, far over the target of 20. Achievement Rating: High.

RI14: Credit to the private sector as a share of total credit increased from 30 to 43 percent, far over the 27
percent target. The ICR discusses how in November 2022, the authorities once again required that
commercial banks purchase government bonds, effectively re-establishing the “27 percent rule.” In mid-2023,
the authorities capped the nominal aggregate growth of bank credit at 14 percent, rendering the flow of credit
negative in real terms. Downgraded due to policy reversals. Achievement Rating: Negligible.

RI15: Share of instrument at market rate in the total stock of government bonds increased from zero to 90
percent, far over the 10 percent target. The ICR discusses how higher interest rates helped incentivize
increased commercial participation in T-bill auctions. However, following the significant drop in ODA due to
the Tigray conflict, the government increased its use of monetary financing, reducing the supply of T-bills for
auction. In addition, the reintroduction of the mandated purchase of government bonds by commercial banks
reduced their participation in the T-bill auctions, so that their share in the total stock of T-bills dropped from 49
percent in December 2022 to 35 percent in December 2023. Downgraded due to related policy reversals
undermining reform impact as raised in ICR. Achievement Rating: Substantial.

The combined rating of PDO2 is Moderately Satisfactory. While the ICR discusses how the broader
investment climate has worsened considerably, the progress measured by RI12 and RI13 has been
maintained for this specific investment climate concern.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhancing public transparency and accountability to promote good governance

Rationale
RI16: Percentage of CSOs registered by the Ethiopian Charities and Societies Agency under the new
proclamation increased from 0 to 100 percent, over the 80 percent target. This is downgraded from high to
modest due to the MU relevance rating: Achievement Rating: Modest.

RI17: Number of SOEs that have published on their website timely annual audited financial statements
prepared using IFRS declined from 1 to 0, falling below the target of 9. Achievement Rating: Negligible.



                                                                                                      Page 19 of 27
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



                  The combined rating of PDO3 is Moderately Unsatisfactory



                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The combined rating of PDO1, PDO2, and PDO3, respectively, is Moderately Unsatisfactory, Moderately
Satisfactory, and Moderately Unsatisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of the PAs is rated Moderately Satisfactory

The overall efficacy rating is Moderately Unsatisfactory

The overall outcome rating is therefore Moderately Unsatisfactory


a. Rating

Moderately Unsatisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks to the sustainability of development outcomes are high, although many risks have already been realized,
and some reform areas are being further promoted with the WB’s July 2024 DPF and IMF program. Many of
these reforms, while ambitious, run counter to a long history in Ethiopia of following its own unique state-led
development model and will require considerable political will to maintain progress. Continuing conflict presents

                                                                                                          Page 20 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



considerable risks to development outcomes and reform momentum. While the ICR suggests stronger citizen
engagement does not appear to be at risk of reversal, continuing conflict has led to states of emergency
announcements and could otherwise prompt a reversal on increasing oversight by CSOs.

The government’s regular recourse to monetary financing, combined with the reintroduction of mandated
purchases of government bonds already undermined development outcomes. While the WB’s July 2024 DPF
included PAs to strengthen the central bank’s independence and mandate to promote financial stability, this can
only be achieved and maintained by strengthening and maintaining the institutions that guard the central bank’s
independence over the longer term, while simultaneously increasing fiscal policy sustainability. This is similarly
the case for allowing a market-determined exchange rate. While the central bank has allowed the birr to float in
July 2024, it will need to eliminate a parallel market premium over the longer term and ensure sufficient supply of
foreign exchange to offset private sector concerns in recent years.

The ICR also notes several other concerns about the institutionalization of reforms, government commitment,
and already evident weaknesses. SOE audit reports are still not published on SOE websites, and it is unclear
whether annual SOE audits will continue and become part of regular performance monitoring – although the
inclusion of related reform measures in the July 2024 DPF are designed to help reduce this risk. Moreover, the
PPP Directorate General was downgraded to a department within the MOF, while the new legal framework for
PPPs and related efforts to build the government’s capacity have not been adequately tested.

Power sector outcomes are also at risk, with the need to strengthen not just financial but also operational
sustainability. A part of this is being addressed in the July 2024 DPF, which has reforms to continue raising
tariffs considering current tariffs support only 18 percent of the cost recovery. However, institutional, and
operational performance will likely be a continuing concern.

The government has demonstrated commitment to some reform areas identified for DPF3, which was dropped,
but could reduce their sustainability risks. This includes amendments to the Commercial Code, the adoption of
the revised SOE Proclamation, the establishment of the Electronic Single Window for customs
clearance, awarding of telecom licenses to a private operator, moving forward with another round of electricity
tariff increases, and domestic debt restructuring for SOEs.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The DPF series was very ambitious, seeking to reform many aspects of the Ethiopian economy in areas that had
previously been off-limits for reform – including measures to increase foreign investment and competition in
various key sectors (energy, telecom, logistics), increase exchange rate flexibility, reduce financial repression,
and privatize SOEs, as well as opening up CSOs to foreign financing. In doing so, the DPF foresaw various
political and economic risks, some of which were related with binding constraints that stymied achievement of
some of the PDOs, and others which eventually materialized during the preparation of DPF2. The exacerbation
of some of these political risks contributed to the cancellation of DPF3.



                                                                                                    Page 21 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



The DPF’s results framework reflects design strengths and some weaknesses of the pathways from the PAs to
the PDOs, with some variability across PDOs. While DPF2 reduced reform ambition in several areas, it also
increased it in others.

      PDO1 is marked by reforms that were less successful because there were binding macroeconomic
       constraints that undermined the PA’s progress towards the PDO. These raise the question of whether
       the reforms were premature without the binding macro constraints already having been addressed.
       Exchange rate adjustments were initially backloaded as a trigger for DPF3 even though DPF1 was
       negotiated well before an IMF program or the government’s new reform program were in place. By
       DPF2, as an IMF program was in place which would support exchange rate flexibility, DPF2 dropped the
       DPF3 trigger on increasing exchange rate flexibility at the same time as acknowledging how important
       macroeconomic and exchange rate reforms were for the implementation and eventual sustainability of
       the reform program. As such, this could raise questions if DPF1 and DPF2 were premature as the non-
       implementation of exchange rate reforms compromised the effectiveness of the PPP, trade logistics,
       telecom (failure to attract more foreign vendors) reforms included in the series, undermining the success
       of the related PAs in reaching the PDOs. Progress in the logistics sector was also undermined by the
       monopoly status of ESLSE in shipping.
      PDO2 had only one reform in DPF1, a reform which reduced licensing requirements. It was followed by
       critical reforms in DPF2 for enabling foreign competition in a broader range of sectors, allowing T-bill
       auctions to be determined at market rates, and dropping the 27 percent rule—a strong reform newly
       added in DPF2, replacing the reform of 2 key state-owned banks. These were critical liberalization
       reforms in key areas of the economy. However, progress towards the PDO was undermined by dropping
       various key reforms, including the trigger for reforms for two key state-owned banks, as well as dropping
       a competition proclamation, which was critical given challenges created by the abuse of dominant
       positions and a general lack of competition. DPF2 also dropped an indicative trigger for increasing
       foreign exchange flexibility once the IMF program was in place. Ultimately, the financial sector reforms
       were undermined by policy reversals.
      For PDO3, reforms to enhance public transparency and accountability laid the foundations for future
       sector wide reforms, reflecting an important design strength. Opening up CSO registration and sharing of
       SOEs’ financial statements publicly, while laying the foundation for SOE privatization and establishing an
       SOE holding entity are good examples of initial reforms in areas that had historically been off-limits.

The RF was relevant but had RIs to measure achievement of the PAs that had a few design-related
weaknesses. While RI targets were either partially or completely achieved, there were gaps in achieving each
PDO, due to the use of RIs that in some cases would not adequately measure the relatively ambitious PDO.
Under PDO1, for example, the RI on PPPs fell short of measuring actual PPPs signed, instead stopping at an
earlier stage in the results chain (bids received). Attribution for some RIs could be affected by factors beyond the
adopted reforms, such as number of days to clear imports and exports and share of population using mobile
money. Some RIs under PDO3 did not fully capture the broader impact of the reforms. For example, they only
reflected CSO registrations, not the actual activities of CSOs to increase transparence and accountability. The
target dates for most RIs were for 2021 but were not adjusted by the DPF2 approved in March 2020 when a
DPF3 was still planned. This timeframe would have not allowed for measuring implementation results from the
third DPF.

The DPF series was the country’s first budget support operation in more than a decade. The PD indicates how it
applied interdependent filters to guide the choice of sectors and reforms, which reflected key lessons learned
from the World Bank’s extensive experience in preparing DPFs: (i) the relative urgency of reforms; (ii) the
presence of strong analytical underpinnings and a good knowledge base to inform the choice of actions; (iii)

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



robust implementation arrangements; (iv) a strong government commitment to implement the reforms within the
operation’s timeframe; and (v) coordination with other development partners.

Analytical foundations

The DPF series was broadly underpinned by the 2016 Systematic Country Diagnostic, which identified the need
for a sustainable financing model for growth, as well as inadequate feedback mechanisms to facilitate citizen
engagement and government accountability. It also targeted binding constraints identified in the SCD including
limited credit for private investment and the uncompetitive private sector. The DPF series benefitted from
extensive analytical work by the WB, Government of Ethiopia, and partners.

      PPP reforms were informed by WB global lessons, as well as WB TA and power systems work.
      Reforms in the power sector were informed by WB global analysis as well as analysis specific to
         Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP) and Ethiopian Electric Utility (EEU).
      Logistics sector reforms were informed by analysis from the African Development Bank (AfDB),
         Government of Ethiopia, and development consultancies.
        Telecom reforms were supported by the WBG 2016 World Development Report on Digital Dividends, as
         well as a Government of Ethiopia white paper on policy options for the telecom sector.
        Business regulations reforms were informed by various WB Ethiopia reports, including the 2014 CEM, as
         well as the Ethiopia Chamber of Commerce’s Business Agenda
        Private sector credit and bond market reforms were informed by a WB analysis of SME finance reform in
         Ethiopia as well as IMF TA related to secondary market development in Ethiopia.
        CSO reforms were underpinned by a Government of Ethiopia CSO reform Action Options report; and
         SOE reforms relied on a number of analytical reports (sometimes unpublished).

Risk identification and mitigation measures:

The PDs identified the overall risk of the DPF series as substantial, which remained unchanged over the three
series. Two high risk categories were i) political and governance risk; and ii) macroeconomic risks related to a
high level of external indebtedness and weak revenue performance. In both areas, the identified risks gradually
materialized.

Rising political unrest and related risks worsened between the approval of DPF1 (in October 2018), DPF2 (in
March 2020), and the Supplemental DPF (in June 2020) and was well reflected in the PDs. Once the Tigray War
only began in November 2020, the DPF3 did not move forward. Early risk mitigation measures (in DPF1)
focused on careful monitoring of the political and governance situation. In DPF2, the Bank sought to lock-in
reforms ahead of the elections to mitigate the risk of reversal.

Exchange rate pressures continued between the approvals of the DPF series. DPF2 indicated how the results of
the DPF could be affected if foreign exchange market and overvaluation issues were not addressed. Mitigation
measures were to closely monitor the IMF program and expectations of the next DPF (DPF-3) in this series. In
the case of the exchange rate reforms, the World Bank could have better assessed the risks to a DPF series if it
is not able to frontload binding constraints to the rest of the reform program. Foreign exchange shortages
caused by the real overvaluation of the currency have been the binding constraint for Ethiopia’s economic
transformation, yet the government was not interested in addressing this at the time of DPF1 in December 2018.
Not addressing the binding constraints could have and to some extent did make some structural reforms
ineffective. Nevertheless, the WB supported critical reforms which were possible at the time, in the hope to


                                                                                                   Page 23 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



increase reform momentum and that the government may eventually address the exchange rate distortions - as
finally occurred in July 2024.

The World Bank also faced questions around supporting a more focused reform program vis-à-vis supporting a
broader program in which the government was interested. Supporting the broader program may have increased
risks for individual sectors and increased the likelihood that vested interests may stymie reform in some areas,
but the World Bank managed to continue some reform momentum across multiple sectors.

Consultations with stakeholders:

The DPF was coordinated with several development partners. The DPF series was coordinated with the budget
support provided by the EU. France and Germany provided parallel financing for DPF2. The PD discusses how
partners, including the EU and its member states, China, Japan, USA, the IMF, and the AfDB were engaged in
providing technical and capacity building support in several areas covered by the DPF, including PPPs,
domestic revenue mobilization, government bond market, public investment management, investment climate,
logistics reform, financial sector reform, trade reform, SOE reform and SOE governance.

The PDs discuss consultations held by the government with relevant stakeholders in relation to key new
regulatory initiatives supported by this DPF, including on the proposed electricity tariff framework, regulations
and directives on PPP, business regulation, logistics and financial sector reforms. Moreover, the Law and
Justice Advisory Council was established to provide policy recommendations on amending the CSO and anti-
terrorism laws, and it held broad public consultations with academia, legal professionals, CSOs, and political
parties “unprecedented in their scale and intensity in Ethiopian context.”



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Implementation was supported by the government establishing a Technical Committee (Project Coordination
Committee) chaired by the State Minister at the MoF and comprising focal points from the different government
agencies as well as development partners specific to this DPF series. As discussed in the ICR, the WB team
received regular updates on implementation progress, including during the pandemic. In addition, a multi-
donor WB-executed trust fund was set up by 2020 to provide comprehensive and coordinated technical
assistance for the implementation of DPF-related reforms in the series over the subsequent four years. The
Development Assistance Group (DAG), which is the existing architecture for aid coordination in Ethiopia, was to
be leveraged to that effect.

New and emerging risks were identified for DPF2 and the supplemental financing for DPF-3.

DPF2 made relevant adjustments to strengthen reforms, including repealing the “27 percent rule” in the financial
sector, strengthening reforms in the energy sector (requiring initiation of debt restructuring for energy utilities),



                                                                                                      Page 24 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



allowing private operators (including foreign firms) to access existing dry ports and invest in new dry ports,
requiring that the board of the telecom regulator be appointed.

At least two supervision missions were held after the approval of DPF1. The first, in November 2018, reviewed
progress towards reforms identified for DPF2. A second, in September 2019, focused on strengthening national
systems for Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).

The ICR discussed how the reforms supported institutional strengthening in several ways by strengthening the
regulatory framework for competition, establishing an independent telecom regulator, streamlining business
regulations, easing constraints on CSO registration, promoting PPPs, enhancing SOE oversight, and claritying
the roles and responsibilities of the MOF. Establishing an auction market for T-bills supported strengthening
monetary policy and deepening the financial sector.

In several areas, additional technical assistance and operational engagement complemented reforms by building
the capacity of relevant institutions and creating incentives to implement reforms, especially those involving
PPPs, SOE audits, and the energy, telecom, and financial sectors. Technical experts and capacity-building
training also helped advance the reform agenda, as well as complementary operations at the sector level,
including policies such as the Sustainable Development Finance Policy to support SOE reforms.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With Bank performance at both design and implementation rated moderately satisfactory, overall Bank
performance is rated moderately satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The DPF reforms had positive effects on the poor and vulnerable. Electricity tariff increases protected lifeline
tariffs, thereby protecting poor households with monthly electricity consumption below 50 kwh. Reducing the
cost of telecom would support the poor, as would increasing the voice of CSOs. Reforms such as phasing out
the “27 percent rule” in the banking sector would help the poor indirectly, by helping to boost credit to the private



                                                                                                      Page 25 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



sector and thereby supporting job creation, although the impact of this reform is unclear given the policy
reversals.

In addition, COVID-19 supplemental emergency funding covered about 20 percent of Ethiopia’s additional
financing needs for FY20 which also supported the poor and vulnerable. This helped the government bolster
healthcare, expand safety nets and food programs, fund wage subsidies to reduce job losses, and support small
and medium enterprises and self-employed workers.



b. Environmental

The DPF series promoted reforms to increase the fiscal sustainability of future investments in the energy sector,
which would also help maintain the country’s long-term low-emissions pathway, given how its electricity supply is
almost entirely based on hydropower.



c. Gender

ICR did not discuss gender impacts.



d. Other

None.



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR is of substantial quality. Assessments of both the relevance of the PAs and the results indicators were
candid and included sufficient evidence to assess efficacy. The ICR provided further discussion of the reasons
why various indicators were or were not met, and the broader context of achieving outcomes. It provided a clear
analysis of the change in PAs over the DPF series, as well as of the WB’s assessment of risks. The ICR’s
lessons were also based on evidence discussed in the report and would have value for future DPOs.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments

                                                                                                    Page 26 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ethiopia Growth and Competitiveness (P168566)



                                Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                                                              While many reforms were
                                                                              undermined by binding
                                Moderately                                    macroeconomic constraints and
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                key dropped reforms, the DPF
                                                                              series supported a generally
                                                                              ambitious reform program.
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR discusses 6 lessons, with which IEG broadly agrees. IEG highlights one key lesson below.

Frontloading difficult reforms early in the reform dialogue is critical for success, in recognition that reform
momentum can decline in advance of elections. To the extent possible, promoting reforms on binding
constraints early in the program is crucial, such as exchange-rate reforms and structural reforms targeting key
sectors such as financial intermediation and logistics.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 27 of 27
