     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024208

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P156766                                     Access to Long Term Finance

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ukraine                                     Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87270,IBRD-92540                       31-Mar-2022                                        250,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 02-May-2017                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            250,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        250,000,000.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz            Vibecke Dixon                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (p.6) dated
   June 26, 2017, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 10) the project development objective (PDO)
   was “to improve access to longer term finance for export oriented small and medium enterprises”.

   The PDO remained unchanged when an additional IBRD loan in the amount of US$100 million was granted
   on June 7, 2021.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Jun-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Access to Long Term Finance (ALTF) Project was designed with a single component (Estimated Cost
   at Appraisal: US$150 million; Revised Cost with additional financing US$250 million; Actual Cost at Closing:
   US$250 million). The credit line was to provide financing to export oriented small and medium enterprises
   (SMEs). According to the PAD (p. 12), the choice of a design with single component was to provide
   re‐allocation flexibility against a potentially limited number of participating financial institutions (PFIs) and
   high financial markets uncertainty. The project was to be implemented and intermediated by the Export-
   Import Bank of Ukraine (UEB) through two subcomponents:

   Sub-component 1: Under this sub-component the UEB was to on-lend through PFIs to export oriented
   SMEs to finance their projects. The PFIs were to assume the credit risk of the sub‐borrowers that were to
   be selected based on the eligibility criteria agreed by the World Bank. On the other hand, UEB was to
   assume the credit risk for on‐lending funds to PFIs. Neither the PAD nor the Loan Agreement set a budget
   for this sub-component. However, it was estimated that around US$100 million of funds was to be disbursed
   through on-lending.

   Sub-component 2: Under this sub-component the UEB was to lend directly to the eligible export-oriented
   SMEs and act as a PFI while assuming the credit risk of sub‐finance to the sub‐borrowers. The eligibility
   criteria of sub‐finance and for sub-borrowers were to be different under Component 1 and 2 to reflect the
   differences in financing models. Similar to the sub-component 1, no specific budget was allocated for this
   sub-component. However, it was estimated that around US$50 million of funds was to be disbursed through
   direct lending.

   Revised components: The second restructuring changed the estimated allocation of funds between the
   two sub-components. This was as a result of the exposure limits introduced by the regulatory authority
   following the Russian invasion of Ukraine. The UEB could not allocate more funds to the PFIs under the
   newly introduced exposure limits. The undisbursed amount at the time of the restructuring was allocated to
   sub-component 2. Accordingly, the estimated budgets became US$110 million and US$40 million for sub-
   components 2 and 1 respectively. However, this change did not require any amendment in the loan
   agreement as the distribution at appraisal was of a tentative nature. Lastly the single borrower limit was
   increased from US$8 million to US$15 million.



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$150 million. An additional financing of
  USD$100 million was granted increasing the total project cost to US$250. The actual cost at project closing
  was US$250 million. The project funds were fully disbursed by the World Bank. However, US$8.3 million
  remains to be dispersed by the UEB to the sub-borrowers due to restrictions imposed on the bank by the
  National Bank of Ukraine- NBU (Meeting with the project team, October 3, 2024).

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan to UEB (guaranteed by the government of Ukraine) amount was
  estimated at US$150 million (IBRD-87270). In June 2021, an additional IBRD loan was granted in the
  amount of USD$100 million (IBRD-92540) and accordingly the total financing for the project reached
  US$250 million. By closing, the project funds were fully disbursed by the World Bank. However, the UEB is
  yet to disburse remaining US$8.3 million to the sub-borrowers.

  Borrower contribution: Borrower contribution was not foreseen and none was materialized by project
  closing.

  Restructuring: The project had four restructurings and one additional financing (AF):

        Additional financing (June 7, 2021): Similar to the original project the AF provided a US$100
         million Investment Project Financing (IPF) guaranteed by the Ukrainian government and
         intermediated by UEB through on-lending to PFIs and by direct lending. The aim of the AF was to
         scale up of the original project and to allow productive SMEs to recover their economic activities
         affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, preserve jobs, and facilitate much needed long-term
         investments. With the AF, targets for two PDO indicators (number of SME beneficiaries, and volume
         of bank support) and one intermediate results indicator (number of PFIs) were revised upwards. A
         new gender intermediate indicator was added to monitor the share of female-led SMEs. Another
         intermediate indicator was introduced to capture the volume of lending to SMEs with up to 250
         employees, with an indicative target of 55 percent disbursement rate in the POM to be monitored
         throughout the project lifetime. Lastly, a new intermediate indicator was introduced on citizen
         engagement to monitor the percentage of SMEs who believed the project had established effective
         engagement processes (through semi-annual roundtables and/or a survey).
        First Project Restructuring (March 24, 2022 – Level 2): The restructuring extended the closing
         date of the original loan (IBRD-87270) by 15 months from March 31, 2022 to June 30, 2023 to match
         with the closing date of the AF. At the time of the restructuring 79.2% of the original loan was
         disbursed.
        Second Project Restructuring (April 25, 2022 – Level 2): The second restructuring changed the
         allocation of funds between the two sub-components which did not require any change in loan
         agreement since the distribution between the components was tentative. The change in allocation
         was as a result of the exposure limits introduced by the regulatory authority following the Russian
         invasion of Ukraine. The UEB could not allocate more funds to the PFIs under the newly introduced
         exposure limits. The undisbursed amount at the time of the restructuring was allocated to direct
         lending component. Accordingly, the estimated budgets became US$110 million and US$40 million
         for sub-components 2 and 1 respectively. In addition, the conditions imposed by the war resulted in
         deferral of required documentation for SMEs conducting their environmental and social due
         diligence since the SMEs could not have access to their company premises/documents. It was
         agreed that the selected enterprises were to present these documents to UEB once the war and the


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



          martial law will have ended. Lastly the single borrower limit was increased from US$8 million to
          US$15 million.
         Third Project Restructuring (March 3, 2023 – Level 2): The restructuring increased the single
          borrowing limit of the AF from US$8 million to US$15 million as had been processed for the original
          project. The goal was to allow UEB to swiftly proceed with addressing key financing needs of SMEs
          (currently eligible under the project) operating primarily in agri and food-related sectors.
         Fourth Project Restructuring (April 24, 2023 – Level 2): The restructuring extended the project’s
          closing date from June 30, 2023 to December 31, 2023 to allow full disbursement of funds and
          finance the remaining 18 projects in the UEB’s pipeline.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context and consistency with the country strategies and priorities: The PDO was well
aligned with the country strategies and priorities. At appraisal, Ukraine was pursuing a financial sector
reform and the relevant authorities, with the support of the World Bank’s advisory work, were developing a
state-owned banks strategy (SOB Strategy). The strategy was to refocus mandates, introduce independent
governance structures (with relevant legislative changes adopted by early 2017), and enhance risk
management practices. Also, Ukraine was in the process of changing the structure of its exports and
geographically shifting them towards the West. The Free Trade Agreement signed with the EU was
expected to accentuate this shift. This move would require market diversification, more capital intensive
and sophisticated products for which long term finance would be needed by the SMEs. The banking sector
in Ukraine was the largest provider of long-term finance and was facing maturity mismatches from limited
access to long‐term funding sources. This imposed limitation on availability of long-term finance impeded
the country reaching its export potential. In this context, this project had a key objective to make long-term
finance available/accessible to export oriented SMEs in the country and therefore, highly aligned with the
country’s priorities.

Previous sector experience: The project benefited from the Bank’s experience in designing and
implementing financial intermediation operations in Europe and Central Asia and worldwide. At appraisal,
the WB had completed two financial sector Development Policy Operations (P151941, P150677) focused
on financial stability reforms. In addition, the World Bank and the UEB had completed two Export
Development Programs (EDPs) previously and the lessons learnt from these programs were reflected in the
design of the project. Compared to previous EDPs, the objective of the ALTF was more focused and had
the appropriate level of ambition by targeting SMEs with upper limit on enterprises’ size eligibility, defining
specific maturity targets (for loans from UEB to PFIs and loans from PFIs to SMEs). Lastly, as a result of a
lesson from EDP2, the ALTF incorporated both direct and on‐lending sub‐components, under a single
financing component, to allow for re‐allocation flexibility during the project’s lifetime.

World Bank strategy: The project objective was well aligned with the World Bank strategy defined in the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY17-21 for Ukraine. There has been no new CPF since then. The
World Bank started consultations for the preparation of CPF for FY22-FY26 in December 2021 but it is not
yet finalized. Under the valid CPF’s second Focus Area (Fiscal and Financial Stability), the second
objective was to strengthen the financial sector and lay the basis for sound credit growth. This objective


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



               was to be implemented through lending to facilitate access to longer-term finance, financial sector technical
               assistance and multisector development policy financing. The project was directly aligned as it facilitated
               lending long-term finance and lessening maturity mismatches in the banking sector. The PDO was also in
               line with the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity by facilitating a
               more inclusive and stable financial system. In addition, by increasing access to finance, the project was to
               contribute to the growth of SMEs and employment.

               Overall, the PDO was well aligned with the Bank's strategy and the country's priorities. While the ICR
               reflects sound results at the outcome level of the results chain, the PDO formulation itself is pitched at an
               intermediate results level only, which is a minor shortcoming. Relevance is therefore rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to longer term finance for export oriented small and medium enterprises.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): To achieve this objective, the project supported the activities of extension of loans
                             by UEB to PFIs (intermediaries) which would on-lend funds to export oriented SMEs for financing their sub-
                             projects and also extension of loans by UEB directly to export oriented SMEs. All loans were with
                             predetermined targeted minimum maturities. These activities were expected to result in outputs of increased
                             number of SMEs accessing finance and availability of longer-term loans for financing export oriented sub-
                             projects (the focus of the project was on sub-loan maturity extension, rather than broadening access, with
                             explicit minimum maturities set for sub-finance PAD, p12). By increasing access and tenors of finance, the
                             expected intermediate outcomes were the growth of SMEs (increasing exports) and increased employment,
                             as well as lessening maturity mismatches in the banking sector. In the long term, these would result in
                             increased financial inclusion, increased income and prosperity. Overall, the AF did not change the PDO, the
                             ToC or the results framework (only some targets were revised upwards).

                             The critical assumptions for the achievement of the PDO were: a) terms of the loans and application
                             procedures were favorable and simple enough for the PFIs to participate in the program, b) terms of the loans
                             and application procedures were favorable simple enough for the SMEs to participate in the program, c) PFIs
                             and SMEs have enough capacity to comply with the World Bank’s environmental and social framework
                             policies and other procedures.

                             Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were connected to the outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes
                             in a plausible causal chain. However, the ToC did not include any element which would support capacities of
                             eligible PFIs for their operations within the scope of the project. The results framework did not include an

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



indicator which could capture the impact of the increased tenure of finance on exports and/or on the SMEs
themselves (i.e. increased revenues, sales or employment). That said, this issue was partly resolved by
defining “Additional Indicators” (performance and profile of SMEs and profile of loans under the project) in the
PAD. However, according to PAD (p.33) these indicators were to be monitored for analytical purposes only
and were to serve as useful inputs to define policies and projects aimed at further improving SMEs’ access to
finance in Ukraine. The two of the PDO indicators (number of SME beneficiaries and the volume of Bank
support) were intermediate results indicators.

Outputs/Intermediate Results reported in the results framework:

      As of February 2024, 85 SMEs have received loans under the project (130 approved sub-projects).
         Target was to grant financing to 130 SMEs. Target could not be achieved. The ICR (p. 13 and 24)
         reports that the under achievement was due to extraordinary circumstances and the limited ability of
         UEB to attract new clients and participating banks due to martial law as well as the average loan size.
        The total volume of disbursed sub-projects reached US$235.4 million (US$241.7 million, Meeting with
         the project team, October 3, 2024) or 94.16 percent of the total project volume (including AF) of
         US$250 million. The sector breakdown indicated that agriculture and food industry sectors had the
         largest share among the financed sectors. Around 67 subprojects for the amount of USD 137 million
         were financed (over 58 percent of the total Project amount) in these two sectors.
        By December 2023, 70.1% of project funds were granted to sub-borrowers with less than 250
         employees. By project closing, 89.4% of SME beneficiaries financed under the project was with at
         least 15 percent female participation in their workforce and 83.5% of the SMEs were led by a female
         Director/CEO, Deputy/member of the Management Board, Chief Accountant/CFO, or woman owning
         >50% stake, exceeding the target of 70%. The World Bank also reviewed the first sub-finance from
         each PFI for gender bias, and remedial action was taken where necessary.
        By project closing the project had three active PFIs. Although this target was achieved, only a small
         portion of project funds (two long term loans in the total amount of US$7 million) was disbursed
         through the PFIs. Only two of PFIs have disbursed to SMEs, and one subsidiary agreement expired
         undisbursed. In this regard, the project could not fulfill its initial design feature of channeling majority of
         funding through PFIs. It was mainly because borrowing in foreign currency was not attractive for the
         PFIs (large banks) given the low interest rate on FX liquidity and the limited availability of FX hedge
         options whereas the small private banks found it difficult to comply with the eligibility criteria (ICR,
         p.21). After the Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the UEB could not attract new PFIs under the
         implementation of martial law when NBU introduced forbearance measures.
        A beneficiary feedback survey conducted in October-November 2023 revealed that 97.6% of the
         beneficiary SMEs believe that sub-loans provided by the project reflected their needs and the project
         has established effective engagement processes through semi-annual round table and surveys,
         exceeding the target of 90%.
        By December 2023, the outstanding SME finance portfolio (entire SME portfolio of the PFIs not just
         bank financed) was US$1.2 million with 970 active SME finance accounts. These indicators (SME
         finance portfolio and active SME accounts) did not have baseline values for before and after
         comparison and no target value.

      Other indicators in the results framework on financial performance of the borrower (UEB):
           o By December 2023, UEB’s portfolio at risk was 20.10% (baseline:40.95%) This indicator did
                 not have a target value. The ICR (p. 26) reports that the progress was due to actions of the


                                                                                                         Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



             borrower to resolve legacy NPLs, many of which were enabled by the parallel World Bank
             support through DPO operations.
           o By December 2023, UEB’s return on assets was 2.1% (baseline: -1.82%) of the entire portfolio
             (not only Bank-financed). The borrower reported a strong increase in net profit in the last year
             of implementation, mainly due to the recovery of loan portfolio quality and favorable monetary
             policy (high-interest rate environment). This indicator did not have a target value.
           o The UEB’s financial sustainability improved. Return on Equity was 93.1% (baseline: -299.79%)
             project closing.
           o Compliance with prudential regulation: This target could not be achieved. The ICR (p. 29)
             reports that UEB had been compliant with the NBU prudential requirements for most of the
             project’s lifetime. However, the unprecedent challenges of COVID-19 pandemic and Russian’s
             invasion of Ukraine negatively impacted UEB’s asset quality and UEB fell out of compliance
             with several prudential ratio and required three waivers on UEB’s compliance with the NBU’s
             prudential requirements.

Outcomes as reported in the results framework:

     By project closing the ratio of the average maturity of SME sub-finance under the project, over the
      average maturity of PFIs’ SME portfolio not financed under the project was 1.2. Target was to achieve
      a higher than 1 ratio.



Other outcomes reported in the ICR with respect to “Additional Indicators” (Sources: ICR and
Borrower’s ICR):

     The ICR (p. 13) reports that the average maturity of sub-loans under the project and AF was 45.2
      months (94.6 percent had a maturity above 24 months, 36.6 percent above 50 months).This was not
      an indicator in the RF and hence there was no target value.
     The participating SMEs continuously increased their sales revenues between 2017 and 2019 and
      maintained their level in 2020 despite the challenging environment. The revenues of the participating
      SMEs increased from UAH11.6 billion to UAH22.9 billion in 2020. During the implementation of AF,
      the total sales revenues remained unchanged in 2021 and 2022 but increased in 2023. The project
      under challenging environment contributed to satisfying the demand of Ukrainian companies for long-
      term financing.
     Annual exports by the participating companies grew significantly from US$114 million in 2017 to
      US$528 million in 2023 annually. The figure was even higher in 2022 (US$756 million).
     The financing granted by ALTF allowed the beneficiary export-oriented companies to access new
      export markets and diversify the geographical and product structure of exports. The financing also
      enabled the SMEs to renew machinery and equipment, modernize production facilities and improve
      competitiveness of goods and services which is important particularly for exports to the EU market
      (ICR, p.40). With the invasion, the export-import activities with Russia and Belarus stopped. Russia
      was traditionally the largest single-country trading partner of Ukraine. Under these circumstances the
      companies were forced to supply their products to new market and through new logistics ways.
      Despite the challenges the geographical structure of exports was quite diversified under ALTF. The




                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



                                    companies supplied their products to around 100 countries worldwide (Poland and Switzerland had
                                    the largest shares).

                            According to the ICR (p.21), the development outcome could have been more significant if the
                            implementation of other supporting reforms in the country on facilitating development of long-term investors,
                            such as pension funds, and enhancing capital markets had not stalled as a result of the conditions imposed
                            by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.

                            Overall, through the financing granted, the ALTF extended the loan maturity available for export-oriented
                            SMEs. The beneficiary SMEs increased their exports and sales revenues during the implementation which
                            was a challenging period. The project funds were directed prominently by UEB not through the PFIs,
                            therefore could not meet its design feature. However, although disbursing majority of funds through PFIs was
                            only a tentative and flexible feature, if implemented, could have contributed to the capacities of the PFIs and
                            to the overall financial sector. Based on these achievements, efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project’s efficacy in achieving its objective is rated Substantial. The project increased the loan tenors
                            available to export oriented SMEs resulting in increased revenues and exports.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Financial and economic analysis: At appraisal a traditional economic/financial analysis for the project was not
   conducted since the sub-projects to be funded were not pre‐identified and project costs were not defined.
   However, the project included specific eligibility criteria, terms, and conditions (including minimum sub-loan
   maturities) that would be consistent with a market-driven approach, focusing on potentially financially viable
   companies. Provision of long-term finance was crucial for Ukraine in facilitating export growth (particularly in the
   EU markets) since export growth would require provision of more capital intensive and sophisticated products
   compatible with the EU. In addition, availability of working capital has been a priority in the context of economic
   downturn as companies experience delays in the payments for goods sold and services provided. At project
   closing a financial and economic analysis was not conducted also. An attempt to conduct a financial analysis
   could have been done to assess the impact of the financing by project closing.


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



Administrative and operational efficiency: The project experienced delays in ratification of the project and its
AF by the Parliament. The ratification of the agreement by the Parliament required more than 13 months of the
project and 11 months for AF. As a result, the effectiveness period for both loans were extended twice. In
addition, the conditions imposed by COVID-19 and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, significantly impacted the
implementation of the project. The closing date and disbursement deadline date of the project and the AF had to
be extended.



A financial or an economic analysis was not conducted at appraisal and project closing. Project experienced
significant delays due to delays in ratification of both original project and the AF. In addition, COVID-19 and
Russian invasion of Ukraine negatively impacted implementation resulting in delays. These delays negatively
impacted administrative and operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objective was rated Substantial, as was overall efficacy. The project’s efficiency was rated Modest
as a result of administrative and operational inefficiencies. Based on these ratings, overall outcome is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Security risk: Security risk is high. Continuation of conditions imposed by the war constitutes a significant
threat to physical assets, infrastructure, energy resources, logistics. It can be expected that these threats

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



would limit the SMEs capacity to increase production capacity for exports and their demand for long term
loans.

Financial risk: Financial risk is high. As mentioned in the Borrower’s ICR report, under the continuing war
conditions, both SMEs and corporate enterprises suffer from the destruction and business interruptions in all
regions of Ukraine and need the financial assistance for renovation, implementation of new technologies and
diversify as well increase the quality of produced goods to be acceptable in USA, EU and other countries. If
the financial assistance could not be provided, businesses particularly the SMEs are expected to face
difficulties and may not be able to keep up with the level of production and exports achieved under the ALTP.

Institutional support risk: Institutional support risk is moderate. The commitment to pursuing the SOB
strategy is likely to be sustained. The enhanced ability of UEB supported by the World Bank’s previous
engagements is likely to be maintained. However, the reform process facilitating development of long-term
investors, such as pension funds, and enhancing capital markets need to be implemented.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant to the Government of Ukraine’s financial sector reform strategies;
  more specifically to its SOB strategy. The PDO was also in line with the World Bank’s strategies as it
  supported availability of long-term finance targeting maturity mismatches in the banking sector which is
  the main source of funding for the SMEs. From technical perspective the project featured a single
  component design which involved flexibility to reallocate funds between the two sub-components of the
  project. This flexibility was introduced following the lessons drawn out of the previous EDPs.
  Implementation arrangements were overall sufficient. At appraisal, financial condition of UEB as well as
  the potential eligible PFIs were analyzed and found satisfactory. The UEB was chosen as the main
  implementing agency due to its experience with exporters and also, with the World Bank. The Project
  Implementation Unit (PIU) at UEB was staffed with qualified personnel, capable of satisfactorily
  implementing all aspects of the project. The PIU had already performed well under past and current
  World Bank projects. At appraisal, the risks were identified in two main areas: Macro-financial and
  political risks. These risks were identified as high. In addition, the PAD, foresaw that the pool of eligible
  PFIs may have been limited given the banking sector’s ongoing transformation and challenges. The
  overall risk was rated substantial. To mitigate these risks a flexible design was introduced for the project
  and an analysis of potential PFIs was conducted. Furthermore, close monitoring of the project by the WB
  was foreseen. The M&E design was simple, clear, but had some shortcomings. The results framework
  did not include an indicator which could capture the impact of the increased tenure of finance on exports
  and/or on the SMEs themselves (i.e. increased revenues, sales, employment). A list of additional
  indicators was introduced at appraisal however, these were for analytical purposes only. The two of the
  PDO indicators (number of SME beneficiaries and the volume of Bank support) were intermediate results
  indicators.



  Overall, the quality-at-entry is rated Satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 11 Supervision Missions during the 6 years of project implementation.
 During the implementation, the World Bank team regularly monitored progress of the project and achieving
 the PDO. In addition to regular monitoring, the team provided advice in several areas, such compliance
 with E&S requirements. The progress of the project was candidly reported in the Implementation Status
 and Results Reports. The World Bank team’s focus on development results was demonstrated by their
 effort to address the challenges experienced during the implementation and needs of the Borrower and to
 restructure the project accordingly. The flexible design and the restructurings enabled change in
 distribution of funds between sub-components and extensions in the implementation period enabled full
 disbursements of the funds. In addition to the restructurings, the AF was secured to meet the increasing
 demand by the SMEs. At the restructurings, some revisions were introduced in the results framework.
 However, these revisions were mainly to adjust targets to the extended implementation period. The
 weaknesses in the results framework mentioned in the Quality-at-Entry section above were not addressed.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was clearly defined and involved a single objective. The results framework included three PDO
 indicators two of which were output level indicators. The first PDO indicator provided evidence on extension
 of loan tenors available for the SMEs. On the other hand, the PAD (p.34, Annex 2) identified a list of
 additional indicators which provided evidence about the impact of the financing on the beneficiary SMEs.
 However, these additional indicators which included among others, indicators of increase in exports and
 maturity of sub-loans, were not part of the project’s results framework. The results framework involved a
 number of financial ratios which monitored financial stability, quality of loan portfolio and profitability of the
 Borrower. Although these inputs were relevant, they did not provide evidence with respect to achievement
 of the PDO. The PIU in the UEB was to monitor the PDO and intermediate indicators of the Results
 Framework and the additional indicators on a regular basis. The data was to come from UEB’s internal
 reports. The PIU was to prepare semi‐annual project reports.




                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 18) reports that UEB was experienced in collecting reporting information from previous
  engagements in the implementation of projects financed by the WB and other IFIs. UEB, jointly with WB,
  developed appropriate reporting templates in the POM. The data on project performance came from
  reports submitted by UEB on a regular basis (semi-annually). In line with the restructurings, the project
  team revised the results framework. With the extended implementation period and AF, the set targets
  were increased to match the project’s ambition and some target definitions were revised. The project
  team completed implementation status and results reports. The data regarding the additional indicators
  were also collected in addition to the data collected under the results framework.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly reviewed by the project team and the implementing agencies. The
  M&E framework enabled the project team to make appropriate adjustments to the implementation plan,
  depending on the status of physical progress. During the implementation, the M&E system was also
  used as a tool to facilitate decision making and achieving the PDO by the implementing partners.



  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Substantial. The M&E design involved two sets of indicators. The set
  of indicators which were not part of the project’s results framework provided relevant evidence not the
  results framework. That said, this design issue did not hinder the assessment of the PDO.
  Implementation arrangements were adequate, and data was systematically collected despite challenging
  conditions. Inputs of the M&E system were used to inform project implementation and support project
  management decisions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category FI aimed to extend a credit line, intermediated by UEB through
   on‐lending to PFIs and by direct lending. Two environmental safeguard policies were triggered:
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and OP/BP 4.09 Pest Management (where applicable). All
   sub‐projects to be financed under the Project were subject to an environmental review process following the
   procedures described in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ICR (p. 19)
   reports all project activities were undertaken in a manner consistent with the ESMF requirements. All
   subprojects went through a preliminary environmental and social (E&S) screening and due diligence to
   check and confirm if they operated in compliance with the national environmental regulatory framework.
   According to the ICR (p.19) the PIU demonstrated good understanding of E&S risk management
   requirements and project E&S timelines during the entire project implementation. Any sub‐projects that may
   require land acquisition, physical displacement, or result in any issues associated with involuntary
   resettlement (that would require application of the World Bank Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 on Involuntary

                                                                                                  Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



   Resettlement) were not eligible for financing under the scope of this project. The project had a two-level
   grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to address concerns of stakeholders. The project had a GRM focal
   point and a dedicated log. During the implementation of the project, the GRM did not receive any
   complaints.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement: A procurement specialist was assigned at appraisal to carry out supervision. Loans to
   SMEs were to be consistent with the relevant provisions on Eligibility, Conflict of Interest and Fraud and
   Corruption included in the World Bank "Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers", dated July 2016. The
   ICR report does not include a section on procurement. However, as informed by the project team,
   (Correspondence, October 9, 2024) no procurement activities were conducted under the ALTF (and AF).
   This was a one-component project fully implemented via PFIs.

   Financial management: At appraisal UEB was already an experienced borrower with the World Bank,
   had established systems and procedures to manage the on‐lending and direct lending components. UEB
   had qualified staff to execute these tasks. The ICR report does not include a section on financial
   management (FM). However, as informed by the project team (Correspondence, October 9, 2024), the FM
   arrangements were in place and FM performance fully satisfactory. In the last project ISR (preceding the
   ICR), FM of the Project was rated "Satisfactory". No further information was provided in the ICR about
   independent audits and any potential qualified opinions.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)




12. Lessons

The following three lessons are from the ICR with some adaptation of language:

        If implemented in conjunction with reforms supporting the same objective, the credit
         lines to support SMEs’ access to finance can help achieving development outcomes
         more effectively. In the case of ALTP, the country experienced significant shocks during the
         implementation period. It can be reasonably expected that, in the absence of a stable
         macroeconomic performance and effective legal framework, chances of developing
         sustainable long-term finance would be low. The development outcome could have been
         more significant if the implementation of other supporting reforms on facilitating development
         of long-term investors, such as pension funds, and enhancing capital markets had not
         stalled.
        Availability of foreign currency hedging instruments under the credit line operations
         or providing loans in foreign currency can increase attractiveness of offered funds to
         beneficiary SMEs and PFIs. According to an NBU survey, about 80 percent of businesses
         in need of a loan would be seeking financing in local currency. In the case of Ukraine, SMEs
         typically do not have access to financial instruments such as currency swaps or forward rate
         agreements which impedes them to hedge against currency risks. The project did not prohibit
         UEB from providing sub-loans to SMEs in local currency, which suggested that PFIs would
         have to hedge against the currency risk or take the currency risk on its balance sheet within
         the prudential limit. Hedging against currency risks and more expensive pricing on the WB
         financing reduced its attractiveness for the PFIs.
        In countries where WB engages in credit lines on a consistent basis, having a
         provision for re-lending funds refunded by PFIs to the wholesale bank, can help
         continuity of operations. As mentioned in the efficacy section, the low participation of small
         private PFIs in the project was due to difficulty in complying with the eligibility criteria. As for
         larger banks it was due borrowing in foreign currency. In fact, most of the funds that UEB
         disbursed to PFIs were pre-paid or returned. The project did not call for UEB to re-lend any
         funding reflows from PFIs under similar terms. Under the ALTP, it is assumed that funds
         returned by PFIs were used by UEB to continue financing their core clients, export-oriented
         SMEs. However, there is no record of such reflows in the project reporting within the lifetime
         of the project



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and provided adequate coverage of project activities and candidly reported on most
shortcomings in a concise form. The ICR used the available data to justify most the assigned ratings and is
consistent with the guidelines. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and

                                                                                                         Page 14 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Access to Long Term Finance (P156766)



analysis. The ICR could have been enriched by further details including the sections of M&E and Fiduciary
Compliance.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 15 of 15
