     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024145

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P156892                                      TA for transport sector industry reform

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Burkina Faso                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59410                                    30-Jun-2022                                         18,902,283.20

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jan-2017                                  30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              20,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               18,392,753.66                                              0.00

 Actual                                           18,902,283.20                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 2, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 3) is:

   " To improve the efficiency and safety of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the
   Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso) - Abidjan (Cote d'Ivoire) - road transport Corridor" (hereafter referred to
   as the Corridor).


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Report Review, the PDOs are unpacked as follows:

   PDO 1. To improve the efficiency of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the road transport
   Corridor.

   PDO 2. To improve the safety of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the road transport Corridor.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were five components (PAD, pages 3 -9).

   1. Institutional strengthening and capacity building support for public and private sector
   participants in the transport sector. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.90 million. The actual cost
   was US$3.50 million. This component aimed to strengthen the capacities of the government and transport
   and professional groups for providing efficient transport services. Activities in this component aimed at
   professionalization of the road transport industry and accompanying measures for transport and logistics
   operators to adapt to the new regulatory environment. Sub-component activities included capacity building
   of staff of the General Directorate of Land and Maritime Transport (DGTTM), Burkina Shippers Council
   (CBC), Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Burkina-Faso (CCI-BF), Training Center for Road Transport
   and Auxiliary Activities (CFTRA), operators and professional drivers' associations.

   2. Development of a heavy cargo truck renewal scheme. The name of this component was changed to
   "development of a heavy cargo truck renewal scheme" through the fourth project
   restructuring. This component was partly financed by the Bank and partly by counterpart financing. The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$16.00 million. The actual cost was US$13.00 million. This component
   aimed at developing a self-financing long-haul, heavy-cargo renewal scheme and operationalization of a
   scrapyard. Activities in this component included institutional strengthening of the DGTTM to to manage
   activities under this component.

   3. Support to customs modernization and trade facilitation on the Burkinabe section of the Corridor.
   The estimated cost at appraisal was US$3.00 million. The actual cost was as estimated. This component
   aimed to strengthen transit facilitation along the Burkinabe section of the Corridor. Activities in this
   component aimed at interconnecting the Burkinabe and Ivorian customs management systems to facilitate
   transit trade along the Corridor.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



  4. Road safety on the Burkinabe section of the Corridor. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.10
  million. The actual cost was US$2.50 million. This component aimed at improving road safety. Activities in
  this component included capacity building of the National Road Safety Agency.

  5. Project management, monitoring and evaluation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$1.00
  million. The actual cost was as estimated. This component aimed at supporting project management and
  monitoring and evaluation. Sub-component activities included: (i) financing operating costs; (ii) financing
  project management costs and costs of audits; (iii) monitoring costs, including through third party monitoring
  by Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs); (iv) supporting implementation of citizen engagement and
  gender-related activities and acquiring Information Communication Technology (ICT)
  equipment, Geographical Information Systems (GIS), satellite cellphones, video links and websites; (v)
  financing costs of environmental and social management; and (iv) conducting HIV/AIDS prevention
  campaigns and monitoring HIV/AIDS along the Burkinabe section of the Corridor.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$25.00 million. The actual cost was US$23.00
  million.

  Project financing. The Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit of
  US$20.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$18.90 million. The difference between the appraisal
  estimate and amount disbursed was due to exchange rate changes.

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$5.00 million was planned at appraisal. Their actual
  contribution was US$2.07 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on January 12, 2017, became effective on June 29, 2017 and was to
  close on June 30, 2022. The Mid-Term Review was held on October 21, 2019. The project closed an year
  behind schedule on June 30, 2023.

  Changes. There were five level 2 restructurings.

  The following main changes were made through the first restructuring on March 30, 2020:

        The Interbank Guarantee Company of Burkina Faso (SOFIGIB) was added as an implementing
         agency to oversee financial management of the guarantee intended to facilitate transfer of
         commercial bank credit for buying new trucks under the heavy cargo truck renewal scheme.
        The disbursement arrangements were changed.

  The following change was made through the second restructuring on December 22, 2021.

        Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.

  The following main changes were made through the third restructuring on December 29, 2022.

        The PDO level indicators were modified and a new PDO level indicator was added. These changes
         were made based on the preliminary findings from the ongoing Bank-financed project in the Ivorian

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



          section of the corridor. The replaced indicators better represented the scope of technical assistance
          (TA) activities and were attributable to the project (discussed in detail in section 9).
         The closing date was extended by six months from June 30, 2022 to December 31, 2022, due to the
          political instability following the coup d' Etat in 2022.
         Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories.

   The following main changes were made through the fourth restructuring on February 13, 2022.

         The name of component two activity from "development of a heavy cargo truck renewal scheme" to
          "development of a heavy cargo renewal and scrapping scheme", in recognition of the fact that the
          retired trucks participating in the program were removed from the fleet.
         The closing date was extended by six months from December 31, 2022 to June 30, 2023, due to the
          political instability in the country.
         Counterpart funding was reduced from US$5.00 to US$3.00 million. The original design envisioned
          counterpart funding of US$5.00 million for developing a heavy cargo truck renewal scheme. Savings
          were realized while implementing this scheme. Hence, counterpart funding was reduced to US$3.00
          million.

   The results framework was further modified with the fifth project restructuring on June 9, 2023.

   Split rating. The PDOs did not change. Some original key outcome indicators (which were achieved) were
   modified to reflect outcomes that were attributable to the project. Therefore, this review is not based on a
   split rating of objectives.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and regional context. As a landlocked country, Burkina Faso's depends on transport
infrastructure to reduce poverty, ensure food security and access to basic services. The project areas were
in the Abidjan- Ouagadougou regional transport corridor. The overall length of the Corridor is about 1,189
kilometer (km), of which about 536 km is in Burkina Faso. The Corridor, accounted for about 35% of the
overall transit trade for Burkina Faso. At the regional level, the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU) Road Program identified this Corridor as a key regional transit corridor.

Sector context. The state of transport infrastructure in Burkina Faso was poor. Transport services were
inefficient due to factors such as, inadequate regulation, market price distortions and lack of interest from
the private sector to invest in the sector. Truckers tended to overload trucks and use obsolete trucks. As a
result, the containerization rate on the Corridor was one of the lowest in the world, with only 20% of transit
goods moving via containers. Hence, modernizing road transport services, professionalizing the trucking
industry, facilitating renewal of obsolete trucks and streamlining customs procedures at borders were
important for reducing trade-related costs on the Corridor.

Government strategy. At appraisal, the 2016 -2020 National Economic and Social Development Plan
(NESDP) identified the main sector challenges as: (i) professionalizing road transport actors; (ii)

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



               modernizing freight vehicles; (iii) improving stakeholders' competitiveness among players; and (iv)
               improving road safety. The updated NESDP for 2021 - 2025 prioritized the need for reforming institutions
               and identified logistics as a main constraint to raising private sector productivity. The project is well-aligned
               with Burkina Faso's Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework on Climate
               Change (UNFCC) 2021- 2025.

               World Bank (WB) strategy. The PDOs are well-aligned with the WB strategy. At appraisal, the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016 - 2020 highlighted the need for Burkina Faso's participation in
               regional initiatives to sustain its competitiveness. The PDOs are relevant to the current Bank strategy for
               Burkina Faso. The objective 1.3 of improving connectivity for better access to markets was specified in the
               Focus Area 1 of accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth for job creation. The project is consistent
               with the WB's 2022 G5 Sahel Region Country Climate Development Report (CCDR). The CCDR
               highlighted the importance of investing in greener, safer, more efficient and inclusive transport systems to
               ensure a resilient transport network.

               Bank experience. When this project was under preparation, the WB had supported transport sector
               reforms in Burkina Faso and Cote d'Ivoire through the Regional Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness
               Credit (RTFCC) series of Development Policy Operations (DPOs). This project supported two types of
               interventions on the Burkinabe segment of the Corridor. One, technical and financial assistance to
               operationalize the RTFCC policy and regulatory reforms by targeting cross border transit and trade
               facilitation improvements. The project activities aimed at implementing the prior actions of the RTFCC DPO;
               and (II) technical assistance for establishing mechanisms to support private operators adapt to the new
               regulatory environment.

               Since efficiency and road safety of transport services on the regional Corridor depended on reforms on both
               sides of the border, the Bank also financed a parallel project in Cote d'Ivoire when this project was being
               implemented, that was focused on reforms aimed at reducing trade and transport costs on the Ivorian
               section of the corridor. The overall reach of the project, which was relevant to the government strategy and
               the Bank country and regional strategies, was appropriate. Overall relevance is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. To improve the efficiency of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the road transport
                             Corridor.

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



Theory of change. Activities aimed at institutional strengthening of transport entities, professionalizing the
road agencies, developing trade facilitation mechanisms, developing the truck renewal scheme for replacing
obsolete trucks, expediting customs clearance facilities and establishing Authorized Economic Operators
(AEOs), were likely to improve the efficiency of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the Corridor.
The causal links between inputs, outputs and outcomes are logical. Along with similar activities on the Ivorian
section of the Corridor, the outcomes of this project are likely to aid in the long-term objective of efficient road
transport services on the Corridor. The theory of change is based on these assumptions: (i) The designed
capacity building activities are implemented; (ii) The modalities of the fleet renewal program are developed
and there is adequate counterpart financing for the program; and (iii) Burkinabe transport operators are
committed to the program.

Outputs.

      TA was provided for activities aimed at capacity building of the public and private sector transport
         sector participants as targeted: (i). An information systems diagnostic study and hardware for
         interconnecting the systems of the General Directorate of Land and maritime transport (DGTTM) with
         the National Identification Office (ONI), the Police-Gendarmerie (IRAPOL), the General Directorate of
         Customs (DGD), the Motor Vehicle Control Center (CCVA) and the General Directorate of Taxes
         (DGI); (ii). A data management platform for transporters; (iii) A Road, Rail and Air Transport
         Management System (SYGESTRAN) for Burkina Shippers Council for improving freight tracking; (iv)
         Software for managing the guarantee funds on customs transit operations; (v) System for
         interconnecting between administrations for data exchange and issuing transport tickets; (vi) installing
         local networks, interconnecting buildings at border sites and acquiring security equipment; and (vii) a
         diagnostic study for deploying a pilot phase of a computerized management system for Driving
         License Examinations in Burkina Faso (SIGEPec).
        7,936 people from CFTRA, Burkina Shippers Council (CBC) and the Chamber of Commerce and
         Industry of Burkina Faso (CCI-BF) were trained on using the driving simulator. 202 instructors were
         trained for professionalizing road transport services, exceeding the target of 90.
        TA was provided for the truck fleet renewal scheme: The activities included: (i) Studies for
         implementing mechanism for accessing financing for renewing truck fleets, developing a fleet renewal
         procedures manual, evaluating the commercial viability of the vehicle scrapping mechanism and the
         environmental and social impact notices for the scrapyard site for old trucks; (ii) establishing a
         guarantee fund within the Interbank Guarantee Company of Burkina Faso (SOFIGIB); (iii) approval
         and validation for renewing 140 heavy cargo trucks and payment of the scrapping premium for 140
         eligible trucks in the program; and (iv) organizing committees for implementing the renewal
         mechanism and scrappage scheme. 54% of heavy vehicles fleet managers were trained in
         accordance with the new training standards, exceeding the target of 50%.
        86 new long-haul trucks were put in service, short of the target of 100. The ICR (para 23) noted that
         the fleet renewal program is expected to exceed the target, as the program's delivery schedule for 140
         trucks that had been validated and approved by the closing date, is expected to be completed by June
         2024.
        TA was provided for modernizing customs and trade facilitation practices. The activities included: (i)
         training customs officers and users: (ii) training transporters and the General Directorate of Customs
         (DGD) technical teams/focal points for implementing the interconnection of the Burkina Faso and Cote
         d'Ivoire customs management systems; and (iii) updating, editing and distributing the customs
         interconnection User Guide to transporters. Electronic transmission of transit documents collected by


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



       Burkina Faso Customs was provided in real-time to the Cote d'Ivoire Customs when the project
       closed.

The following activity was not completed as targeted.

      The activity of certifying transporters as Authorized Economic Operators (AEOs) was not completed
       when the project closed.

Outcomes. (ICR, pages 17-19).

The TA activities were expected to contribute to the following outcomes: (i) Increase the number of
professional transport companies; (ii) Reduce the border clearance time at Niangologo (Burkina Faso/Cote
d'Ivoire border); and (iii). reduce Carbon di Oxide emissions per annum due to replacing old trucks with newer
trucks.

      202 transport companies were professionalized, exceeding the target of 90.
      The time taken for customs clearance at the Niangolgo border reduced from ten hours at the baseline
       in December 2016 to one hour and forty eight minutes, exceeding the target of three hours.
      The carbon di oxide emissions reduction per annum due to replacing old trucks with new trucks
       reduced to 576 Metric ton when the project closed, short of the target of 8,000 metric tons. The ICR
       notes that the fleet renewal program is expected to exceed the target, as the program extends beyond
       the closing date. An analysis conducted on May 2, 2024 estimated that the program's current
       reduction was 8,273 Metric ton, with 86 old trucks out of circulation, exceeding the end-project target
       of 8,000 Metric ton. Since 54 old trucks are to be taken out of circulation (with 140 trucks in the
       program), the total reduction per annum that is likely to be achieved is 13,468 Metric ton, exceeding
       the specified target of 8,000 Metric ton.
      4,170 people directly benefitted from project activities (with 50% female beneficiaries) as targeted.
       Beneficiaries included people in the tradeable sectors of the economy (shipping companies) and
       women participants operating small businesses on the Corridor.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial as the outcomes were realized for the most part.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To improve the safety of transport services on the Burkinabe section of the road transport Corridor.

Rationale
Theory of change. TA activities aimed at capacity building of the National Road Safety Agency
(ONASR), developing awareness and prevention campaigns and treating black spots were likely to help in




                                                                                                Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



                            improving road safety on the Burkinabe section of the Corridor. The causal links between project activities,
                            outputs and outcomes are logical and the intended outcomes are monitorable.

                            Outputs.

                                  TA was provided for the following activities aimed at improving road safety as targeted: (i). A study to
                                   digitize the system for collecting road traffic accident data; (ii).National Road Safety Agency
                                   (ONASER) staff and other public actors were trained in road safety inspection and audits of traffic
                                   accidents; (iii) capacity building workshops were conducted for private-sector players in the container
                                   transport chain; (iv) support was provided for designing the ONASER website: (v) holding periodic
                                   accident data collection missions on the Corridor; (vi) equipment was provided to ONASER for road
                                   safety promotion activities; (vii) training law enforcement officers and transport operators on road
                                   safety safety management; (viii) organizing study tours for sharing experience in managing truck
                                   weigh stations and interstate traffic; and (ix) for treating black spots identified by the road safety audit
                                   of the Ouaga -Bobo - Cote d'Ivoire border axis and implementing the recommendations of the road
                                   safety audit on the border.
                                  Equipment was provided to support corridor road safety enforcement, improving data collection and
                                   better accountability of road crashes, injuries and deaths. The ICR noted that recorded road accidents
                                   jumped from 184 in 2016 to 389 in 2021 as a result of better data.
                                  86 unsafe and old heavy cargo trucks (up to 49 years of age) were old trucks were replaced with safer
                                   and newer trucks when the project closed, as compared to the target of 140.

                            Outcomes.

                                  53% of the missing/damaged traffic signs were replaced on the Burkinabe portion of the corridor
                                   achieving the target.
                                  The number of casualties on the Burkinabe portion of the corridor declined from 83 at the baseline to
                                   51 when the indicator was dropped at the second restructuring. However, the ICR and the team
                                   provided additional attribution analysis (email dated October 16, 2024) conducted with the Burkinabe
                                   National Road Safety Office (ONASER) to appraise the impact of road safety equipment and road sign
                                   installation in the Corridor. The installation of road safety equipment and road signs in the Corridor
                                   were completed in 2022. The analysis revealed a reduction in road incidents by 10% (from 24,686 to
                                   22,217), injuries by 7% (from 15,384 to 14,307) and deaths by 23% (1150 to 885) respectively in the
                                   year after installation.

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



  Overall efficacy is rated as substantial, with minor shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. The Bank conducted an economic analysis using standard econometric methods for the
heavy cargo truck renewal scheme. This activity accounted for 80% of the appraisal estimate and 57% of actual
cost. The benefits were assumed to come from: (i) reduction in vehicle operating costs (VOCs) due to the
renewed truck fleet; and (ii) reduction in negative environmental impacts due to reduction in carbon dioxide
emissions. The Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate was US$ -1,29 million at appraisal and the NPV
was US$10.72 million at project closure. The ex- post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 21%,
exceeding the ex-ante EIRR of 10.9%. Savings were eventually realized in the truck fleet renewal program,
which was partly financed by counterpart fundings. The savings realized were utilized for reducing counterpart
funding for the project.

Administrative and operational shortcomings during implementation. There were delays in the rollout of
the truck fleet renewal program due to inadequate analytical work that were tailored to the country context
(discussed in section 9a). During implementation, there were adverse external shocks such as the restrictions in
the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic and two coup d' Etats in 2022. Despite the delays, which were partly
outside the control of the project, most activities were completed, with an extension of one year of the scheduled
closing date.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the economic justification for the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         80.00
 Appraisal                                                    10.90
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         57.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 21.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDOs is High. Efficiency and overall efficacy are substantial. Considering these ratings,
the outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ownership. There is moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcome
for activities associated with the truck renewal scheme. After the project closed in 2023, the Government
enacted legislation for providing exemptions from import duties, Value-Added Taxes (VAT) and other taxes
to truckers participating in the scheme for replacing old truck with newer trucks (less than ten years old).

Political risk. There is substantial risk to the sustainability of development outcome, given the instability in
the Sahel region (Burkina Faso, Mali and Niger).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons from previous Bank-financed series of DPOs. This
  project aimed at providing TA for implementing the prior actions of the DPO. Recognizing that project
  benefits are contingent on activities on both sides of the Corridor, the Bank had a parallel project that
  focused on similar operations on the Ivorian section of the Corridor.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate, as project performance was not undermined by the
  arrangements made at appraisal. The arrangements included: (i) The Project Steering Committee (PSC)
  in charge of coordinating sectoral interventions; (ii) The Project Technical Committee (PTC) in charge of
  day-to-day technical oversight; and (iii) The existing and operational Permanent Secretariat of the
  Transport Sector (SP-PST) in charge of fiduciary aspects (PAD, pages 10 - 11).

  The Bank preparation team identified several risks at appraisal including: (i) High risks with political and
  governance (due to the political turbulence in Burkina Faso since October 2014) and the macroeconomic
  environment (given that Burkina Faso is vulnerable to adverse exogenous shocks); (ii) substantial risks
  with technical design, the weak institutional capacity, stakeholders and fiduciary risks. The Bank
  incorporated several mitigation measures. Even with these measures, the project risk was rated as High
  at appraisal (PAD, page 12). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary
  compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).




                                                                                                       Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



  There were moderate shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry: One, the roll out of the truck fleet renewal
  program (the project's flagship activity and which accounted for over half of the financing for the project),
  would have benefitted from additional feasibility studies at appraisal. The project design implicitly
  assumed that the design used in Abidjan truck fleet program could be replicated in Burkina Faso.
  However, Burkinabe banks were less inclined to approve credit to informal freight transport companies
  and a first iteration of applications resulted in a high rejection rate for factors such as: (i) underestimating
  the capital cost of new truck assets cost; and (ii) most loan applications were not supported by long-term
  contracts or evidence of revenues to demonstrate their ability to meet monthly payments; This
  necessitated extensive consultation with beneficiaries and commercial financial institutions for the Bank
  team and SP-PST to tailor appropriate solutions; (ii) While risks associated with weak implementation
  capacities were foreseen, the mitigation measures at appraisal were not adequate. The project's four
  components required that the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) coordinate across four independent
  Burkinabe institutions. The multiplicity of actors coupled with shortcomings in the technical capacity of the
  various agencies, resulted in procurement delays and delays in the roll out of the truck fleet renewal
  program; and (iii) There were shortcomings in M&E, with many key outcome indicators not attributable to
  the project activities (discussed in Section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision team addressed the challenges that rose during implementation through the project
 restructurings. The supervision team aided by modifying the indicators that were attributable to the TA
 activities financed under the project. However, the PDO indicator was replaced by output indicator
 “Missing/damaged traffic signs replaced on the Burkinabe portion of the corridor,”. Based on the
 subsequent clarifications by the team, it seems that dropping the indicator may have been a mistake, as
 the project did have an impact on the fatal road crashes.

 The continuity of leadership was maintained, with two task team leaders during the project lifetime. The
 support provided by the Bank team of environmental and social specialists based in Burkina Faso aided in
 safeguards compliance and the presence of the Bank technical team in Burkina Faso helped in proactively
 responding to the challenges that arose during implementation. The Bank conducted supervision missions
 twice a year during implementation, except in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Coup d'Etat in
 2022, when the team conducted virtual missions.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory, due to the shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                       Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was clear. However, the original key outcome indicators went far beyond the project
 scope and not attributable to the project activities. Based on the preliminary findings from the parallel
 project in the Ivorian section of the Corridor, the original key outcome indicators were modified to reflect
 better the outcomes that were attributable to the project activities:

 (i) The original indicator - " the average cost of transporting a 40-foot container by road from Ouagadougou
 from to Abidjan" was unrealistic, as project activities did not directly aim at reducing the cost of transporting
 a container in the Corridor. This indicator was replaced by an accurate indicator , "the number of transport
 companies professionalized "; (ii) The indicator - "average transit time to Ouagadougou after existing
 border post with Cote d'Ivoire" was dropped, as it was difficult to monitor how the financed activities directly
 reduced the transit time. This indicator was replaced by an appropriate indicator," Time taken in hours to
 cross the border post with Cote d'Ivoire"; (iii) As the project only financed activities focused on acquiring
 radars and installing traffic signs, the indicator " Number of fatalities on the Burkinabe section of the
 Corridor" was replaced an indicator " the percentage of missing/damaged signs on the Burkinabe section of
 the Corridor'; which in retrospect seems to be a mistake since the project did have an impact on the
 fatalities and (iv) the indicator " reduction in carbon dioxide emissions per annum due to the scrapping of
 old trucks with equivalent number of new trucks' was modified to an "equivalent number of newer trucks",
 as the truck renewal program comprised both used (but newer) trucks manufactured within the last ten
 years.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Permanent Secretariat of the Transport Sector (SP-PST), was overall in charge of M&E. As
  discussed above, most of the original outcome indicators were replaced with indicators that could be
  attributed to the project activities. However, the indicators were replaced with the fourth project
  restructuring on December 29, 2022, about two years after the Mid-Term Review (MTR). The indicator
  used to monitor progress on the PDO of improving road safety was output-oriented and not adequate for
  monitoring outcomes.

  The ICR (para 51) noted that data collection was appropriate, although sporadic and application of M&E
  methodologies was inconsistent during implementation. The expected quarterly reports were not
  produced and submitted in a timely manner. The data reported discrepancies without any explanations.
  The two indicators related to customs and border crossing times did not consider an average, derived
  from relevant statistical analysis.

  Revisions to the results framework over the course of implementation did not eventually translate to a
  better design or utilization as the revised indicators did not fully reflect the desired outcomes.




                                                                                                      Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 52) noted that the results indicator was utilized as a checklist to monitor progress. The
  M&E plan at design indicated that the indicators were to be collected from various sources and on a
  yearly basis. The ICR (para 53) acknowledges that most indicators were neither assessed during
  implementation, nor communicated to the various stakeholders. As such, the indicators were unavailable
  to inform and assess the project's performance during implementation.

  In sum, overall M&E is rated as modest because of the shortcomings in M&E design, implementation
  and utilization. Although some deficiencies of the original indicators were rectified, they were done just
  six months before the scheduled closing date.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) under the World Bank safeguard policies.
   One safeguards was triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) (PAD, page iii).

   Environmental Assessment. Since the project only financed TA type of activities, irreversible long-term
   negative environmental impacts were not foreseen at appraisal. However, potential environmental risk was
   associated with the truck scrapping scheme. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), A
   Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Grievance Report Mechanism (GRM) was prepared to address the
   risk. There were no adverse environmental impacts during implementation. There were four complaints
   during implementation and the four cases were resolved by project closure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The Bank conducted a FM assessment of the Permanent Secretariat of the
   Transport Sector Project (SP-PST). SP-PST had experienced staff. The assessment concluded that the
   FM arrangements were adequate (PAD, para 53). The Project's FM was rated as moderately satisfactory
   (ICR, para 57). Although financial and internal audit reports of acceptable quality were submitted in a
   timely fashion, the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) experienced some difficulties in generating data from
   the accounting system on time.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of SP-PST at appraisal. SP-
   PST had experience in executing previous Bank-financed projects. Despite this, procurement risk was
   rated as High at appraisal, given the country context (PAD, para 64). Procurement performance was rated
   as moderately satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 58) due to the delays in the procurement
   processes during the project lifetime.



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts during implementation.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Scaling up Investments in cross-border information systems can help in realizing greater
efficiency gains in regional projects. This project aimed at simplifying customs clearance and
border crossing processes. However, the interconnected technology at Niangolgo (Burkina Faso and
Cote d'Ivoire land border) was not being fully utilized by all transporters, many of whom still relied on
paper-based processes. The lesson from this project is that refined and clearly articulated incentive
structures, that can reduce the variance in clearance and crossing processes and times, such as the
use of preferred lanes for known shippers according to their risks profiles, can help in realizing
efficiency gains from investments in cross-border information systems.

2. A longer-term engagement may raise the potential for success for implementing sectoral
reform strategies. This project was implemented in the wake of a Development Policy Financing
(DPF) Operation. The project aimed at providing technical assistance for implementing some of the
prior actions of the DPF operation. The lesson is that a long-term engagement may be required for
implementing sectoral reform strategies.

3. Feasibility studies that carefully take into account local conditions and risk factors can
help in reducing implementation delays. The roll out of the truck renewal program was delayed,
as project design implicitly assumed that the design used in Abidjan truck fleet program could be

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TA for transport sector industry reform (P156892)



replicated in Burkina Faso. However, Burkinabe banks were less inclined to approve credit to
informal freight transport companies and a first iteration of applications resulted in a high rejection
rate. This necessitated extensive consultation with beneficiaries and commercial financial institutions
during implementation to tailor appropriate solutions in the country context.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and clear. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly shows the causal links
between project activities (inputs), outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR provides convincing rationale
for why some of the original key indicators were modified during implementation. The ICR provides adequate
evidence and analysis to assess project performance. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the
experience of implementing this project.

One minor shortcoming is the length of the ICR. The main body of the text at 26 pages is almost twice the
recommended length of 15 pages.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 15 of 15
