     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024236

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P149620                                    MZ-Agriculture NRM Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                 Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58550,IDA-D1190,IDA-D5020              31-Oct-2021                                          92,260,714.97

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jun-2016                                31-Oct-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             93,724,977.10                                                0.00

 Actual                                         92,260,714.97                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          J. W. van Holst              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli                   Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Financing Agreement (page 4) states that the project’s development objective (PDO) is “to integrate rural
   households into sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains in the project area and, in the event of
   an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or
   Emergency.”

   The PAD (page 8) states more broadly that the objective is to “contribute to improving the livelihoods of
   targeted rural households and the sustainability of natural resources in the project area.” There is no

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



   evidence in the ICR that the change in project objective was approved by the Board. Nevertheless, in line
   with IEG guidelines, the PDO stated in the Financing Agreement will be used in this review.

   For this review, the PDO has been parsed into two subobjectives:

   Subobjective 1: To integrate rural households into sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains in the
   project area

   Subobjective 2: To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Part A: Agriculture and Forest-Based Value Chain Development (Appraised: US$58.00 million
   [original allocation: US$21.00 million; additional financing: US$37.00 million]; Actual: US$56.25
   million

   Increasing smallholder and SECF's participation in key agriculture and forest-based VCs in the Project Area
   including through:

   (i) Support to Small Emerging Commercial Farmers (SECFs) and Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise
   (MSME) agribusinesses to increase rural households' participation in Value Chain (VC) development and
   building capacity of other VC actors benefiting smallholders, including through carrying out of Training for
   SECF, MSMEs, farmers' organizations and the hiring of a service provider to support SECFs.

   (ii) Support to SECFs and other key MSMEs agribusinesses to access credit, including through:

   (a) implementing a matching grants "(Matching Grants)" scheme aimed at SECFs and MSME
   agribusinesses.

   (b) implementing a partial credit guarantee fund ("PCG Fund") aimed at lowering the risk exposure of
   participating financial institutions to cover SECFs and MSME agribusinesses financing needs, including
   through the hiring of a Financial Service Provider (FSP) to act as the administrator of the PCG Fund; and

   (c) implementing a weather-based agricultural index insurance scheme ("Index Insurance") for the purpose
   of providing weather-based insurance coverage in respect of weather risks impacting farmers' production.

   (iii) Improvement of rural infrastructure in the Project Area including through:

   (a) identification of key infrastructure bottlenecks in the Project Area;

   (b) carrying out of preparatory studies to identify the most critical links in the feeder road network;


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



(c) rehabilitation and maintenance of critical rural roads needed to transport production to markets;

(d) carrying out of feasibility and design studies for ground and surface water to assess and prioritize the
more relevant irrigation infrastructure needed to support the development of selected VCs; and

(e) rehabilitation and carrying out of priority irrigation schemes in the Project Area.

Part B: Securing Land Tenure Rights and Increasing Natural Resources Resilience (Appraised:
US$22.00 million [original allocation: US$14.00 million; additional financing: US$8.00 million];
Actual: US$12.50 million)

Promotion of integrated landscape management; securing land tenure regularization at the community and
individual levels; and restoration of critical natural habitats, in the Project Area including through:

(i) Supporting land tenure regularization, through:

(a) issuance of Land Use and Benefit Right (DUATs); and

(b) community land delimitation, including strengthening of Community Based Organizations (CBOs),
Natural Resource Management Committees (CGRNs) and other community based informal associations.

(ii) Carrying out of Training of relevant staff at the Recipient's district and provincial level and provision of
equipment within the Project Area.

(iii) Strengthening capacity on integrated landscape management, including through:

(a) consolidating Multi-Stakeholder Landscape Forum (MSLFs) at the Recipient's provincial level;

(b) promoting the use of spatial tools that can inform land use planning and addressing equipment needs
for Provinces and Districts within the Project Area for integrated landscape management; and

(c) carrying out of Training to relevant Recipient's staff at provincial and district levels.

(iv) Restore degraded lands critical for the VCs in the Project Area through assisted natural regeneration
and active planting with native and exotic species

Part C: Project Coordination and Management (Appraised: US$5 million; [original financing US$5.00
million; additional financing: US$5.00 million]; Actual: US$16.47 million

Support to the Unidade de Gestdo de Fundos Internacionais (UGFI) and provincial implementation units
(PIUs), to oversee the implementation of the Project in each of the Provinces in the Project Area comprising
support for Project coordination and management, including fiduciary and safeguards management,
monitoring and evaluation, and communications.

Part D: Contingency Emergency Response (Appraised: US$10 million; [original financing US$0.00
million; additional financing: US$10.00 million]; Actual: US$10 million)




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



  Support the Recipient in case of a potential disaster-recovery need by providing immediate response to an
  Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The project was appraised to cost US$100 million; the actual cost was US$92.26 million

  Financing

  The project was financed through an IDA grant of US$26 million (IDA-D1190), IDA credit of US$14 million
  (IDA-58550), and a grant from the Crisis Response Window (CRW) of US$60 million (IDA-D5020).

  Borrower Contribution

  The borrower was not expected to contribute to the project.

  Dates

  The project was approved in June 2016 and became effective in November 2016. The mid-term review
  (MTR) was conducted in August 2018. The project closed as planned in October 2023.

  Restructuring

  August 2019: Additional financing (AF) to scale up the original project by extending it to areas affected by
  Tropical Cyclone Idai and to replenish the funds reallocated to the CERC following the activation of the
  Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). The ICR states that the AF resulted in changes in the Results
  Framework, components and costs, loan closing dates, reallocation between disbursement categories, as
  well as disbursing and procurement arrangements as described below.

  Changes to RF

  The revision included the addition of a new PDO sub-indicator (SECFs, less than 35 years old) and upward
  revision of targets for four PDO indicators (i) number of direct project beneficiaries, ii) number of rural
  households integrated into sustainable agriculture and forestry VCs, and, of them, iii) total number of
  smallholder farm households, and iv) number of SECFs. The changes are summarized below.

                                                                                        Targets
   PDO outcome indicators
                                                                                        Original    Revised
       1. Direct project beneficiaries                                                  201,000     250,000
       2. Rural households integrated into sustainable agriculture and forestry value
                                                                                        30,150      40,250
   chains
       2.1 Smallholder farm households                                                  30,000      40,000
       2.2 Small Emerging Commercial Farmers                                            150         250
      2.2.1 SECFs less than 35 years old                                                -           100

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

Mozambique’s economy performed strongly after the civil war in 1992; its Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
grew at an average of 7.4 percent per annum between 1993 and 2013, compared to the average of 4.4
percent of SSA non-oil economies (PAD, para 1). However, the growth became less inclusive with weak
links between growth and poverty reduction. The bottom 40 percent of the population, mostly rural, did not
benefit nearly as much as the rest of the population from the growth that was driven by capital- and import-
intensive mega-project investments which had limited linkages with the local economy (PAD, para 1).
Despite the high growth rates that had been achieved, average per capita income in 2014 in Mozambique
was only US$586, about a third of the Sub-Saharan Africa average.

Despite its positive economic prospects, Mozambique faced short-term economic difficulties, slowing down
of growth and increasing fiscal risks (PAD, para 2). Its short-term challenge was to maintain macro-
economic stability while pursuing diversification for inclusive growth through sectors, such as agriculture.
Mozambique’s considerable natural capital (36 million ha of arable and 40 million ha of natural forests)
offered substantial potential to develop agriculture and forestry, but the potential remained underutilized
with less than a quarter of the land suitable for agriculture cultivated and generating low yields. Inefficient
and limited provision of agricultural services was among the key factors limiting production and productivity
growth (ICR, para 4). However, providing services was a challenge because the agriculture sector is
predominantly made up of nearly four million households typically practicing subsistence agriculture on
average holdings not larger than 1.3 ha (PAD, para 11).

Country Strategy

The government that took office in 2015 adopted a Five-Year Government Plan 2015-19 (PQG) which
emphasized rural development through promotion of agriculture and forestry with focus on the central and
northern provinces (PAD, para 6). The PDO was relevant to Integrated Sustainable Rural Development
Program (2015-2019), which focused on five priorities including secure land user rights, sustainable forest
management, and an Operational Plan for Agrarian Development (PODA) 2015-2019, which aimed to
increase food security and income generation of rural producers (ICR, para 4). The PDO remains relevant
as the SUSTENTA program (integrating family farms into value chains) developed by the government in
2020, aims to increase agricultural income for one million smallholders to bring them above the poverty line
by 2025.

Bank Strategy

The PDO was consistent with the Country Partnership Framework or CPF (FY16-21) of the World Bank,
which emphasized increasing agricultural productivity, rural development, and spatial planning to achieve
sustainable poverty reduction under the Focus Area One “promoting Diversified Growth and Enhanced
Productivity” (ICR, para 5). The PDO remained relevant to the World Bank’s CPF (FY23-27) which included
green job creation as Higher-level Outcome 2 and sustainable growth in selected natural resources sectors
as Objective 4 (ICR, para 23).


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



               However, there were shortcomings. The PDO was pitched at a level that was insufficient to effectively
               illustrate the transformation expected through project support. The PDO to integrate rural households into
               sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains in the project area was pitched at an intermediate
               outcome level that was only a small step towards sustainably increasing their incomes. The ICR noted that
               the key indicator to measure achievement of the PDO was “rural households integrated into sustainable
               agriculture and forest-based value chain”. This was measured by counting the rural households that
               benefited from services provided by small and emerging commercial farmers (SECFs) rather than tracing
               the ability of these farmers to effectively market and sell their crops, thus improving household level net
               incomes. Without following through with what 'integration' meant, it is not possible to assess the project’s
               contribution to reducing poverty amongst rural households.

               Summary: Mozambique’s economy performed strongly following the end of civil war but weak links between
               growth and poverty reduction made it less inclusive, only marginally benefiting the 40 percent of the
               population that lived in rural areas. Abundant natural resources offered considerable potential to develop
               agriculture and forestry, but it was underutilized because of the practice of low productivity subsistence
               agriculture by smallholders who made up the bulk of the rural producers. Integration of rural households
               into sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains, which would encourage them to produce
               surpluses to increase their incomes, was, therefore, a highly relevant strategy for lifting smallholder farmers
               out of a cycle of perpetual subsistence farming, but any productivity improvements must be linked to
               changes and indicators that link these improvements to increased incomes. The PDO and its key outcome
               indicator were pitched at an intermediate results level rather than reflecting the outcomes from the
               integration of smallholders into sustained and remunerative value chains. The relevance of the project’s
               PDO to the challenges facing smallholder agriculture is, therefore, rated Substantial, though marginally so.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To integrate rural households into sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains in the project area.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC)

                             The ToC, implicit in project design and articulated retrospectively in the ICR (para 6), is built on the premise
                             that a network of SECFs and MSMEs can help rural households integrate into agriculture and forest-based
                             value chains (VCs); it states that project inputs/activities, such as (i) providing training and technical
                             assistance, (ii) provision of access to finance to SECFs and rural Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
                             (MSMEs) and (iii) overcoming infrastructure constraints, producing outputs, such as support to MSME
                             agribusinesses, value chain development business plans implemented by SECFs, and areas provided with

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



irrigation and drainage would lead to the integration of smallholders into selected value chains, but without
any indicators measuring the outcomes for smallholders involved in value chain development activities.

Additionally, activities/inputs, such as (i) securing land tenure for communities engaged in agriculture and
forestry through the issue of community delimitation certificates; and (ii) promoting the adoption of sustainable
land use practices, producing outputs, such as land parcels benefiting from the recording of user rights, would
enable rural households to participate more easily in VC development activities and contribute to sustainable
management of landscapes, which is implied but not explicitly stated in the PDO.

The ToC change envisaged in this project was plausible if several critical assumptions could be met, namely:
(i) an adequate number of SECFs and MSMEs with the intention of scaling up their operations and capable of
contributing to invest in business plans could be identified, (ii) the SECFs and MSMEs implement their
business plans and offer production and marketing services to smallholders, and (iii) available agricultural
technologies enable the smallholders they support to increase their crop yields.

Key evidence needed to demonstrate the success of the ToC include the number of rural households
integrated into sustainable value chains (defined in the PAD as households that are able to market their
agriculture and forest-based outputs sustainably year after year in the project area because of the project
(Annex 1B, p. 45)).

Outputs

Support to SECFs and MSMEs

        58 SME agribusinesses were supported, exceeding the target of 50
        58 SME agribusinesses implemented approved VCD business plans, exceeding the target of 50
        462 VCD business plans were implemented by SECF, exceeding the revised target of 250
        128,257 benefited from weather-based crop insurance, exceeding the target of 40,000

Infrastructure

      34 ha were provided with irrigation and drainage services, falling short of the target of 250 ha
      343 km of roads were maintained, falling short of the target 1,050 km

Land records

      355 community delimitation certificates were issued, exceeding the target of 270
      307,402 land parcels benefited from the recording of their use or ownership rights, exceeding the
         target of 150,00
      Of them, 159,849 belonged to females, exceeding the target of 90,000
      84.70 percent of the recipients were satisfied with land administration services, exceeding the target of
         75 percent

Landscape management

      Sustainable landscape management practices were adopted on 104,808 ha, exceeding the target of
         22,000 ha

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)




      Participatory multistakeholder landscape forums (MSLFs) completed 62.38 percent of the activities
       agreed in the Strategic Actions Plans (SAPs), falling short of the target of 80 percent
      2,862 ha were restored or re/forested, exceeding the target of 2,000 ha
      71.2 percent of the meetings of MSLFs were with participation of forum representatives above the 70
       percent threshold, falling short of the target of 80 percent
      1,442,461 ha were supported by community land use plans, exceeding the target of 405,000

Achievements

Households integrated

      76,050 rural households were integrated into sustainable agriculture and forest-based chains in the
         targeted landscape, exceeding the revised target of 30,150
        Of them, 76,050 were female smallholder farm households, exceeding the revised target of 30,150
        Of them, 462 were SECFs, exceeding the revised target of 250
        Of them, 76,050 were smallholder farm households, exceeding the revised target of 40,250
        Of them, 141 were SECF less than 35 years old, exceeding the revised target of 100
        Of them 33 were women SECF less than 35-year-old, exceeding the revised target of 30

However, based on a sample survey of participating PAs, the project’s Impact Evaluation (published after
release of the ICR) noted inter alia that only 36.4 percent of all PAs were satisfied with agricultural marketing
support (p. 26). Also, credit for inputs and agricultural marketing were the services least accessed by
smallholders.

Yields increased

      Maize yields of smallholder farms were 2.61 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 2.5 tons per ha
         (baseline: 1.5 tons per ha)
      Sesame yields of smallholders were 1.03 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 1.0 ton per ha (baseline:
         0.8 tons per ha)
      Beans yields of small holders were 1.00 ton per ha, falling short of the target of 1.50 tons per ha
       (baseline: 1.1 tons per ha)
      Soya yields of smallholders were 2.41, exceeding the target of 2.00 tons per ha (baseline: 1.5 tons per
       ha)

However, the impact evaluation, which does not offer an average yield for all the districts, instead determined
average yields achieved by smallholders and SECFs for four project provinces excluding Cabo Delgado. In all
four provinces crop yields of SECFs exceeded those of the smallholders and the control group based on data
from Mozambique’s Integrated Agricultural Survey of 2020 but fell short of achieving the yield targets
established by the project.

Direct beneficiaries

      380,042 people benefited directly from the project, exceeding the revised target of 201,000
      Of them, 40 percent were female, falling short of the target of 50 percent


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



Support from SECFs and MSMEs

      37,331 smallholder farmers implemented VC development activities and/or were being served by
       SECFs, falling short of the target of 40,000
      85.4 percent of smallholders were satisfied with services provided by SECFs, exceeding the target of
       75 percent

Technology adoption

      37,828 clients adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project, exceeding the
       target of 20,000
      Of them, 10,457 were female, exceeding the target of 8,000

The impact evaluation assessed that only 69 % of SECFs and 41% of smallholders adopted “some”
technologies. Seeds was one of the important technologies supplied by the SECFs, but more than 75% of the
smallholders used traditional seeds. The level of adoption, however, increased over 2020 baseline.

The key indicator to measure the achievement was the number of rural households that were integrated into
sustainable agriculture and forest-based value chains. More than the targeted number of households were
integrated. The project measured it as all rural households that benefited from services provided by
SECFs. However, the impact evaluation suggests that not all the households that received the services were
integrated into markets. Market access was one of the services provided least effectively by SECFs.

The integration reported in the ICR could have resulted from project activities as hypothesized. The project
exceeded the targets in supporting the business plans for SECFs and MSMEs. They in turn offered services
to rural households. For example, MSMEs linked 50 percent of the beneficiary households to markets (ICR,
para 34). Overall, rural households were satisfied with the services they received to a greater extent than
targeted, but the level of their satisfaction with different services varied.

The ICR reports that smallholders adopted improved agricultural technologies promoted by the project to a
degree greater than expected. And on average smallholder farmers reached/served by project-supported
SECFs increased their yields in three of the four priority value chains to an extent greater than targeted. The
impact evaluation, however, suggests that both the level of technology adoption and average yields achieved
failed to achieve the targets.

The project fell short of the target in building supporting infrastructure, feeder roads and irrigation. However,
overall, more than the targeted number of farmers stated that they benefited directly from project activities,

The project exceeded the targets for recording of use-rights of land parcels, the issue of community
delimitation certificates, and in supporting the promotion of landscape management practices.

In a section titled “Poverty Reduction and Shared Prosperity” the ICR states that “The revenue generated
from the landscape interventions has improved the livelihoods of the targeted beneficiaries, particularly in
terms of the agricultural incomes of the smallholder involved in soybeans, sesame, beans, and maize. This
suggests a positive impact on economic outcomes and potentially shared prosperity among the beneficiaries.
The beneficiary assessment conducted by the project in July 2023 shows a high level of beneficiary
satisfaction and social investments because of increased income” (para 51). However, the ICR does not offer
any evidence of revenue generated or improved livelihoods among project beneficiaries. Moreover, there is

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



absence of a baseline for market orientation or integration. For example, the ICR notes that in Manica
province, which accounted for 38 percent of the direct beneficiaries, farmers had long experience of market
orientation (ICR, para 29 and Table 4) which raises the question of the attribution of achievements to this
project again.

Summary. According to the ICR, the project almost fully achieved its stated first subobjective of integrating
smallholder farmers into market value chains in a few of Mozambique’s provinces where the incidence of
poverty is high. More than the targeted number of farmers were integrated into selected value chains. The
results could be attributed to project activities, but the ICR provides no supporting counterfactuals, nor does it
provide evidence of what this integration resulted in. The project exceeded the targets in supporting the
businesses of SECFs and MSMEs who in turn provided the services that enabled the beneficiary households
to increase yields and be integrated through value chains into markets. But again, the evidence base here is
weak and without evidence of activity within and through the value chains, it is difficult to have confidence that
the relationships lead to increased commercial activity. The project fell short in improving the rural
infrastructure but, as anticipated, strengthened the tenure rights of individuals and communities, and also
promoted the adoption of improved natural resource management practices.

On the other hand, the impact evaluation concluded from a sample survey of participating smallholders that
almost all of them used the SECFs to obtain seeds and other agricultural inputs. But only 58 percent of
smallholders availed themselves of technical innovations, predominantly certified seeds and fertilizers.
Smallholders were recorded as being generally satisfied with the services provided by the SECFs. Contrary to
the ICR, the impact evaluation concluded that, although yields for the four focus crops increased above their
baselines and exceeded the control group levels at the project’s close, none of them reached the target yield
levels established in the PAD. It was notable, however, that the impact evaluation concluded (based on focus
group discussions) that only 47 percent of smallholder participants considered market access as an important
element in the services available to them.

Overall, the efficacy with which the project’s first sub-objective was achieved is rated substantial, but with
moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency

Rationale
ToC

The ToC offered by the ICR does not include this part of the project's objective, activities and results
chain. The funds were used to supply seeds to households that were devastated by Cyclone Idai. Supplying
seeds to households that are prone to climate shocks or have lost their crops because of climate events is a
widely accepted effective measure to restore agricultural production capacity. The activities of the component


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



                            were expected to contribute to accelerating the restoration of the production capacity and livelihoods of the
                            targeted households (Project Paper. Annex 5, para 9).

                            Outputs and outcomes

                            According to the Project Paper for the Additional Financing the project responded immediately to the crisis.
                            On April 5, 2019, the Government requested activation of the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism and on
                            April 18, 2019, the Africa Region Vice-presidency approved an amount of US$55 million, including a
                            reallocation of US$10 million to the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) of the SUSTENTA
                            Project to provide support to an agricultural recovery plan to restore livelihoods in the country’s central
                            provinces in the aftermath of Cyclone Idai.

                            The component was fully disbursed through a contract with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
                            United Nations (FAO), which was expected to be completed by October 2019. The effort aimed to reach over
                            150,000 farming and pastoral households in the provinces of Manica, Sofala, Tete and Zambézia, which
                            suffered some of the heaviest damage from the Cyclone. The beneficiaries were also among Mozambique's
                            most vulnerable households (Project paper, para 11).

                            On effectiveness, the ICR does not offer any information on implementation of the activity by the FAO or
                            evidence of the outcomes because of the lack of pertinent information on the household level effects (ICR,
                            Annex 4, para 10).

                            Summary: This activity supplied seeds to farming and pastoral households in three of the provinces that
                            suffered some of the heaviest fallout from cyclone Idai in early 2019. The project responded immediately to
                            the request from the government. In the absence of information on the effectiveness of this component, the
                            efficacy with which this second subobjective was achieved is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ToC hypothesized that supporting a network of SECFs and MSMEs with training and access to finance
                            would be an avenue to provide services to smallholders to enable them to adopt improved technologies,
                            improve yields and integrate into selected agricultural and forest-based market value chains. Further, building
                            support infrastructure, strengthening tenure rights of individuals and communities, and promoting improved
                            management of landscapes would enable rural households to more easily integrate into market value chains
                            and make the value chain development more sustainable. The project succeeded in its objective of
                            integrating a targeted number of rural smallholders into the business and marketing activities of the SECF
                            and SMEs of various scale, but without documenting any net benefits to smallholders. The resultant
                            integration could have been attributable to project activities, as the project supported a network of value chain
                            actors as planned and they in turn offered services to the beneficiaries as expected, which the ICR asserts


                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



  enabled the rural households to gain access to input and market value chains.  However, there was no
  counterfactual analysis in the ICR. On the other hand, the Impact Evaluation concluded, on the basis of
  sample surveys and focus group discussions, that only 36.4 percent of SECFs were accessing and marketing
  smallholder production. At the same time only 47 percent of smallholders considered marketing services
  offered by SECFs as important. Additional benefits claimed in the ICR were increases in yields for three
  of four crops supported by the project, but without evidence on the attribution of the increases to the project's
  activities. The Impact Evaluation assessed that, although crop yields increased in the project areas
  during implementation, none of the crops achieved the target yield levels established by the PAD. The
  project also fell short in building the modest supporting rural roads and irrigation infrastructure planned for the
  project in the PAD. The project used CERC funds to respond immediately to a crisis in Mozambique caused
  by Cyclone Idai, but in the absence of evidence on the effectiveness of the response, the efficacy with which
  this objective was achieved is rated modest. 

  This review concluded that the overall Efficacy with which the project’s stated objective was achieved is
  rated Substantial, but with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
At appraisal, annual cash flows were estimated as the difference between with and without scenarios based on
available value chain studies. The analysis yielded an EIRR of 21 percent over an unusual 50-year period (PAD,
para 91). In the analysis, 68, 1, and 31 percent of the returns came from net benefits at the farm level, net
benefits from post-harvest improvements, and improvements in carbon balance (PAD, Annex 6, Table 7).

The analysis redone when additional financing was brought into the project yielded an estimated EIRR of 19.2
percent over 50 years and 23.6 percent over 50 years when carbon benefits were added (Restructuring Paper,
para 20).

The analysis at the end of the project applied the same methodology but used a range of assumptions in farm
budgets, updated prices and actual project costs. The analysis yielded an EIRR of 20.6 percent over 50 years
(ICR, para 41). Given the unusual assumed 50-year life of the project, the ICR estimated the final project
internal rate of return at 18.9 percent for an assumed life of 20 years..

Summary. The EIRR estimated at the end of the project is close to the EIRR estimated at appraisal. While the
project was implemented with delays due to additional financing and reached 52 percent more beneficiaries than
targeted, there was a 125 percent increase in total funding, and project coordination and management costs
increased considerably from 12.5 percent to 18.3 percent of total project costs excluding the Contingency
Emergency Response. On the other hand, the ICR states that "The cost per assisted person was as low as
US$250, which is comparatively efficient when compared with other similar projects" (para 42). Given the
uncertainties about the actual benefits to smallholders, the large increase in the project cost, and the delays,
the efficiency of this project is rated marginally Substantial.



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                21.00
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             20.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Although there was considerable potential to develop agriculture and forestry to benefit the rural poor who
hadn’t benefited from the rapid GDP growth Mozambique experienced following the civil war, agriculture was
characterized by subsistence farming, handicapped by inefficient and limited provision of agricultural services,
including access to markets. The PDO was, pitched at an intermediate results level, and substantially relevant
to the country’s strategy to increase incomes of smallholder households and the World Bank’s strategy to
support growth in natural resources sectors as it sought to achieve these objectives by integrating smallholders
into selected agriculture and forest-based value chains. The project succeeded in integrating smallholders into
value chains by supporting a network of SECFs and MSMEs, who in turn provided the services necessary for
smallholders to increase their productivity and commercialize their operations. The project also fell short of the
target in building supporting infrastructure, feeder roads and irrigation. The project had, however, used the
CERC funds to respond immediately to a crisis, but the ICR lacked evidence on its effectiveness. The overall
efficacy was therefore assessed to be substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project was also assessed
as having been implemented with marginally substantial efficiency. The EIRR estimated at the end of the project
using estimated benefits and actual expenditures was similar to the EIRR estimated at appraisal, but the project
was implemented with delays, reaching more smallholder households than planned but at considerable
additional cost. Since the project's relevance, efficacy and efficiency all had moderate shortcomings the overall
outcome of this project is rated moderately satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



The ICR identifies two risks to development outcomes (paras 69 and 70)

Institutional risk

Whether the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADER) and the National Sustainable
Development Fund (FNDS) will retain the technical capacity to adapt the models and approaches to deliver
services, developed with support and supervision from external development partners, into their own
structures over medium to long term poses a risk. The project built the technical and operational capacity of
the two organizations to manage programs and created the conditions necessary for them to continue
supporting smallholder producers even after the project’s closing. Strong leadership within FNDS and the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was critical to the project’s success; however, their future replacement
may dilute that leadership. Insufficient budget allocations are also likely to threaten service delivery to
smallholders in the future.

Enterprise risk

Diminished access to credit for SECFs and MSMEs poses a risk to maintaining development outcomes.
Local financial institutions were reluctant to lend to these enterprises; consequently, grants from the project
covered as much as 75 percent of the investments made by the SECFs and SMEs, and the Partial Risk
Guarantee was exhausted supporting just five SMEs (ICR, para 73). Unless the two groups are financially
viable, they may not be able to attract the access to credit needed to sustain these enterprises.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design met the strategic objectives of the government articulated in “Program Estela” (2015-
  2019) and the National Agricultural Development Plan (2015-2019) to increase food security and income
  of rural producers. The theory of change underlying the design, that a network of SECFs and MSMEs,
  supported by the project with technical assistance and access to finance, could support rural households
  integrate into selected value chains, was drawn from experiences in many countries (PAD, para 52). The
  project included activities that could be expected to achieve its objective; it also included activities to
  strengthen tenure rights, build the necessary infrastructure, and promote landscape management
  practices to facilitate the desired transformation of smallholder agriculture and ensure that it would be
  done sustainably.

  The M&E was elaborate with as many as 25 indicators and gender-based disaggregation of three PDO
  level and two intermediate level indicators. But the indicators were not designed appropriately to capture
  core outcomes and test the ToC. Several PDO indicators measured project outputs and some of the
  Intermediate outcome indicators should have been among the outcome indicators. However, none of the
  indicators assessed the extent to which the value chains were profitable for smallholders and therefore
  likely to be sustainable.

  Implementation would later reveal that the mechanisms included in the design to link financial institutions
  with private enterprises were not adequate to incentivize the financial institutions to lend to the


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



  agricultural enterprises. Although this failure did not affect the efficacy of the project, the project could not
  develop access to credit as it intended to sustain the development outcomes.

  Considering these moderate shortcomings in M&E and access to finance, and despite a design based on
  principles proven in other countries, the project’s Quality-at-Entry was only Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted the required two missions annually, 17 in all, during seven years of
 implementation. The teams included the required capabilities, except for expertise in M&E (ICR, para 66).
 Although four task team leaders supervised implementation over a seven-year period, the presence of one
 person in the Bank project team throughout the period provided some continuity.

 Supervision fell short when the project was extended to areas affected by tropical cyclone Idai with
 additional funding. The implementing organization could not meet the goods and business plans of SECFs
 in a timely manner, and violations of procedures occurred in financing the business plans (ICR, para 67).
 The World Bank team revised the procedures to curtail mismanagement, but it was not successful in
 building the capacity required to implement the project over a larger area.

 Summary: The design, with a set of activities adequate to achieve the desired outcomes, was appropriate
 to meet the strategic objectives of the country. It was based on elements of theory of change that had been
 proven in other countries. The M&E was elaborate, but it was not well structured to test the ToC without
 appropriate categorization of outputs and outcomes. The mechanisms in the design to incentivize financial
 institutions to extend credit to agricultural enterprises would turn out to be ineffective. The World Bank team
 intervened during supervision when it observed cases of violations of procedures when the project area
 was expanded. Because of minor shortcomings in quality at entry, although the World Bank team was
 proactive in addressing the situations that arose, the Overall Bank Performance is rated Moderately
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                        Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was built on a large number of indicators, 25 in all. The design was adequate to capture
 project outputs and some of the outcomes not directly relevant to the PDO; however, it wasn’t organized in
 an appropriate way to test the ToC. Although they were all measurable, one of the six PDO indicators,
 “Rural households integrated into …value chains,” only adequately captured the process towards an
 outcome implied in the PDO. In an exchange on November 4, 2024, the project team explained to IEG that
 "the indicator was measured by counting all rural households that benefited from emerging commercial
 farmers (SECFs). And it included households that had access to financing (both in value and in kind) and
 production contracts between SECFs and smallholder farmers or between SECFs and final
 buyers/processors. Consequently, these farmers were able to market their production." But illustrating
 impact requires evidence that net incomes for these households increased, or at a minimum, evidence of
 sales volumes into the value chains. Without this information, the PDO indicator was intermediate. A
 number of the remaining PDO indicators were also output based (ICR, paras 57).

 Some of the intermediate indicators such as the yields of four selected crops, could have been more
 appropriate among the PDO indicators although yield improvements of these crops were not included in the
 project’s PDO, but undoubtedly necessary for farmers to produce a surplus to trade through the selected
 value chains.



b. M&E Implementation
  A dedicated project M&E office in the FNDS implemented M&E activities, regularly reporting on results
  indicators which were geo-referenced and geo-tagged (ICR, para 58). The project commissioned an
  independent survey of beneficiaries to collect evidence on qualitative indicators.

  The ICR notes that the indicators on project beneficiaries’ satisfaction with services provided by the
  project were provided after the MTR. That information, if provided on time, could have helped further,
  especially at MTR, to bring more reflections on additional changes in project design, activity
  implementation and institutional arrangements



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR the M&E system informed project management, progress reports, and technical
  missions of the World Bank team (para 59).

  Summary: The M&E was designed with a large number of indicators to capture the project outputs
  and outcomes (crop yields), but the monitoring was not well structured to test the links in the ToC
  because the indicators were not appropriately categorized into PDO and intermediate indicators. The
  key PDO indicator was intermediate results oriented. The design was implemented as planned, but the
  project’s restructuring in August 2019 was not used as an opportunity to bring clarity to the indicators.
  This is disappointing in a country with a strong historical record of World Bank supported agriculture-
  based projects. M&E quality is therefore rated Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project, classified as Category B, triggered several environmental safeguard policies including
   Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Forests OP/BP 4.36, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Pest
   Management OP/BP 4.09, Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37, and Involuntary Resettlement 4.12.

   The ICR states that “An Environmental Assessment (EA), Pest Management Plan, and Environmental and
   Social Management Framework (ESMF) were developed and disclosed in compliance with national
   regulations and World Bank standards” (para 62). The ESMF provided guidelines for identifying, appraising,
   and monitoring activities, categorizing subprojects, and ensuring stakeholder engagement and grievance
   redress. A dedicated team monitored compliance, and a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was
   in place.

   Despite environmental assessments, households expanding their agricultural fields posed risks of
   deforestation and habitat disruption. The mitigation efforts promoted sustainable practices and ecosystem
   restoration. Additional measures taken included improving coordination among technicians and creating
   clear guidelines to prevent habitat conversion. Most subprojects were categorized as B, with some as C,
   and detailed Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were made publicly accessible. The
   GRM effectively resolved all grievances, and the Bank's E&S team provided ongoing training and support to
   ensure compliance.

   The overall safeguards rating at the end of the project was 'Moderately Satisfactory' (ICR, para 62)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM)

   According to the ICR the project’s financial management performance was generally adequate ( para 63).
   Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) were often submitted on time, but there were notable lapses, such as
   delays in recording the financial transactions in the accounting system. Although audit reports and
   management letters were usually submitted past the deadlines, they were found to be satisfactory on all
   material matters. FM received a "Satisfactory" rating upon the project's completion.

   Procurement As stated in the ICR “The assessment at appraisal of the procurement capacity of MITADER
   concluded that the procurement risk was Substantial. The International Funds Management Unit
   (UGFI)/FNDS was newly created. It had the basic minimum procurement staffing in place (Procurement
   Officer and Procurement Assistant), with limited exposure to the World Bank’s fiduciary procedures and no
   experience in complex procurement cases and selection of consulting services – its experience was limited
   to Shopping and Single-Source Selection. Risk mitigation measures that were established included: (i)
   hiring of a Senior Procurement Specialist within the first 9 months following effectiveness to provide in-

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



   house and on-the-job training to colleagues for a period of up to six months; (ii) participation of
   procurement staff in Bank-related procurement training, before project effectiveness; and (iii) preparation of
   a Procurement Operations Manual, a key part of the Project Implementation Manual to guide
   implementation of project procurement activities. With these mitigation measures, the residual procurement
   risk for the Project became “Moderate” (para 64). The ICR does not mention any cases of mis-
   procurement in this project.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR notes several unintended outcomes of the project (Para 52 and annex 6). Key among them were:

          The project inspired the Ministry of Agriculture to prepare the SUSTENTA National Program
           incorporating some key elements of the project.
          SECFs innovated to effectively support the smallholder farmers (SFs). Because they were small-
           scale farmers themselves, they did not have the capacity to transact with many SFs as required by
           their business plans. They, therefore, identified small-scale contact farmers (PAC) for groups of 25
           to 30 SFs through whom they offered services, aggregated outputs, and made financial
           transactions. They compensated the PACs in kind or by offering their services at more favorable
           prices.
          The support to SECFs was also used to attract youth into agriculture. The FNDS introduced a
           program to attract youth by opening up a new financing window for young SECFs and training
           them, including by putting them through an incubation program.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Shortcomings in the project's
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory    relevance of objectives and
                                                                                 efficacy
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)



The ICR presented five lessons. Two of them that are likely to be widely applicable are presented
below with edits. In addition, IEG notes an additional lesson illustrative of the shortcomings in the
project design.

A network of small emerging commercial farmers and small or medium agricultural
enterprises can be potentially utilized to deliver support to smallholders to enable them to
integrate into existing value chains. Although the performance of the model needs to be
evaluated in depth, in this project, it was effective in delivering services to small-scale farmers, and
the farmers’ organizations found it to be an effective platform for interactions to obtain information
necessary to improve productivity and gain access to markets for their surplus production.

Although matching grant mechanisms are useful instruments for financing farmers’
purchase of equipment and other modern inputs, the incentive mechanisms built into a
project to encourage financial institutions to provide credit to small-scale agricultural
enterprises need to be carefully negotiated. In this project, only one financial institution provided
support to small and emerging commercial farmers at the beginning of the project, at a subsidized
interest rate of 5 percent. Most commercial banks did not participate in a co-financing mechanism
because of their perception of the risks associated with small-to-medium scale farming despite the
establishment in this project of a partial risk guarantee mechanism. All the project’s financial
resources allocated to the partial risk guarantee were used in supporting only 5 SMEs. The small-
scale emerging commercial farmers also found the usual interest rates offered by commercial banks
(over 27 percent) to be too high to be viable for their enterprises. The lesson is that a solution needs
to be found to reduce the costs and risks for commercial banks of lending to remote small-scale
borrowers, negotiate the solution with the banks during project appraisal, and incorporate the
solution in the project’s design.

In addition to the above, IEG also notes that without objectives that sufficiently engage with the
expected transformation expected in households transitioning into more commercial
opportunities, the tracking of success becomes too heavily aligned to participation.
Productivity improvement is a useful proxy for farmers utilizing project support, but it does not
effectively illustrate the degree to which they've increased household incomes or transitioned to an
amplified value chain model.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  In the course of exchanges with IEG the Bank project team has referred to this project as a flagship operation
  in support of the Mozambique government’s agricultural development policy. A careful project performance
  assessment report at the earliest opportunity may benefit both the government and the Bank to enhance the
  performance of future iterations of this potentially important project concept to the benefit of numerous
  smallholder farmers. Such an assessment would also assess the sustainability aspect of the project’s PDO
  which could not be reasonably tested until after the project closed


                                                                                                      Page 19 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      MZ-Agriculture NRM Project (P149620)




14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report provides an adequate overview of the project activities and outcomes, meeting the requirements.
The report uses credible information, which comes primarily from the project's M&E; the information is provided
in adequate detail in tables. The report is also candid in noting many deficiencies and reflecting them in its
rating of important aspects of the project. The report is succinct and internally consistent with a few exceptions.

However, there are several shortcomings in the ICR. The report could have taken a better approach to
examining efficacy. Rather than using the ToC to guide its analysis, the report examines whether the targets for
the PDO indicators have been met, while noting that some of them were not appropriate. The result of this
approach is insufficient justification and a lack of outcome orientation through linking of outputs to outcomes;
and inconsistencies in the text: for example, the PDO indicators listed in page 3 are different from those listed in
Annex A. With respect to the analysis of efficiency, the heavy reliance on assumptions about project benefits
underlined the need to baseline and beneficiary surveys to assess additional project benefits, as well as the
establishment of control groups to assess counterfactuals.

The ICR also does not include any assessment of the administration or impact of the US$10 million expenditure
on the Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). It briefly notes that the CERC funds were
transferred to FAO for immediate relief (Annex 4, para 10) and that they were used to buy seeds (ICR, para
21). The Bank’s project team, in an exchange on October 16, 2024, informed IEG that due to difficulties in
obtaining pertinent information on the household-level effects of the seeds and inputs distributed under the
emergency response, no information on the CERC was included in the benefit stream for the project's analysis
of efficiency, and that constraints related to the length of the ICR further limited the inclusion of other details on
the CERC.

Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 20
