     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024199

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P149286                                     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-18896,TF-B6111                           31-Dec-2022                                         33,791,816.26

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jan-2015                                 29-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              34,640,000.00                                  34,640,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               34,640,000.00                                  33,791,816.28

 Actual                                           34,639,950.01                                  33,791,816.26




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin            Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Uganda's Multi-Sectoral Food Security and Nutrition Project as
   articulated in the Grant Agreement (GA, page 6) was identical to the one in the Project Appraisal Document
   (paragraph 22) and aimed to:

   "Increase production and consumption of micronutrient-rich foods and utilization of community-
   based nutrition services in smallholder households in project areas."


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on three objectives as follows:

   1. To increase production of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas.

   2. To increase consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas.

   3. To increase utilization of community-based nutrition services in smallholder households in project areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Delivery of multi-sectoral nutrition services at primary school and community levels (appraisal
   cost: US$17.80 million, actual cost: US$21.78 million). This component used the multi-sectoral approach
   to deliver enhanced and effective nutrition services to communities in the project districts by improving the
   nutrition functions of: (i) community- based institutions; (ii) primary schools; (iii) agriculture extension
   mechanisms; and (iv) village health teams (VHTs) in line with Uganda Nutrition Action Plan (UNAP) and the
   three sectoral strategic plans. It was comprised of the following four sub-components:

   1.1. Community sensitization and establishment of community-based institutions.

   1.2. Enhancing nutrition services delivered through primary schools, parent groups, and lead farmers.

   1.3. Agriculture support for school-based nutrition services.

   1.4. Strengthened nutrition services through Village Health Teams (VHTs) and Health Center Level II.

   2. Strengthening capacity to deliver nutrition interventions (appraisal cost: US$5.20 million, actual
   cost: US$US$6.97 million). This component aimed to improve the capacity of sectoral institutions to
   deliver nutrition interventions relevant to the project, including support for: (i) national, district, and sub-
   county, stakeholder sensitization on nutrition and project activities; (ii) consultancy services to develop
   necessary training materials for extension agents, primary schools, and community workers, including
   workshops to finalize training and support materials and printing and distribution of necessary support
   materials for each sector; (iii) consultant services to deliver nutrition training for relevant district, primary
   school and community personnel; and (iv) sector-specific refresher training and supportive supervision for
   relevant staff at district level and below.




                                                                                                         Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



  3. Project management, monitoring, evaluation and knowledge generation (appraisal cost: US$4.64
  million, actual cost: US$5.89 million). This component included initiatives to: (i) ensure project
  management and coordination; and (ii) support monitoring, evaluation at all levels, knowledge generation
  and management, and dissemination of findings within Uganda and globally. This component mainly
  financed goods, services, and specified incremental operating costs.

  Revised Components. While the original components remained unchanged, activities were added to
  project components because of the Additional Financing (AF). The AF was primarily requested to scale up
  project activities to address the COVID-19 impacts in the short and medium term, to minimize disruptions,
  and ensure sustainability of project results. As a result, additional activities were added to the existing
  components. Specifically, the AF financed: (i) water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) activities, relevant
  WASH training, and promotion for increased consumption of fruits/ vegetables/MNR foods to contribute to
  fight against the impact of COVID-19; (ii) nutrition improving activities through Nutrition Sensitive Saving
  schemes for farmers; and (iii) quality-assured micronutrient rich (MNR) seed/planting material multiplication
  centers and seed banks, value addition, marketing, and distribution activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The estimated total project cost at appraisal was US$27.64 million. The actual cost according
  to the ICR (Data Sheet, page 2) was US$34.64 million. The increase compared to the appraisal estimate
  was due to Additional Financing (see below for details).

  Financing. The project was financed through a Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
  Grant of US$27.64 million that financed all project interventions. In 2021, the project received an Additional
  Financing (AF) of US$7.00 million. The total project financing was US$34.64 million. The actual amounts
  disbursed were US$27.64 million and US$7.00 million for the original Grant amount and the AF,
  respectively.

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through the GAFSP Grant and no borrower
  contribution was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on January 7, 2015 and became effective eleven months later on
  December 7, 2015. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on March 19, 2018, about three years and
  four months after effectiveness. While the PAD did not provide a specific date for the MTR, this Review
  finds that it was timely conducted and in-line with other World Bank funded operations. The project closed
  on December 29, 2023 which was about four years beyond the original closing date on December 31, 2019.
  The project was restructured three times and received one additional financing as follows:

  1. On September 21, 2018, when the amount disbursed was US$15.13 million, in order to revise the results
  frame work and extend the Grant closing date from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2020. This
  extension was to accommodate the delay experienced in project effectiveness and allow more time to
  implement activities (Restructuring Paper, paragraph 6).

  2. On October 21, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$26.70 million, in order to extend the Grant
  closing date from December 31, 2020 to December 15, 2021. According to the Restructuring Paper
  (paragraph 4) this extension was "to allow for completion of critical remaining project activities that could not



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



   be implemented due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the related response measures that include
   restrictions on movement and congregation of people."

   3. On June 30, 2021, the project received an Additional Financing (AF) of US$7.00 million. With the AF the
   closing date was extended from December 15, 2021 to December 31, 2022, and new activities were added
   as noted above.

   4. On July 28, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$32.10 million, in order to revise the results
   framework to better capture changes with the AF financed activities, revise the implementation schedule,
   and extend the Grant closing date from December 31, 2022, to December 31, 2023, to complete all the
   planned activities and fully utilize the AF resources (Restructuring Paper, paragraph 8).

   A split rating will not be applied to assess the overall project outcome because the PDO was not changed,
   and the PDO outcome end targets were revised upwards to more accurately capture the outcomes of
   additional resources that the project received.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. At appraisal, Uganda was among the 20 countries worldwide with the highest
prevalence of under nutrition. Micronutrient deficiencies (particularly vitamin A and iron) were also highly
prevalent across all regions. The total fertility rate was 6.2 births per reproductive age woman, one of the
highest in the world, and about 78% of the population was under the age of 30 years, which, combined with
Uganda's rapid population growth, posed a challenge to service delivery, infrastructure development, and
employment. Recognizing the essential role of nutrition in fostering human capital and sustaining economic
growth, the Government of Uganda (GoU) prioritized strengthening nutrition across key sectors, including
health, agriculture, and education. By leveraging existing programs within each sector, it aimed to enhance
technical capacity and streamline sectoral coordination for nutrition, particularly at the sub-national level.
The Uganda Multi-Sectoral Food Security and Nutrition Project is therefore focused on agriculture, health
and education, recognizing that other sectors provide important complementary support was a pioneering
response to address nutritional challenges.

Previous Bank Experience. The project design was informed by other World Bank projects in Uganda
including the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and
the Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAs), Early Childhood Development
(ECD) projects. The project design also incorporated lessons and experiences learned from other multi-
sectoral projects that have been implemented in Uganda including: Parent-led school gardens
program, Uganda Community Connector (CC) and Harvest Plus. The Bank also participated in the National
Nutrition Technical Committee and a Nutrition Donor sub-group to leverage and harmonize multi-sectoral
nutrition program support in coordination with the UN agencies, particularly UNICEF. Overall, the Bank had
relevant experience to design and supervise the implementation of this project.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the World Bank Country
Assistance Strategy for Uganda (CAS, FY2011-FY2015). The CAS strategic objective
of Nutrition improvement focused on agriculture, health, education early child development, hygiene and

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



sanitation, and gender strategies. Specifically the project supported the CAS first objective: Promote
Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth, and the third objective: Promote Human Capital
Development through focusing on nutrition and corresponding health and human capital outcomes. In
addition, the project would help improve efficiency in public spending.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with World Bank's Country Partnership Framework for
Uganda (CPF, FY2016-FY2021), which was still in operation at the time of the ICR. Specifically, the PDO
was in line with two of the CPF strategic outcomes (SOs), namely, Improved Social Service Delivery
(SO2) and Increased Agricultural Commercialization (SO3). In addition, supporting human capital
development including water and sanitation remain key WBG priority areas. The project also focused on the
adoption of nutrition-sensitive agricultural (NSA) interventions to increase MNR crop production and value-
addition through the agriculture sector which linked with SO3. In addition, the project supported capacity
building and the development of school based demonstration and nutrition education services for improving
skills and knowledge of project beneficiaries through the education sector which contributed to SO2. Finally,
the project supported improved nutrition and training to increase utilization of community-based nutrition
services through the health sector which also contributed to SO2.

Consistency with the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line
with Uganda's strategic framework for economic development and the National Development Plan (NDP)
which incorporated nutrition as a cross-cutting issue in the following key sectors: agriculture; health;
education; and gender, labor, and social development. The PDO was also in line with the Uganda Nutrition
Action Plan (UNAP, 2011-2016). UNAP's primary goal was focusing public resources and national efforts to
reduce stunting. UNAP proposed to scale up implementation of a package of high impact and cost-effective
nutrition interventions by operationalizing the nutrition component of the NDP, as well as the 2003 Uganda
Food and Nutrition Policy (UFNP) and the Uganda Food and Nutrition Strategy (UFNS, 2005).

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Uganda's National Development Plans (NDP).
Specifically, key strategic elements of the NDP-2 (FY2016-FY2020) and NDP-3 (FY2021-FY2025)
emphasized ending hunger, improved nutrition and food security, increased household incomes, enhanced
value addition, and strengthened private sector capacity to drive growth. Also, the Uganda Nutrition Action
Plan (UNAP-2) aimed to strengthen smallholder household incomes and nutrition within key social sectors,
including agriculture, health, and education. The project outcome also contributed to the knowledge
resources and implementation of the UNAP-2 (FY2021-FY2025) as well as the Uganda Food and Nutrition
Policy, aimed at promoting adequate, safe, high quality and nutritious food with a long shelf-life for local,
regional, and international markets.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives. The PDO statement was clear, focused, and pitched at an
adequate level of ambition given the Bank's experience and the envisioned outcomes. At completion, the
PDO was in line with World Bank Strategy and the Government priorities as noted above. Further, the AF
was in line with World Bank's Strategic Response to COVID-19 through the COVID-19 Strategic
Preparedness and Response Program (SPRP), as well as the Emergency COVID-19 Economic Crisis and
Recovery Development Policy Financing. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                          Page 5 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase production of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported seed multiplication centers
               to facilitate farmers’ access to micronutrient rich (MNR) seed/planting materials and increase seeds available
               to households. This was expected to make local acquisition of quality seed for subsequent planting easy and
               protect farmers from purchasing sub-standard seeds. Thus, the quantity of seed/planting materials of selected
               MNR crops produced by Lead Farmers would increase. The project also supported: strengthening linkages
               between agriculture extension services and participating primary school demonstration gardens,
               and community sensitization and mobilization on nutrition to increase the levels of awareness of MNR crops.

               Expected outputs/intermediate results: women trained in nutrition sensitive agriculture, number of the local
               seed multiplication centers were established and operationalized, number of farmers accessed and multiplied
               seed/planting materials for MNR crops, and the quantity of seed/planting materials of selected MNR crops
               produced by Lead Farmers.

               All this would contribute to achieving an increase in households in the project districts reported year-round
               production of at least three micronutrient rich crops (PDO outcome).

               Anticipated long-term impacts were the improved nutritional status of pregnant and lactating women and
               children under age 2, and reduced stunting.

               The key assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective were: (i) districts, primary
               schools, and health centers/ community would have the capacity and resources to implement the project
               activities; (ii) community, schools, and stakeholders at all levels would work together seamlessly; (iii) targeted
               individuals would allocate time to the activities introduced by the project; (iv) women’s workload resulting from
               participating in the nutrition saving schemes or demonstration garden intervention would not compromise their
               role as mothers; (v) improved knowledge and skills would increase agricultural production all year round; and
               (vi) there would be adequate enthusiasm among target community people to utilize the agricultural technology
               introduced by the project, to produce and consume MNR foods to fight against malnutrition.

               Overall, the ToC reflected plausible links between the supported activities, outputs and expected outcomes.
               The ToC was used as a basis for developing the operation’s results framework and it reflected a good
               balance between the complexity and clarity of the causal links. The PDO was aligned with the higher level
               objective of Uganda's Nutrition Action Plan (UNAP) that focused on multi-sectoral engagement in response to
               development challenges. Finally, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

               Outputs/Intermediate Results



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




        298,102 farmers had access to multiplied or produced micronutrient rich seed/planting materials in
         project areas compared to a baseline of none and exceeding both the original and revised targets of
         93,000 and 293,375, respectively (targets exceeded).
        The quantity of seed/planting materials of selected micronutrient rich crops multiplied or produced by
         lead farmers in project areas reached 107,583 exceeding the original target of 105,000 (target
         exceeded).
        340,408 women were trained in nutrition sensitive agriculture through parents groups (PGs) in project
         areas exceeding both the original and revised targets of 27,000 and 303,797, respectively (targets
         exceeded).
        36 local seed multiplication centers for micronutrient rich crops were established and operationalized
         compared to a baseline of none and exceeding the target of 30 (target exceeded).

Outcome

        By project completion 51.78% of households reported year-round production of at least three
         micronutrient rich crops in project areas compared to a baseline of 41.20% and exceeding the original
         target of 49.44% and slightly exceeding the revised target of 51.50% (PDO Outcome indicator #2).
        The ICR (paragraph 25) reported that the project's Impact evaluation study (2023) showed that
         households in project districts had higher levels of awareness of MNR crops than households in
         control districts. Specifically, awareness regarding orange flesh sweet potato, amaranthus,
         pumpkin and iron rich beans. The study also revealed that adoption rates of MNR crops were
         significantly higher in project districts compared to control districts, which consequently boosted
         production of MNR crops such as orange flesh sweet potato (35kg per HH), pumpkins (41kg per HH)
         and vegetables (31kg per HH).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to increase production of micronutrient-rich foods in
smallholder households in project areas through supporting seed multiplication centers, providing training to
women and increasing awareness among beneficiaries. The project met or exceeded all of its intermediate
results indicators, and achieved its PDO outcome target as noted above. Therefore, the efficacy with which
this objective was achieved is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To successfuly increase consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project coordinated nutrition actions across
multiple sectors (agriculture, health, and education). Interventions would be primarily delivered in selected
primary schools and community level to improve coverage of nutrition services in agriculture, health, and
education (nutrition information, inputs, and commodities). Specifically, the supported activities
included: supporting community mobilization and improved understanding on the importance of nutrition and

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



key actions for nutrition in all selected districts. To deliver these community-based nutrition services, the
project supported the development of institutional capacities of the relevant line ministries and local
government coordination, supervision and monitoring. At a national level, the project would support
management, monitoring and evaluation, knowledge generation and dissemination, and policy advocacy.

Outputs and intermediate results: Number of under-2 children reached for Growth Monitoring and Promotion
(GMP) in project areas, number of households consuming fruits/vegetables/ Micro Nutrient Rich (MNR)
porridge at least three times a week, number of cooking demonstrations carried out at community
level, number of Parent Groups (PGs) established and functional, number of primary schools offering a
package of nutrition demonstration activities in project areas, number of people receiving improved nutrition
services (disaggregated by gender and age) in project areas, number of girls (primary 4 and above) receiving
weekly iron folic acid supplements through primary schools in project areas, number of cooking
demonstrations carried out at community level, and number of people receiving loans disbursed under
Nutrition Sensitive Saving schemes.

All this was expected to result in increased consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households
in project areas.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: (i) districts,
primary schools, and health centers/ community would have the capacity and resources to implement the
project activities; (ii) community, schools, and stakeholders at all levels would work together seamlessly; (iii)
targeted individuals would allocate time to the activities introduced by the project; (iv) women’s workload
resulting from participating in the nutrition saving schemes or demonstration garden intervention would not
compromise their role as mothers; and, (v) nutritional and health services would be readily available in target
communities.

Overall, the ToC reflected plausible links between the supported activities, outputs and expected outcomes.
The ToC was used as a basis for developing the operation’s results framework and it reflected a good
balance between the complexity and clarity of the causal links. The PDO was aligned with the higher level
objective of Uganda's Nutrition Action Plan (UNAP) that focused on multi-sectoral engagement in response to
development challenges. Finally, the stated critical assumptions were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      3,000 Parent Groups (PGs) were established and functional fully achieving the target of 3,000 (target
       fully achieved).
      1,500 primary schools offered a package of nutrition demonstration activities in project areas fully
       achieving the target of 1,500 (target fully achieved).
      832,170 people received improved nutrition services in the project areas compared to a baseline of
       177,460 and exceeding the target of 713,449 (target exceeded).
      253,133 girls (primary 4 and above) received weekly iron folic acid supplements through primary
       schools in project areas exceeding the target of 219,381 (target exceeded).
      1,837,513 primary school children received deworming tablets through primary schools in project
       areas compared to a baseline of 39,906 and exceeding the target of 1,809,887 (target exceeded).
      448,135 children under-2 children were reached for GMP in project areas compared to a baseline
       of 40,500 and exceeding the target of 445,126 (target exceeded).


                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




        30, 918 cooking demonstrations were carried out at community level exceeding the target of 30,000
         (target exceeded).
        142,410 households consumed fruits/vegetables/ Micro Nutrient Rich (MNR) porridge at least three
         times a week compared to a baseline of 93,000 and exceeding the end target of 139,500 (target
         exceeded).
        15,000 people received loans disbursed under Nutrition Sensitive Saving schemes fully achieving the
         target of 15,000 (target fully achieved).

Outcome

        By project completion, 51.78% of children aged between 6 - 23 months from households in project
         districts had minimum dietary diversity compared to a baseline of 45.90% and exceeding both the
         original and revised targets of 50.49% and 51.63%, respectively (PDO Outcome indicator #1).
         According to the ICR (paragraph 28) and as a result of the project activities, the "overall, household
         dietary diversity improved by 22%, women’s dietary diversity by 62%, and children’s dietary diversity
         was 4%."
        The ICR (paragraph 27) reported that according to the impact evaluation study of the project, 10-
         11% more households in project districts adopted improved feeding practices compared to
         households in control districts. Also, 20-23% more households in project districts adopted improved
         health practices compared to control districts.
        The consumption scores of households in project districts were found to be 9-11 points higher than
         control districts, translating into 26-34% higher based on the Food Consumption Score (FCS) (ICR,
         paragraph 29). Also, the evaluation study, showed that 32% more households in project districts were
         found to be more food secure (as measured by FCS) than households in control districts.
        The project activities also reduced stunting as there was a significant improvement in Height for Age
         scores by about 18-21% in project districts compared to control districts. The results also showed that
         the project significantly reduced the proportion of children with stunting in project districts by 5.1-5.3%
         more than in control districts (ICR, paragraph 30), indicating that the project contributed to sustained
         significant long-term reductions in child stunting.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To achieve the stated objective, the project enhanced knowledge and
awareness of nutrition and health benefits and increased the consumption of MNR crops through
a combination of activities that included community nutrition education forums, cooking demonstrations,
information dissemination and community-based health sessions such as Growth Monitoring and Promotion
(GMP). The evidence provided in the ICR (M&E data and impact evaluation study) point to the success of the
project in increasing consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas. The
project exceeded its original and revised target for the PDO outcome indicator and most targets for
intermediate results indicators were exceeded. The evidence reported in the ICR also indicated that the
project activities contributed to sustained significant long-term reductions in child stunting. Therefore, the
Efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated High.



Rating
High



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To increase utilization of community-based nutrition services in smallholder households in project areas.



Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). This achievement of objective was interdependent on both Objectives 1 and 2. To
achieve the stated objective, the project supported strengthening the capacity of sectoral institutions to deliver
nutrition interventions relevant to the project. This included supporting national, district, and sub-county,
stakeholder sensitization on nutrition and project activities; financing consultancy services to develop training
materials for extension agents, primary schools, and community workers; finance consultant services to
deliver nutrition training for relevant district, primary school and community personnel; and provide sector-
specific refresher training and supportive supervision for relevant staff at district level and below.

Outputs/Intermediate Results: establishing Parent Groups, which were used as platforms for delivering
various trainings for women and for demonstrations, women who received loans under the nutrition sensitive
savings scheme, number of households in project districts registered in using improved nutrition and health
services, number of people receiving improved nutrition services in project areas, number of girls (primary 4
and above) receiving weekly iron folic acid supplements through primary schools in project areas, number of
primary schools offering a package of nutrition demonstration activities in project areas, and of local seed
multiplication centers for micronutrient rich crops established and operationalized.

All this was expected to contribute to increase utilization of community-based nutrition services in smallholder
households in project areas.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following five critical assumptions: (i) districts, primary
schools, and health centers/ community would have the capacity and resources to implement the project
activities; (ii) community, schools, and stakeholders at all levels would work together seamlessly; (iii) targeted
individuals would allocate time to the activities introduced by the project; (iv) women’s workload resulting from
participating in the nutrition saving schemes or demonstration garden intervention would not compromise their
role as mothers; and, (v) nutritional and health services would be readily available in target communities.

Overall, the ToC reflected plausible links between the supported activities, outputs and expected outcomes.
While the ToC was used as a basis for developing the operation’s results framework, enhanced capacity of
targeted sectoral institutions was not directly measured. Finally, the stated critical assumptions were logical
and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      3000 Parent Groups (PGs) were established and functional fully achieving the target of 3,000 (target
       fully achieved).
      15,000 people (of which 70% were women) received loans disbursed under Nutrition Sensitive Saving
       schemes fully achieving the target of 15,000 (target fully achieved).
      36 local seed multiplication centers for micronutrient rich crops were established and
       operationalized fully achieving the target of 36 (target fully achieved).



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




                                    832, 170 people received improved nutrition services in project areas compared to a baseline of
                                       177,460 and exceeding the target of 713,449 (target exceeded).
                                      253,133 girls (primary 4 and above) received weekly iron folic acid supplements through primary
                                       schools in project areas compared to a baseline of none and exceeding the target of 219,381 (target
                                       exceeded).
                                      1,500 primary schools offered a package of nutrition demonstration activities in project areas fully
                                       achieving the target of 1,500 (target fully achieved).
                                      4,500 WASH demonstration facilities compliant with COVID requirements were established and
                                       operationalized at community and schools (target fully achieved).
                                      Notable achievements not captured by the RF included: enhancing the capacity of 118, 909 key
                                       project staff/actors including the project's management at different levels, to deliver nutrition services
                                       to project beneficiaries.

                            Outcome

                                    By project completion, 57.31% of women in the project areas participated in community-based
                                     nutrition activities compared to a baseline of 36.40% and fully achieving the target of 57.3% (PDO
                                     outcome indicator # 3).
                                    The ICR (paragraph 32) reported that the successful delivery of multi-sectoral nutritional services at
                                     primary school and community levels benefitted from: (a) strong political commitment from
                                     government leadership and local leaders demonstrated by the annual allocation of resources through
                                     their budgets to support nutrition interventions, (b) a dedicated coordination structure under the Office
                                     of the Prime Minister that ensured alignment of the project activities and the countrywide scale up
                                     strategy for multi-micronutrient supplements, (c) district local governments ensured that project
                                     activities were integrated into District Nutrition Action Plans, (d) community-based nutrition actions
                                     were regularized through continuous mobilization, training and integration of key service delivery
                                     platforms. These initiatives provided an effective institutional structure for sustainably improved
                                     nutrition outcomes and human capital development.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To achieve the stated objective, supported strengthening the capacity of
                            sectoral institutions to deliver nutrition interventions relevant to the project. The achievement of this objective
                            was also interdependent on the successful implementation of activities under Objective 1 and 2. The project
                            fully achieved its PDO outcome target and most intermediate results targets were either fully achieved or
                            exceeded. Overall, the evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in providing an
                            effective institutional structure for sustainably improved nutrition outcomes and human capital development.
                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this Objective was achieved is rated High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




  Rationale
  Overall Efficacy is rated High. The project successfully increased production of micronutrient-rich foods in
  smallholder households in project areas (Objective 1) through supporting seed multiplication centers,
  providing training to women and increasing awareness among beneficiaries. The project fully achieved
  or exceeded all of its intermediate results indicators, and fully achieved its PDO outcome target pertaining to
  this objective. The project also successfully increased consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder
  households in project areas (Objective 2) through enhancing knowledge and awareness of nutrition and
  health benefits and increased the production of MNR crops. The project exceeded its original and revised
  target for the PDO outcome indicator and most targets for intermediate results indicators pertaining
  to Objective 2 were exceeded. Also, the evidence reported in the ICR indicated that the project activities
  contributed to sustained significant long-term reductions in child stunting. Finally, the project contributed
  to increasing utilization of community-based nutrition services in smallholder households in project areas
  (Objective 3). The project fully achieved its PDO outcome target and most intermediate results targets
  pertaining to this objective were either fully achieved or exceeded. Overall, the evidence provided in the ICR
  point to the success of the project in providing an effective institutional structure for sustainably improved
  nutrition outcomes and human capital development.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  High



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

Ex-ante

     The project's internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at 24% with a net present value of benefits
      estimated to be US$33.4 million and the benefit-cost ratio of 2.3. The economic benefits were calculated
      mostly from nutrition interventions for children under five and did not into take account potential benefits
      from other source, such as improved cognitive skills for school-age children that benefit from more
      nutritious food and better care practices.
     Cost-benefit analysis was conducted based on the estimated economic value of the benefits attributable
      to specific interventions funded by the project. The monetary value of health and nutrition benefits was
      calculated by assuming that a statistical life year saved was valued at 1.5 times the country’s GDP per
      capita.
     The project was expected to generate significant health and nutrition benefits. An investment of
      US$27.64 million was expected to save 115,455 Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) and avert 65,000
      cases of stunting annually.
     The project would also contribute to enhancing agricultural production and productivity through
      strengthened institutions. In addition, the project would contribute to addressing gender issues in the
      agriculture sector though focusing on improving and diversifying household food production of
      smallholder farms which are traditionally controlled by women.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 22
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



Ex-post

      The ex-post analysis followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure consistency and
         comparability. The analysis estimated the internal rate of return at 16% which was below the 24%
         estimated at appraisal. The discount rate used for the economic analysis was 6% while opportunity cost
         of capital was 11%. The estimated net present value of benefits was US$45.4 million, with a benefit-cost
         ratio of 1.4 (compared to 2.3 at appraisal), which implied that for every US$1 invested through this
         project, it generated benefits of US$1.4. The economic analysis employed a cash flow model over 20
         years, accounting for all project costs and benefits.
        Benefit streams were calculated based on Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), averted cases of
         stunting, and education benefits.
        The ICR (paragraph 36) attributed the lower ex-post IRR compared to the ex-ante one due to "an
         overestimation of the number of beneficiaries and benefits during appraisal, as well as some changes in
         the calculations since the original ones were not provided. Specifically, for the number of stunting cases,
         recorded figures from the Ministry of Health were used instead of estimates."
        The project also contributed to increased income for lead farmers and parent group members through
         the production and sale of crops, such as orange fleshed sweet potato (6-7% adoption impact compared
         to non-project districts) and other nutrient-rich vegetables such as high iron rich beans.
        Sensitivity Analysis. The analysis showed that the project remained viable with increases in capital and
         recurrent costs or in delay of benefits due to implementation issues. However, a two year delay in
         benefits reduced the IRR to 11.8%. In reality, the project experienced a four year delay.
        Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced an eleven months delay in effectiveness and closed
         four years beyond its original closing date. Implementation delays were partially due to the outbreak of
         COVID-19 and the associated restrictions. The project was also extended by two years due to the AF
         which scaled up some activities and increased PDO outcome targets.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post IRR was estimated at 16% which was below the ex-ante
estimate at 24%, but still well above the discount rate of 6% and the opportunity cost of capital at 11%. While the
project experienced implementation delays as noted above, part of the delay (~ 2 years) was also due to the
increase in scope as a result of the AF and the project fully achieved or even exceeded its targets. Based on the
sensitivity analysis, a two year delay dropped the IRR to 11.8%, so it is plausible to assume that a four year
delay would result in even lower IRR, although not reported by the ICR. Finally, the benefit-cost ratio at
completion was estimated at 1.4 compared to 2.3 at appraisal which indicated that for every US$1 invested
through this project, the return at completion was less than what was expected at appraisal. Therefore, Efficacy
is rated Substantial with some shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                   Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                  24.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
ICR Estimate                                               16.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated High. The project successfully increased
production of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas (Objective 1). The project also
successfully increased consumption of micronutrient-rich foods in smallholder households in project areas
(Objective 2). Also, the evidence reported in the ICR indicated that the project activities contributed to sustained
significant long-term reductions in child stunting. Further, the project contributed to increasing utilization of
community-based nutrition services in smallholder households in project areas (Objective 3). Overall, the
evidence provided in the ICR point to the success of the project in providing an effective institutional structure
for sustainably improved nutrition outcomes and human capital development. Efficiency was rated
Substantial with some shortcomings.

Based on the assigned ratings to the three Outcome criteria, the Outcome of the project is rated Highly
Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could impact the Development Outcome:

1. Technical risk. The operations and maintenance of equipment and structures could be at risk because
the mechanism for this had been tested only during the short period of the AF implementation period. To
mitigate this risk, the project put in place a Memorandum of Understanding, where District Local
Governments (DLGs) would continue to provide technical support and supervision to value addition centers,
ensuring proper maintenance and operation of all equipment and centers. The value-addition centers were
designed to be self-sustaining, and the funds generated will be used to maintain and operate the equipment,
and District Local Governments will also provide refresher training through the extension service system led
by the agricultural engineers.

2. Stakeholders risk. There is a risk that seed entrepreneurs may not continue to offer quality declared
seeds (QDS) to farmers after the project’s end as they could potentially: fail to secure seeds/planting
materials from the breeders, or may not seek agricultural extension advise and supervision of good
agricultural practices, and may not comply with the requirement of having their products certified by the
Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) Also, producers may opt not to sell their
products only among their local communities to avoid competing with larger seed suppliers. This will not only


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



undermine the sustainability and utilization of QDS, but also the production and utilization of MNR crops,
food security, nutrition, livelihood, and commercialization. This will negatively impact the development
outcome of the project in the medium/long term. That said, District Local Governments are committed to
continuously support seed entrepreneurs through the extension supply system and linkages with the National
Agricultural Research Organization. Also, additional support can also be leveraged through the Bank -
financed Uganda Climate Smart Agricultural Transformation Project where the development of the seed
system is a key intervention for support.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
           Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
           details). The project was expected to help Uganda strengthen smallholder household food
           security and improve nutrition for targeted beneficiaries through a multi-sectoral approach that
           involved key social sectors, including agriculture, health, and education.
          Technical, Financial and Economic Aspects. The project design featured a clear PDO that was
           supported by relevant activities. The project design featured a multi-sectoral approach that aimed
           to improve the delivery of nutrition services at community levels using community-based
           institutions, primary schools, agriculture extension mechanisms, and village health teams,
           and through sectoral institutions including project management and coordination at both national
           and decentralized levels. To improve targeting of project beneficiaries, the design featured an
           innovative beneficiary identification process based on nutritional status and poverty data. This
           ensured that a high portion of nutritionally disadvantaged groups were covered by the project
           interventions. The PAD included a detailed economic and financial analysis that provided
           adequate justification for the project investments.
          Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The project contributed to addressing
           poverty by helping beneficiaries in the production and sale of MNR crops. Women were the main
           target beneficiaries of the project. To ensure the inclusion of women, the project design required
           that at least 60% of the total female beneficiaries in 15 districts be targeted for training
           opportunities.
          Environmental and Fiduciary Aspects. Relevant environmental and social safeguards were
           identified at appraisal. The (PAD, paragraph 86) noted that the implementing agencies had no
           Environmental and Social Development personnel to handle environmental and social aspects,
           and recommended that relevant specialist be hired within six months of
           effectiveness. Procurement arrangements did not include a community procurement guideline at
           design stage for schools and the communities to carry out their procurement activities. Financial
           management arrangements were adequate.
          Implementation Arrangements. At appraisal, the Ministry of local government (MOLG) was not
           explicitly identified as an implementing entity in the original project design. The project also
           experienced delays in establishing the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), and fiduciary readiness
           on the ground. This negatively impacted implementation readiness and contributed to delayed
           effectiveness.


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



        Risk Assessment. Seven risk areas were identified at appraisal, and the overall risk was rated as
         Substantial. Overall, risk identification was thorough and reflected relevant mitigation measures.
         In a further communication, the project team confirmed that the mitigation measures worked as
         expected, however, the risk related to the outbreak of COVID-19 was not anticipated.
        M&E Arrangements. M&E activities were handled by the PCU which was housed at the MAAIF.
         Also, M&E included an adequately designed Results Framework that reflected a set of indicators
         of adequate relevance, coverage, and measurability to track the project activities and assess the
         achievement of its PDO. M&E benefitted from positioning a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist
         at the PCU as one of the conditions for effectiveness.

  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design
  included a clear PDO that was supported by relevant activities. Environmental and fiduciary aspects were
  adequate. Implementation arrangements had minor gaps. Gender aspects were adequately covered by
  the project design. Risk identification was thorough and reflected relevant mitigation measures. M&E
  arrangements were adequate. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted 17 implementation support missions over the duration of the project
        implementation. However, from 2020 to 2022, all Bank supervision was virtual due to COVID-19
        lockdowns and travel restrictions.
       The project benefited from a well-rounded Bank team that reflected technically strong specialists in
        relevant areas. This included experienced nutrition, agriculture, education, and health specialists.
        The team also included a capacity building specialist, an economist, financial management
        specialist, procurement specialist, and safeguard specialist.
       The Bank team maintained a good balance between introducing multi-sectoral global best practices
        in nutrition, and getting the Office of the Prime Minister involved early enough for overall
        coordination. This ensured that all relevant ministries would participate effectively in project
        activities. Further, the Bank team pursued open discussions at the central level to address
        implementation bottlenecks and engaged various stakeholders to ensure the effectiveness of the
        project interventions.
       The projects fiduciary performance benefited from the on-the-job capacity building provided by the
        Bank's fiduciary specialists. Further, the project oversight benefited from having the agriculture
        lead based in Kampala.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank task team successfully guided the
 implementation of the project against environmental challenges, including the COVID pandemic. The Bank
 team also oversaw the Government's request for additional financing and successfully expanded the
 project scope. The team composition was consistently maintained throughout the project life, and the Bank
 provided quality support and supervision to the project. Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated
 Satisfactory.


                                                                                                 Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a theory of change since it was not required by the Bank at the time of
          appraisal. This Review constructed a theory of change for each of the three objectives through
          using information from the detailed project description in the PAD (Annex 2) and the theory of
          change reported in the ICR (Annex 7).
         The PDO was measured through three PDO outcome indicators which were relevant, reflected
          reasonable targets, and had baseline data. However, the unit of measurement of the three PDO
          indicators was revised to percentage to more accurately capture what was to be measured by each
          of the PDO indicators and in alignment with national reporting (ICR, paragraph 51).
         The results framework also included 10 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress of
          the different project activities. The IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable targets, and were
          connected to the project activities. An additional IRI was included after MTR, and 4 IRIs were
          included as part of the project extension with additional financing.
         The M&E design also called for a baseline study, midline and endline evaluations of the project. In
          addition, positioning of a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist at the PCU was one of conditions for
          effectiveness to ensure an early start of M&E activities.
         Overall, M&E design was sound and reflected a well-designed RF that included a set of indicators
          of adequate relevance, coverage, and measurability to track the project activities and assess the
          achievement of its PDO. In a further communication, the project team stated that while the M&E
          design was robust, it could have been further strengthened by including indictors to capture some
          spillover or unintended outcomes of the project that were observed beyond the results framework or
          PDOs. For example, indicators for increased school attendance, improved student’s performance,
          students/people adopted project interventions in non-project districts, and the volume of marketed
          MNR crops that reflect commercialization during the AF period.



b. M&E Implementation
       M&E implementation experienced delays at the initial stages due to relying on a the paper-based
          system. This was rectified when the project migrated to an e-based reporting system, which
          allowed information to become available in real time. According to the ICR (paragraph 53) "all the



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



           results indicators were regularly reported on, and all the data was geo-referenced and geo-
           tagged."
          M&E implementation benefited from capacity building for all M&E officers of the sectors, including
           nutrition M&E who were trained and exposed to Geo-enabled Technology for monitoring the
           project implementation in the context of their sector.
          A total of 300 Community Facilitators (CF) were recruited and each of them were responsible for a
           cluster of 5 schools where data was collected from head teachers, Village Health Teams, Lead
           Farmers and Parent Groups. Data/information was then transmitted to the district project
           assistants for compilation/consolidation/ validation and submission to PCU.
          The project also used cell phone technology for project monitoring and built capacity on geo-
           enabled M&E for about 535 project staff. The data was sent instantly to the District Project
           Assistants and M&E officers at the central level.
          According to the ICR (paragraph 53) the use of geo-technology improved M&E’s effectiveness,
           efficiency, accuracy of data collection, evaluation, learning and reporting.
          The impact evaluation endline survey of the original project operations and a rapid social
           assessment (RSA) to evaluate COVID-19 impacts on the social aspects of the project
           interventions were both carried out.
          Finally, it worth highlighting that the project won an award from the World Bank for effectively
           adopting the use of e-technology in M&E (ICR, paragraph 53).



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 54) "the M&E data was used to inform project management and
           decision-making in a timely and appropriate manner."
          Utilization of M&E data was evident when the M&E data including MTR and impact evaluation
           reports helped inform technical mission discussions, prepare Implementation Status and Results
           Reports (ISRs) and other reports for communicating with World Bank management on project
           issues.
          In addition, the project information-based M&E data was used by government through the
           Minister of Finance Budget Speech to advocate for policy and budgetary support to the project
           and support the nutrition agenda of the country. Also, the results of the project fed into the
           organization of the 3rd National Nutrition Forum anchored by the Office of the Prime Minister that
           took place in May 2024.
          The M&E data were used to guide the setting of new targets after MTR, project restructuring of
           project and at programming of Additional Financing to capture more accurately the outcomes of
           the additional resources. M&E data also informed the revision of the Results Framework,
           including upward revision of end targets for all the three PDO indicators as well as six IRIs.
          The M&E data also informed the project management on the need, procurement, and distribution
           of additional nutrition commodities. This allowed well-timed strategic action and response to
           satisfy nutritional needs of the target groups supported by the project.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E benefited from a sound design that reflected a well-
  designed RF that included a set of indicators of adequate relevance, coverage, and measurability to
  track the project activities and assess the achievement of its PDO. M&E implementation benefited from
  communication technologies, and data were collected on all results indicators were geo-referenced and
  geo-tagged, which enabled systematic tracking of project performance. M&E utilization was evident in

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



  using M&E data to inform management decisions, and project data were also used to advocate for policy
  and budgetary support to the project and support the nutrition agenda of the country as noted above.
  Therefore, the M&E Quality is rated High.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as Category B since impacts
           were expected to be minimal, site specific and readily manageable. The project triggered
           two Environmental Safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Pest
           Management OP 4.09. Since this project was closely linked with the Bank-financed Agriculture
           Cluster Development Project (ACDP-P145037) as both projects were implemented in the same
           cluster districts, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for ACDP was
           adapted and revised. Also, key aspects of the ACDP Pest Management Plan (PMP) were also
           captured and reflected in the ESMF to provide a framework for management of pesticide use. The
           ESMF was disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on November 19, 2014.
          Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 57) "the
           safeguards performance ratings were largely satisfactory." However, the project faced a challenge in
           the designation of safe final disposal of the collected agro-chemical waste due to budget constraints
           and costly outsourced waste handlers. The project's Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
           was functional, and thematic grievances captured through the GRM monitoring tool. The overall
           environment and social safeguards rating at the close of the project was rated Satisfactory. In a
           further communication, the project team stated that "the project fully adhered to the Bank’s
           Safeguard policies."




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM arrangements were handled at three levels including the national
           (MAAIF), the Local Government for monitoring and supervision and at the school level on behalf of
           the community. Capacity building was completed at each level and systems were
           streamlined. According to the ICR (paragraph 58) "periodic reports were prepared at each of these
           levels and consolidated at the national level to submit to the World Bank on time." There were no
           outstanding audits, and any issues that came up were addressed by management. The Financial
           management performance was rated Satisfactory in the final ISR.
          Procurement. Procurement for the project was carried out at two levels: national (through MAAIF)
           and at community level. Procurement processes at MAAIF initially experienced delays due to
           internal bureaucracy, stakeholder consultative processes during preparation of statement of
           requirements for Nutrition commodities and IEC materials, and limited knowledge of project
           objectives among some internal staff. There were also delays in uploading documentation into the

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



           Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP), and the project faced challenges due to
           human resource losses. Procurement activities benefited from the expertise of the procurement
           specialist in the Bank financed Agriculture Cluster Development Project and a dedicated
           procurement staff in the mainstream Ministry. Delayed implementation at the community level was
           in some instances attributed to conflicting roles between the key players in procurement. To ensure
           successful completion, the project procurement team undertook extensive training and provided
           handholding support in community procurements. According to the ICR (paragraph 59) "there were
           no major issues of compliance with procurement requirements during project implementation."
           Procurement management performance was rated Satisfactory in the final ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (paragraph 44) reported four unintended outcomes:

   "1. The project contributed to shaping the design of the program approach under the National Development
   Plan (NDP-III) based on the lessons learnt from the multi-sectoral approach of the project. This has also
   been extended to the ongoing development of NDP-IV. The Draft School Health policy also benefitted from
   the Uganda nutrition and school feeding guidelines developed by the project.
   2. The project strengthened the community-based monthly nutrition forum, establishing it as a viable and
   cost-effective structure for: (a) identification, referral and management of malnourished children between
   the villages and health facilities; (b) facilitation of frequent dialogue especially between female farmers and
   agriculture extension officers, health workers, school authorities and local government officials.
   3. Homegrown feeding programs expanded to supplement student and staff diets and were managed by
   parent groups using MNR crops from demonstration gardens. Availability and accessibility of school
   feeding for both teachers and students became a reality with all project districts reporting improved school
   enrolment, retention, attendance, and performance. Data on the 1500 Universal Primary Education (UPE)
   schools obtained from the project Districts’ Department of Education collected between 2016-2023,
   showed a 20 percent average increase in retention rates of students and a 26.5 percent average increase
   in pass rates of exam candidates. The provision of Iron and Folic Acid to schoolgirls also had a similar
   impact on their education.
   4. The project supported the development of the Orange Fleshed Sweet Potato value chain for
   commercialization. Thus, it demonstrated that nutrition can significantly contribute to the country’s
   economic growth through commercialization and competitiveness of MNR crop production and agro-
   processing."



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)



                                                                                      There is no disconnect. The ICR
Outcome                            Satisfactory             Highly Satisfactory       main text also rated the overall
                                                                                      outcome as Highly Satisfactory.
Bank Performance                   Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                     High                     High

Quality of ICR                     ---                      High


12. Lessons

The ICR included four lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. A multi-sectoral nutrition approach combined with a robust supra-ministerial coordination
is critical to achieve an effective institutional structure for improved nutrition outcomes. The
project experience emphasized the importance of multi-sectoral approach and coordination. Future
nutrition initiatives should leverage and strengthen the national nutrition coordination structures
under the leadership of the supra-ministerial coordination structures to achieve better coordination
and greater impact. In the case of this project, the coordination anchor was nationally mandated to
oversee the country’s nutrition strategy, which was vital in the success of the approach.

2. Successful implementation of multi-sectoral nutrition projects requires constant learning
from implementation experience and evaluation outcomes. Nutrition projects tend to have a
complex nature and exhibit locational variability. Therefore, a national-level policy dialogue and
widespread dissemination of project learnings are essential for obtaining the desired commitment
from the highest levels of government to maintain project gains.

3. M&E design need to reflect adequate implementation arrangements and relevant indicators
to comprehensively assess the project outcomes. The project experience demonstrated that
the adoption of Geo-enabled M&E technology, capacity building of relevant staff, and proper
utilization of M&E outputs can all help to significantly improve the M&E quality, speed, and due
diligence. Reliable M&E data allows for effective decision making and course-correction to fully
achieve the planned outcomes. In addition, careful selection of nutrition related indicators and
setting of realistic targets is critical to achieve the desired results. Nutrition outcomes, by their
nature, take time to fully manifest as behavioral change is a time-consuming endeavor that
progressively takes root. As such, project teams need to be realistic in setting targets that reflective
of such progression.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG Multisectoral Food Security Nutrition (P149286)




      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected a strong evidence base that was used assess the project
         outcomes.
        Results Orientation. The ICR used the available M&E data and supplemental evidence from impact
         evaluation studies to justify the achievement of the PDO.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes reflected a good balance between achievements
         on the ground and achieving outcome targets. The ICR also included a detailed EFA that justified the
         project investments.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings. However, the section on environmental and social
         compliance lacked an explicit statement on the compliance of the project with World Bank Safeguard
         policies.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a concise coverage of project activities, and candidly reported
         on most shortcomings.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR was well-written as it provided a concise yet through
coverage of different aspects of the project. It adequately used the evidence base to assess the achievement of
the PDO. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         High




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
