     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024201

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P159979                                      CG-CAP

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                           Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61110                                    31-Jul-2022                                          100,533,211.52

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 13-Jul-2017                                  31-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          100,490,635.64                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shashidhara Laxman           Samjhana Thapa                Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective stated identically in the Legal agreement (page 5) and PAD (para 20) of the project is “to
   improve productivity of farmers and market access for producer groups and micro, small and medium
   agribusiness enterprises, in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient, and provide immediate and
   effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.”

   For this review, the objective will be split into three subobjectives:


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)



   Subobjective 1: to improve productivity of farmers in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient

   Subobjective 2: to improve market access for producer groups and micro, small and medium agribusiness
   enterprises in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient.

   Subobjective 3: to provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency

   The Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) related to Subobjective 3 was not triggered.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Component 1: Direct support to producer groups and agribusiness micro, small and medium
   enterprises (MSMEs) (Appraised: US$25 million; Actual: US$41 million)

   1.1. Sustainable intensification and commercialization of crop and animal production

   The provision of support to producer groups to improve crop and animal production and commercialization
   through Subprojects on a cost-sharing basis.

   1.2. Development of agro-industrial activities

   The provision of support to agribusiness Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) for the
   development of agro-industrial activities through Subprojects on a coast sharing basis.

   Component 2: Improving public infrastructure and the business climate for commercial agriculture
   (Appraised: US$45 million; Actual: US$34 million)

   2.1    Public infrastructure for the development of commercial agriculture

   The provision of support to: (a) rehabilitate and provide maintenance for selected basic infrastructure,
   including inter alia, feeder roads, in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient; and (b) implement the
   Road Maintenance Strategy.

   2.2    Governance and regulatory framework for commercial agriculture

   The provision of support to the improvement of the enabling legal and regulatory framework for commercial
   agriculture including through: (a) the establishment of platforms for public-private dialogue at the
   departmental and national levels; (b) technical assistance for the development of the legal and regulatory


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CG-CAP (P159979)



  framework; (c) policy advocacy; and (d) awareness raising, dissemination, consultation and training on
  proposed policy, legal and regulatory reforms.Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacity to support
  the development of commercial agriculture

  Component 3: Strengthening institutional capacity to support the development of commercial
  agriculture (Appraised: US$30 million; Actual: US$25 million)

  3.1     Capacity-building of institutions providing support to commercial agriculture

  The provision of support to strengthen the capacity of selected public and non-public institutions involved in
  the development of commercial agriculture in the territory of the recipient.

  3.2     Project management, coordination and monitoring at national and departmental levels

  The provision of support to carry out project management, coordination, communication, monitoring and
  evaluation at national and departmental levels.

  Component 4: Contingency emergency response (Appraised: US$00)

  The provision of immediate support to respond to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

  The project was appraised to cost US$100 million; the actual cost was US$100.49 million.

  Financing

  The project was financed through an IDA grant of US$100 million.

  Borrower contribution

  The borrower was not expected to contribute.

  Dates

  The project was approved in July 2017 and became effective in April 2018. The Mid-Term Review (MTR)
  was conducted in September 2020. The project was originally scheduled to close in July 2022, but it closed
  in December 2023.

  Restructurings

  There were two restructurings.

  September 2021: to respond to government’s request to reallocate funds to meet the demand for matching
  grants. It resulted in changes in Results Framework (RF) and reallocation between Component


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)



   disbursements. US$23 million was reallocated from Category 1 to Category 2 to increase funding to
   Component 2 to finance matching grants to most vulnerable groups. .

   June 2022: to extend the closing date to allow for completion of lagging activities and extend project
   support to help the country respond to the food crisis. It resulted in a 17-month extension of project closing.

   Revisions to RF in the first restructuring

   Target was increased for a PDO indicator “number of direct beneficiaries” from 500,000 to 502,000; targets
   for three of the four subcomponents of another PDO indicator “average seasonal yield per standard area of
   specific crops among targeted farmers” were revised downward as follows: cassava from 15 to 10 tons per
   ha, maize from 2.5 to 2 tons per ha, and aquaculture from 4 to 3 tons per ha.

   Split Rating

   The restructurings did not change the theory of Change (ToC). The downward revision of targets for
   productivity of three of the four crops and fishery made the achievement of subobjective 1 less ambitious.
   This review will, therefore, apply a split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

Although the Republic of Congo’s (ROC’s) GDP grew at over 5 percent for ten years before the appraisal, it
suffered from high rates of poverty and inequality; Poverty incidence was 74.8 percent in rural areas and
32.2 percent in urban areas (PDO, para 3). Oil accounted for more than half of the GDP and 80 percent of
total exports. Agriculture, excluding forestry, employed 40 percent of the labor force but contributed only 5
percent of GDP, although it held considerable potential as the country received an average rainfall of 1,200
mm per year and only 2 percent of the arable area was exploited. Agricultural exports (palm oil, sugar, and
cocoa) were stagnant and trade balance for food was deteriorating (PAD, annex 1, para 7).

Employing a low input-output model, agriculture was rudimentary with unit costs of production much higher
than those of imported commodities (PAD, para 13). Small scale producers accounted for 90 percent of the
agricultural outputs. The competitiveness of domestic value chains was hampered by legislative and
governance constraints, weak producer organizations, insufficient agricultural extension and veterinary
services, high cost of agricultural inputs, including credit, ageing and underkilled workforce, and poor road
and communication networks (PAD, para 14)

Country strategy

The PDO aligned with ROC’s National Development Plans (NDP) 2012-2016, which included two pillars
dedicated to diversifying the economy by exploiting the country’s natural endowments and developing
sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, and transport with an identified comparative advantage (PDO para
16). Under this framework, the government developed the National Investment Plan for Agriculture, Food

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CG-CAP (P159979)



Security and Nutrition (PNIASON) 2015, the objective of which was to sustainably contribute to meeting the
food needs of the population. The PDO remains relevant to ROC’s recent National Development Plan
(2022-2026), the first strategic pillar of which is to develop agriculture in the broad sense with the goal of
increasing producers’ incomes and improving the country’s agriculture trade balance (ICR, para 19).

World Bank Strategy

The PDO aligned with the World Bank’s CPS for 2013-2016, the strategic objective of which was to build
competitiveness to achieve inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Draft of the Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD) that was underway earmarked agriculture and food as one of the sectors with the
potential to substitute food imports, diversify the economy, and create jobs for youth. At closing, the PDO
remained relevant to World Bank Group CPF’s (2020-2024) the objective 3 of which is to improve
agricultural productivity and commercialization, under the Focus area 1 to strengthen economic
management to create an improved climate for Private-Sector-led growth (ICR, para 19).

The World Bank had previously supported two projects on agriculture and trade and competitiveness:
Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project (PDARP) and Economic Diversification
Support Project (PADE). The PDARP sought to raise the income rural poor through the generation and
promotion of improved agricultural technologies, the provision of market infrastructure, and the formulation
and implementation of poverty-focused agricultural policies and expenditure programs. PADE aimed to
promote private investment in select non-oil value chains and support Small and Medium Enterprises
(SME) development.

The level at Pitched

The PDO to raise productivity of selected crops and increase access to markets for producers and SME
was pitched at an outcome level in the theory of change. The achievement of the objective would have
contributed directly to increasing producer incomes, reducing poverty, achieving improved nutritional
outcomes.

Summary: Unable to reduce poverty and inequality even with steady growth over a decade of its oil revenue
dependent economy, the Republic of Congo strategized to diversify by exploiting country’s natural
endowments. Agriculture had potential but agricultural exports were stagnant, and the country depended
heavily on food imports because the sector was dominated by smallholders who practiced subsistence
agriculture. The PDO pitched at an outcome level to increase productivity and access to markets for small
producers and MSMEs was highly relevant to the country’s objective of increasing producers’ incomes and
improving agriculture trade balance and World bank’s strategy to help the country improve agricultural
productivity and commercialize agriculture.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CG-CAP (P159979)


EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve productivity of farmers in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient.

               Rationale
               ToC

               The ToC articulated in PAD (para 60 and Figure 3) and reproduced in ICR (para 5 and Figure 1) states that
               project activities/inputs, such as i) direct support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs (through
               technical and financial assistance to develop and implement business plans), ii) improving public
               infrastructure and business climate for commercial agriculture (through construction/maintenance of roads
               and other infrastructure, supporting dialogue on commercial agriculture, and drafting favorable laws and
               policies), and iii) strengthening institutional capacity to support commercial agriculture, producing outputs,
               such as business plans supported, kilometers of roads rehabilitated, and policy reforms drafted, would lead to
               achievement of the objective, measured by changes in average seasonal yields and volume of raw material
               and processed outputs sold by producer groups and MSMEs.

               The ToC was plausible, provided the following critical assumptions in the theory held: i) producer groups and
               MSMEs adopted improved technologies and made the necessary improvements in their operations in
               response to technical support and the easing the credit constraint through matching grants; and ii) alliances
               and investments in infrastructure improved access to markets for producers and agricultural enterprises.

               The evidence to test the theory included information on crop yields, volume marketed, and on a few
               intermediate response indicators, such as changes in the area cultivated – as easing credit limitations
               encourages producers to change the area cultivated as well – and transport costs.

               Outputs

                      877 business plans of producers were supported by the project, exceeding the original target of 840
                      72 business plans of MSMEs were supported by the project, exceeding the original target of 60
                      US$23.80 million was transferred as matching grants to producer groups and MSMEs, almost
                       reaching the original target of US$24 million
                      3 laboratories for agriculture research and development and/or food safely control were rehabilitated
                       and brought up to international standards, meeting the original target of 3
                      571 students received support from the project for practical internships or master’s degrees,
                       exceeding the original target of 500
                      Agricultural scientific data and statistics was made available from a centralized source, as planned

               Outcomes

                      83 percent of producers and MSMEs were satisfied with the services provided, exceeding the original
                       target of 60 percent
                      Average seasonal yield of maize increased to 1.81 MT per ha, falling behind the original target of 2.50
                       MT per ha



                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-CAP (P159979)




      Average seasonal yield of cassava increased to 29.30 MT per ha, exceeding the original target of 15
         MT per ha
        Average seasonal yield of aquaculture increased to 5.41 MT per ha, exceeded the original target of 4
         MT ton per ha
        Average yield of poultry increased to 280.7 eggs per chicken, exceeding the original target of 250
        9,005 farmers adopted improved agricultural practices, exceeding the original target of 7,200
        Of them, 3,966 female farmers adopted improved agricultural practices, exceeding the original target
         of 3,600
        419,203 directly benefited from the project, failing to reach the original target of 500,000

The ICR offers evidence from several sources: borrower completion report, internal reports, M&E data and
reports, and an impact study.

The targets for increasing productivity were largely met. The average yields of cassava, aquaculture, and
poultry exceeded the targets by a wide margin – the achieved yields of cassava, aquaculture, and poultry
were 195, 135, and 112 percent of targets, respectively -- while that of maize reached only 70 percent of the
target (ICR, Table 1). The ICR notes that the impact study, which included a sample size of 400 households
consisting of control and comparison groups, showed that the yields of maize, cassava, aquaculture, and
poultry increased by 90, 130, 89, and 110 percent, respectively over the baseline (para 21). However, without
information on the baselines, it is not clear whether the impact study also suggests that the targets were
met.

The ICR notes that as a result of the project, the country produced an additional 102,250 tons of cassava,
16,158 tons of plantain, 5,153 tons of various vegetables, 5,544 tons of poultry meat, 14.4 million table eggs,
931 tons of pork, and 391 tons of fish in the last the three years of the project (para 22).

With support to business plans through matching grants, the recipients gained access to improved inputs,
advisory services, and equipment. Yield-improving inputs they gained access to included disease resistant
cassava cuttings, high quality fish fingerlings and chicks, and better performing maize seeds (ICR, para 22).
The matching grant subprojects supported a wide range of activities: production of staples and horticultural
crops, livestock, poultry, processing, mechanization services and product commercialization (ICR, annex 4).
More than targeted number of farmers adopted improved agricultural practices. However, the absence of any
comparison with control group, however, weakens the attribution of outcomes to project activities.

Summary: Yields for three of the four crops/fisheries exceeded their original targets, while the yield for one
crop reached to 72 percent of the target. Farmers adopted the recommended technologies and expanded the
area cultivated, benefiting from the technical, financial and mechanization support, as well as infrastructure
and policy improvements provided by the project. As a result, the project nearly achieved its original
objectives. Although the ICR indicated that the impact study included control and comparison groups, the
lack of data on the differences in results between the two groups made it difficult to fully assess the attribution
of all project activities to the outcomes, Nevertheless, given the achievements reported above., the efficacy in
the achievement of objective 1 is rated as Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-CAP (P159979)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve productivity of farmers in selected zones of the territory of the Recipient (no change). The
objective is measured with revised targets.

Revised Rationale
The ToC developed for objective 1 applies here.

Outputs

The outputs listed under Objective 1 also apply here.

Outcomes

       419,203 benefited directly from the project, falling short of the revised target of 502,000
       Average seasonal yield of maize was increased to 1.81 MT, nearly meeting the revised target of 2.00
        MT per ha
       Average seasonal yield of cassava was increased to 29.30 MT per ha, exceeding the revised target of
        10 MT per ha
       Average seasonal yield of aquaculture increased to 5.41 MT per ha, exceeded the revised target of 3
        MT ton per ha

The yields achieved exceeded the revised targets in the case of cassava and aquaculture but fell short in the
case of maize in which the yields were 90 percent of the target.

The project almost met the revised targets. The efficacy in achieving revised objective 1 is also rated
Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve market access for producer groups and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises in
selected zones of the territory of the Recipient.

Rationale
ToC

The ToC offered for Objective 1 applies here.

Outputs


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CG-CAP (P159979)




      1,643 km of rural roads were rehabilitated, exceeding the target of 1,500 km
      8 new policy reforms were drafted by the project, exceeding the target of 3
      9 multistakeholder platforms for public-private dialogue on commercial agriculture were established,
       exceeding the target of 4

Outputs not included in M&E

      Built 71.2 km of electricity lines
      Supported the drafting of 8 laws that improved governance and regulatory framework in support of
       commercial agriculture

Outcomes

      906 percent increase in volume of raw and processed products sold by producer groups and MSMEs in
       national and export markets, exceeding the original target of 20 percent


Producer groups and MSMEs increased by more than nine-fold the volume of raw and processed products
they sold in national and export markets, far exceeding the target of an increase of only 20 percent (ICR, para
23). The magnitude of change suggested by the impact study was much smaller, and in an exchange on
October 4, 2024, the World Bank team indicated that it was about one-fourth of the change suggested by RF.
Even these numbers suggest that the volume of products sold was doubled. The increased commercialization
resulted from increased productivity, increase in the area cultivated, and processing that met consumer tastes
and preferences. The beneficiaries increased the area cultivated – by more than tenfold in some cases – and
the cropping intensity because of increased access to mechanization services, according to the impact study
(ICR, para 24). The discussion on crop models also suggests that nearly all the producer groups and MSMEs
increased the area cultivated (ICR, annex 4, paras 23 to 29). The supported MSMEs reduced post-harvest
losses and increased the volume of processed products that met consumer requirement as they gained
access to better production facilities, equipment, storage, transport, advisory services (ICR, para 24).

The project also improved the enabling environment by supporting the upgrading of 1,192 km and
maintenance of 451 km of feeder roads, which according to the impact study increased access to more
remunerative markets and reduced transport costs to various degrees (ICR, para 25). In addition, the project
built electricity lines and established multistakeholder platforms for public private dialogue on commercial
agriculture. Supported the drafting of 8 laws that improved governance and regulatory framework in support
of commercial agriculture.

However, only about 84 percent of the targeted number of people benefited from the project.

Summary: The project fully achieved the objective. The beneficiaries increased the volume of raw and
processed products they marketed by nine-fold, exceeding the target of only 20 percent. They were able to do
so – in addition to through increasing yields – by expanding the area they cultivated, reducing post-harvest
losses, and scaling up processing through project supported investments in private and public infrastructure.
The efficacy in achieving objective 2 is also rated Substantial.




                                                                                                 Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CG-CAP (P159979)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To improve market access for producer groups and micro, small and medium agribusiness enterprises in
                            selected zones of the territory of the Recipient.

                            Revised Rationale
                            There was no change in targets and above discussion under the original objective 2 holds here.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


                            OBJECTIVE 3
                            Objective
                            Provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency

                            Rationale
                            Since the CERC was not triggered, this objective is not assessed.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


                            OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            Provide immediate and effective response in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency

                            Revised Rationale
                            Since the CERC was not triggered, this objective is not assessed.



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             CG-CAP (P159979)




         Rationale
         The TOC employed stated that by directly supporting producer groups and MSMEs, combined with improving
         public infrastructure and business climate, and strengthening public institutions to support commercial
         agriculture, would enable producers and MSMEs to increase both yields and volume of raw material and
         processed products they marketed. The efficacy in the achievement of the first objective was rated
         Substantial as the project almost achieved the objective, with yields of three of the four crops/fishery far
         exceeding the targets. The beneficiaries adopted the improved technologies introduced through project
         activities. Similarly, the achievement of objective 2 was also rated Substantial, as the increase in the volume
         of raw material and processed products sold by producer groups and MSMEs far exceeded the targets.
         Project-supported improvements in production conditions, transport, storage and processing enabling the
         beneficiaries to adopt improved practices, expand their production area, and increase the volume of outputs
         processed. Overall, the efficacy in achieving the project objectives is rated as Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         The TOC employed stated that by directly supporting producer groups and MSMEs, combined with improving
         public infrastructure and business climate and strengthening public institutions to support commercial
         agriculture, would enable producers and MSMEs to increase both yields and volume of raw material and
         processed products they marketed. The efficacy in the achievement of the revised objective 1 was rated
         Substantial as the project almost achieved the objective with yields of three of the four crops/fishery far
         exceeding the targets. Similarly, the achievement of objective 2 was also rated Substantial as the increase in
         the volume of raw material and processed products sold by producer groups and MSMEs far exceeded the
         targets. Project supported improvements in production conditions, transport, storage and processing enabled
         the beneficiaries to adopt improved practices, expand their area of production, and increase volume of
         outputs processed. Overall, the efficacy in achieving the project objectives is rated as Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

The project’s direct benefits came from three sources: support to producer groups and agribusiness MSMEs,
improvements in infrastructure and business climate, and strengthened institutional capacity (PAD, page 33).




                                                                                                          Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-CAP (P159979)



During appraisal, an ex-ante analysis was carried out, adopting a timeframe of 15 years, based on seven
investment models which estimated economic return of 26 percent from yield and production investments. The
economic returns from component 2 -- the benefits from the construction of feeder roads and access to
electricity in component -- was about 9 percent, not counting any nonagricultural benefits. The net present value
of business plans supported was estimated at US$8,000 per ha and the overall economic return for components
1 and 2, was 21 percent (PAD, para 73). The third component was excluded due to the difficulty in quantifying
its benefits.

At project closing, the analysis examined economic returns using 16 models (7 of crops, 5 of livestock and
fisheries, 3 of off-farm activities, and 1 of agricultural product commercialization). Adopting a 15-year timeframe,
the analysis generated an ERR of 21 percent and an NPV of US$50.9 million (ICR, para 30, Annex 4). The
analysis included returns from both activity 1 and 2, similar to the approach followed at appraisal. The results
were tested for sensitivity to variations in costs and benefits. All scenarios showed robust results under all
situations when the returns were estimated over 15 years. But over 10 years, a two year delay with reduced
benefits and an increase in costs by 25 percent would reduce ERR to less than five percent (ICR, annex 4, para
57).

Administrative Efficiency

Implementation of the project fell behind schedule beginning with a delay in project becoming effective (ICR,
para 41). Several disbursement suspensions because of the ROC’s default on its debt service payments and
poor communication among various units engaged in implementation (PIUs at various levels, technical and
procurement teams) further delayed implementation (ICR, para 43).

Inefficiencies in procurement was a major contributor to delays, which required an extension of closing date by
17 months (ICR, para 30). A key factor behind these inefficiencies was the change in Bank team leadership,
with six different TTLs over the implementation period. This resulted in a large number of no-objection
certificates pending, at times reaching as many as 300 (ICR, para 45).

Although administrative inefficiencies delayed completion of the project, robust economic returns based on
outcomes that align with the estimated EIRR at appraisal justify this project an efficiency rating of Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  21.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               21.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable



                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-CAP (P159979)



* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The outcome of the project is arrived at using the split ratings of efficacy in implementation before and after the
restructuring.

                                      Objectives with Original targets       Objectives with Revised targets
Relevance of PDO                      High                                   High
Overall Efficacy                      Substantial                            Substantial
Efficiency                            Substantial                            Substantial
Outcomes                              Satisfactory                           Satisfactory
Outcome value                         5                                      5
Amount disbursed (US$)                59.96 million                          40.48 million
Share of disbursed amount (%)         60                                     40
Total outcome value                   5
Overall outcome rating                Satisfactory

The PDO aimed to improve productivity of selected crops and fisheries while increasing the volume of raw
material and processed products marketed by the beneficiaries. This objective was highly relevant to the
country’s and the Bank’s strategy to build competitiveness of domestic value chains. During the first
restructuring, resources were reallocated to provide more support to farmers through matching grants. At that
time, targets for yields of three of the four crops and fisheries were downwards, anticipating that original targets
would not be met. However, the yields of three of the four crops and fisheries exceeded both the original and
revised targets; the efficacy, therefore, was substantial in achieving both the original and the revised targets.
Despite some inefficiencies that required an extension of project closing date, the economic returns based on
actual outcomes were comparable to the returns projected at appraisal, leading to a substantial efficacy rating
for the project. With similar outcomes before and after restructuring, the outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Productivity risk

Whether producers will continue to use the improved technologies necessary to sustain the productivity
gains poses a risk to project outcomes (ICR, para 59). Their ability depends on government’s capacity to
sustain the supply of critical inputs at affordable prices. There is a small chance that lack of affordability of
inputs could jeopardize their adoption post project closure because producers depended largely on project
grants to finance input purchases.

Government capacity risk


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CG-CAP (P159979)



Limited administrative and financial capacity of the government to sustain the supplies of critical inputs and
invest in maintenance of infrastructure built by the project poses another risk to the outcomes achieved (ICR,
para 60). A major risk relates to continued ability of the gene bank and the artificial insemination center
funded through the project to offer services because by project closing the models for their financial
sustainability had not been sufficiently elaborated. Although the project built the capacity of NGOs that were
in charge of maintaining the rehabilitated roads and of departmental councils to maintain feeder roads, they
will depend on the Government for the resources (ICR, para 61). The government will also need to support
and monitor the activities required to maintain seed and fertilizer supplies.

Institutional risks

The project fostered relationships/partnerships among value chain agents to give producers access to
market. The project was compelled to hire external consultants to help the agents craft and manage their
relationship. Whether these relationships will be sustained after project closure poses another risk to project
outcomes (ICR, para 59).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design was strategically relevant to the country’s strategy to increase productivity,
  commercialize agriculture, and build the competitiveness of their value chains. The project included
  components – direct support to individuals and enterprises, improvements in infrastructure and enabling
  environment, and strengthening of the capacity of the government to supply the technologies – that could
  be expected to achieve the project objectives.

  The technical design incorporated elements that had proven to be effective. For example, productive
  alliances had been effective in other countries. The design also incorporated elements of matching grants
  based on lessons learned from the implementation of previously supported projects in the country
  (PDARP and PADE). The applicants to matching grants would be selected and receive technical
  assistance according to the lessons from these previous projects (PAD, para 46). The investments in
  roads were based on the experience that suggested that investments in roads would motivate
  commercial farm operators to invest in abandoned areas.

  Stakeholders, including the national multisector commission mobilized by the government, were
  consulted during preparation to get the necessary buy in and ensure appropriate targeting (PAD, para
  37). The project identified risks and took adequate mitigation measures; for example, the project
  proposed that a bottom-up, participatory approach would be taken particularly for implementing
  component 1, to ensure that producer groups and MSMEs are engaged equitably and to prevent elite
  capture (PAD, para 69).

  The RF design was appropriate to measure achievement of the project objectives, monitor
  implementation of project activities, and track the links in the ToC. The design included a baseline, mid-
  term and end of the project impact assessments to attribute project outcomes to activities.



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)



  The project was strategically relevant to achieving the objectives of the country and was designed
  incorporating an approach that had been proven elsewhere, informed by lessons learnt from previously
  supported projects in the country, The project preparation involved adequate consultations within the
  country and features a results framework that was able to adequately monitor and test the ToC. Thus,
  Quality-at-entry is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project regularly conducted supervision missions, 12 in all, but some of the missions lacked the full
 spectrum of skills necessary to provide technical support (ICR, para 57).

 The ICR offers several examples of the World Bank team taking measures in response to implementation
 challenges that arose: i) recognizing that the implementing organization did not have the capacity to
 effectively support productive alliances, a firm was hired to help with PAs (para 44), ii) because the
 beneficiaries were not able to contribute to matching grants while they were undergoing hardships imposed
 by COVID, the team agreed to lower their share (para 46); the team responded to the government’s
 request for additional resources to support producers and MSMEs with matching grants.

 However, leadership by six different TTLs between 2017 and 2021 affected the quality of implementation
 support given by the Bank team.

 Although the World Bank team was responsive, addressing issues as they emerged, quality of the support
 it provided was under par, primarily because of frequent changes in leadership, which contributed to
 inefficiencies in procurement. The quality of supervision is, therefore, rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Overall: The World Bank team designed a project that would help in achieving the objectives of the project,
 with components that had proven to be effective in the country and elsewhere, accompanied by an M&E
 that could adequately monitor implementation and test the ToC employed by the project. The team was
 reasonably responsive in identifying problems and taking appropriate measures, but the support was not
 always timely and backed by the required expertise. The Overall Bank Performance is, therefore, rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)




a. M&E Design
 Two measurable indicators adequately captured the clearly specified objectives of increasing productivity,
 and the volume of raw material and processed goods marketed by the beneficiaries.

 The RF was suitable to monitor implementation and to track the links in the Theory of Change that
 postulated that direct technical support to individuals and MSMEs, combined with improvements in
 infrastructure and improved capabilities in the government to supply inputs, would enable them to increase
 yields and increase the volume they market. Of the 10 intermediate level indicators, eight were output
 indicators that measured the execution of project activities. One of them measured the level of adoption of
 technologies among producers, an intermediate outcome. The remaining one measured the level of
 satisfaction with services provided by the project. The RF could have included an indicator that captured
 the changes in the area cultivated by the beneficiaries, often a key response of producers that influences
 the total production in addition to changes in yields; this response of beneficiaries was, however, captured
 by the impact study.

 The RF design included a baseline, mid-term and end of the project impact assessment.



b. M&E Implementation
  Qualified staff at national and departmental levels implemented the M&E as planned (ICR, para 49).

  Interconnected M&E and financial management software enabled them to monitor activities in the annual
  work plan and budget, monitor indicators and create nominal directory of project beneficiaries and
  rehabilitated infrastructure.

  An impact study was conducted that compared with and without situation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Many decisions were made using the M&E data: revisions to end of project targets, reallocation of credit
  proceeds toward matching grants, and the design of impact survey.

  Summary: The M&E design appropriately measured the outcomes of the project and tracked the project
  activities to test the links the ToC supported by baseline and end of the project impact studies. The M&E
  was implemented as designed with a software that linked it to financial management. The project used
  the information generated in making critical decisions. M&E quality of this project is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CG-CAP (P159979)



a. Safeguards
  Environmental

  The project classified as Category B triggered four environmental safeguards policies: Environmental
  Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), and
  Forests (OP/BP 4.36). The World Bank implemented and disclosed nationwide environmental safeguards
  instruments, such as Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan,
  and an Environmental and Social Monitoring Manual. The project completed Environmental and Social
  Impact Assessments (ESIAs) of the business plans and identified mitigation measures. Environmental and
  Social Impact Assessments were also prepared for feeder roads and other infrastructures built by the
  project. At closing, the project’s environmental performance was rated Satisfactory.

  Social

  The project triggered the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12), Indigenous People’s Policy
  (OP/BP 4.10) and Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11). The World Bank prepared social
  safeguards instruments, such as Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Planning
  Framework, and Cultural Heritage Management Framework and ensured compliance with the policies. The
  RPF provisions were implemented to address resettlement issues. Safeguards reports were regularly
  shared with the Bank and a final report on the project's environmental and social performance was made
  available at project closure. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was also established. During
  implementation, 72 complaints that were raised were resolved satisfactorily and closed. At closing, the
  project’s social safeguard performance was rated Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project executed 566 contracts, but with challenges in using Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP). Although the project staff were trained in its use in 2018, they took many months to
  familiarize themselves with this new tool, leading to significant delays in contract processing. At closing,
  there were 150 fully executed and closed contracts that were not updated in STEP; they were
  subsequently updated during the grace period. The procurement performance was moderately satisfactory.

  Financial Management (FM)

  In the initial stages of the project, the financial management system used (“SUCCESS accounting”) was
  found to be inadequate for budget monitoring. It had several shortcomings, including the inability to track
  disbursements in real-time. Subsequently, the project switched to a different software (Tom2pro) which
  produced data for budget monitoring in real-time and for preparing Interim Financial Reports. The other
  shortcoming in the early stages of the project included misuse of the tender documents (Dossier d'Appel
  d'Offres, DAO) account and failure to comply with the intangibility of the opening balance sheet (accounts
  of the end of the year closing balance sheet were not identical to the opening balance sheet of the




                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CG-CAP (P159979)



   following financial year). These shortcomings were corrected over time, and the management of the DAO
   account improved significantly – it had a positive balance at closing.

   External audits were conducted on time, with them yielding unqualified opinions, most of the time.
   However, an in-depth fiduciary review performed in 2022-2023 identified about US$187,205 in ineligible
   expenses, which the government agreed to offset.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Introducing new concepts or approaches, even those proven successful elsewhere, require
building local capacity or the adoption of an incremental approach that begins with pilots
(ICR, para 62). Although the project successfully implemented the ‘productive alliances’ approach, it
faced significant challenges early on. These were addressed once an expert and an international
consulting firm were brought in to strengthen beneficiaries’ capacity, improve links between producer
groups and financial institutions, and provide the additional support required for
successful implementation. Piloting with a smaller number of productive alliances would have
facilitated learning and helped build the capacity required for scaling up.

Implementing activities that selectively benefit people, such as matching grants, require
effective communication and outreach to target communities to ensure transparency and
prevent perceptions of exclusion among those who do not receive benefits (ICR, para 63).
Impact evaluation of the project found some level of dissatisfaction (feeling of being excluded)
among community members who did not benefit from the matching grants, despite the projects’
efforts to be inclusive and transparent. Effective communication campaigns conveying information
about the matching grants, including eligibility criteria, funding guidelines, and overall resource

                                                                                                  Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CG-CAP (P159979)



availability, as well as providing feedback to all applicants (including those not selected) could have
helped.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report comprehensively covers the rationale for the project, its implementation, the outcomes observed
and, to a limited extent, its impacts. Using credible evidence from the RF and the impact study and adopting an
analytical approach that builds on the links in the theory of change, the report convincingly argues that project
objectives were met and that it could be attributed to project activities. The report maintains an outcome-
oriented focus, noting the possible contribution the project made to achieving the country’s strategy of
increasing domestic food production (ICR, para 22). The report is also candid in noting the deficiencies in Bank
supervision and risks to sustaining the project’s outcomes. The writing is clear and crisp, and the lessons drawn
from the project experience would be widely relevant.

There were some shortcomings. Above all, the ICR does not provide details from the baseline survey or the
impact study, which compared outcomes between project beneficiaries and a control group, limiting the
evidence for attributing outcomes directly to project activities. The report could have identified appropriate
critical assumptions in the theory of change, particularly those related to outcomes from productive alliances
and matching grant and elaborated on whether they were met in discussing the efficacy.

Summary: The Quality of ICR is rated Substantial, as it presents a comprehensive narrative based on credible
information, employs sound methodologies, and is communicated clearly, with only minor deficiencies.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
