     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



                                                                                Report Number : ICRR0024323

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P159995                                   Accelerate Higher Education Development

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sri Lanka                                 Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87430,IDA-60260                      30-Jun-2023                                         98,621,323.47

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 12-May-2017                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        98,621,957.14                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Livia Maria Angelica       Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)
 Benavides Matarazzo




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) was “to increase enrollment in Priority Disciplines, improve the
   quality of degree programs and promote research and innovation in the higher education sector” (Loan
   Agreement, July 17, 2017, p. 5). Priority Disciplines were defined as science, technology, engineering and
   mathematics (STEM) subjects in the higher education curricula.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)




b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Accelerating Higher Education Expansion and Development (AHEAD) Operation aimed at
   contributing to the implementation of Sri Lanka’s Higher Education Development Strategy (HEDS). The
   goal of the HEDS program was to “develop the higher education system to produce an educated and
   knowledgeable labor force with the human capital required to accelerate economic development” (PAD p.
   16). The program had three results areas which included: (i) increase enrollment in higher education
   programs of strategic importance for economic development, (ii) improving the quality of higher education
   programs, and (iii) creating a culture of research and innovation in universities.

   The operation included a Program for Results (PforR) component and an Investment Project Financing
   (IPF) component, as described below.

   Program (PforR) Component (Appraisal: USD 2,056 million, of which USD 60 million IBRD, USD 33
   million IDA, USD 1,963 million Borrower. Actual: USD 2,000.8 million, of which USD 60 million IBRD, USD
   33.8 million IDA, USD 1907 million Borrower).

   Program Scope and Boundaries. The Program was designed to support all three results areas of the
   HEDS program, except for (i) major infrastructure projects that were already being financed by other
   development agencies, (ii) tertiary education institutes outside of the Ministry of Higher Education and
   Highways (MHEH), (iii) enrollment of students in overseas universities, and (iv) financing of research
   institutes outside of the universities and technical institutes under MHEH. The Program had three results
   areas that reflected those of the HEDS:

   Results Area 1: Increasing Enrollment in Higher Education in Priority Disciplines for Economic
   Development. This results area aimed to increase enrollments in higher education programs in STEM
   through supply and demand-side initiatives. Increasing the number of STEM graduates was identified as
   being of strategic importance for economic development. Existing as well as new STEM faculties would be
   supported in state universities as well as in Advanced Technological Institutes (ATIs). Virtual learning
   programs would be supported, including Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs). Existing External Degree
   Programs (EDPs) would be adapted and improved. In addition, enrollment in non-state Higher Education
   Institutions (HEIs) would be promoted through a student loan scheme for qualified students. This results
   area would also support the regular updates of the HEDS every two years, fine tuning it based on progress
   monitoring as well as other assessments.

   Results Area 2: Improving the Quality of Higher Education. The objective was to support the
   development of well-qualified students who were prepared for the world of work and for wider civic and
   social life. This result area would take three strategic approaches to address the stated goal. First, a system
   of competitive grants would be established to support innovative approaches to support Enriching,

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



  Learning, Teaching and Assessment (ELTA) and English Language skills Enhancement (ELSE) initiatives.
  The expectation was that these grants would enable universities to introduce modern curriculum
  approaches, teaching-learning methods, and assessment approaches, as well as fostering work placements
  and enhance students’ English language skills. Second, the Program would provide scholarships to support
  professional development of university academics to obtain PhD qualifications and Sri Lanka Institute of
  Advanced Technological Education (SLIATE) academic staff to obtain master’s degrees and professional
  doctorates. Third, Quality Assurance (QA) reviews would be undertaken for all 15 public universities,
  including quality of teaching and learning inputs, as well as research, innovation, and community
  engagement. The overall QA system would be strengthened, as well.

  Results Area 3: Promoting Research, Development and Innovation. This results area intended to
  develop a culture of research and development, innovation and commercialization (RDIC) in universities.
  The Program would support development-oriented research (DOR) in universities and non-state HEIs in
  STEM subjects, Humanities Education, Management and Social Sciences (HEMS) subjects, and STEM-
  HEMS interdisciplinary research. In addition, research and innovation commercialization (RIC) programs
  would be developed and implemented for those universities that would be carrying out industry and service-
  relevant research. Finally, University-Business Linkage (UBL) offices would be implemented in universities
  to assist academics in increasing collaboration with businesses.

  Program Operations and Technical Support (POTS) IPF Component (Appraisal: USD 7 million IBRD.
  Actual: USD 4.7 million). This component would provide technical assistance, as well as academic and
  operational support for the implementation of the program at all levels, including MHEH and academic
  institutions.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  At appraisal, the overall cost of the operation was estimated to be USD 2,063 million, of which USD 100
  million was financed through an IBRD loan of 67 million and an IDA credit of SDR 24.4 million (USD 33
  million equivalent). The operation had two components. The Program component used the PforR instrument
  and was estimated at a total cost of USD 2,056 million, including USD 60 million from the IBRD loan and the
  full IDA credit, that is a total of World Bank financing of USD 93 million. Disbursements would be against the
  achievement of Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) under each Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI). As
  per the Loan Agreement (p. 19), each DLI had a maximum amount allocated for disbursement earmarked
  from either the loan or the credit. The IPF component was fully financed by the loan at an estimated cost of
  USD 7 million.



  The operation was approved on May 12, 2017, and became effective on August 17, 2017. The mid-term
  review was carried out on October 22, 2020. The original closing date was set for June 30, 2023, but was
  later extended by six months to December 31, 2023.

  The operation was formally restructured once, on July 6, 2023 (as per an amendment letter to the client
  dated June 28, 2023, and countersigned on June 30,2023). The restructuring responded to the impact from
  the COVID-19 pandemic and the economic crisis in Sri Lanka during 2022, both of which caused
  implementation delays and affected the timely implementation of activities under one of the DLIs. As a
  result, the operation was extended by six months. In addition, the final DLR under DLI 5 was dropped and a

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



   new DLI (DLI 7) was included with one DLR. The allocation of USD 4 million under said DLR was
   reallocated to the new.

   At closing, the total actual expenditures for this operation was USD 2,004.7 million. The IDA financing was
   fully disbursed for USD 33.8 million (as per the SDR exchange rate). In the case of the IBRD loan, USD
   64.8 million were disbursed, that is 97 percent of the loan.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives    New




  Rationale
  Country and Sector Context. At the time of appraisal, Sri Lanka had achieved significant progress in
  several human development indicators. Primary education completion rate was over 95 percent, secondary
  education completion rate was 86 percent (89 percent for girls and 83 percent for boys), literacy rate was 93
  percent. On the other hand, higher education gross enrollment rates were 21 percent, well below other
  comparator countries (44 percent). Of those students in higher education, about 50 percent were enrolled in
  external degree programs (EDPs) where they would register and take examinations in a university, but did
  not follow classes and did not otherwise receive academic support. In the case of STEM programs, Sri Lanka
  ranked 79th out of 90 countries with a 17 percent enrollment rate (Sri Lanka Education Sector Assessment,
  World Bank, 2017).

  In order to improve the higher education sector, a number of challenges needed to be addressed. Qualified
  academic staff were scarce, with less than 50 percent having PhDs. Teaching and learning practices used
  traditional methods with teacher-centered pedagogy and passive student learning, falling behind international
  trends in active learning and outcome-based education. Students did not receive adequate behavioral skills
  development support to facilitate adequate performance in the workplace. Research and innovation
  initiatives at the university level were scarce, limiting their contribution to economic and social development in
  the country. Finally, the quality assurance and accreditation system was fragmented and needed upgrading,
  including the implementation of Internal Quality Assurance Units within the universities. The HEDS aimed to
  address these challenges so as to improve higher education enrollment and quality, particularly in STEM
  programs, in order to foster future economic growth.

  Bank Strategy. The Program design was well aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
  the period FY17-20 (Report No. 104606-LK), specifically with Pillar 2: Promoting Inclusion and Opportunities
  for All. Objective 2.1 Strengthening education and training systems aimed at contributing to the development
  of the higher education sector with a focus on deepening the relevance of and improving the course curricula
  and offerings in STEM. At closing, the Program design was relevant to the CPF for FY24-27 (Report No.
  182326-LK) which, under Objective 4: Sustain and Strengthen Health, Education and Social Protection
  systems, aimed to strengthen systems and address learning losses in higher education. The CPF
  emphasized the need to sustain education service delivery to prevent further human capital losses and equip
  individuals to cope with future shocks.




                                                                                                      Page 4 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



                       Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank had ample prior experience in the higher education sector.
                       The first operation Improving Relevance and Quality of Undergraduate Education (P050741) was
                       implemented between June 2003 and June 2010 and aimed to enhance institutional capacities conducive to
                       greater relevance and quality in undergraduate education. A subsequent project, the Higher Education for
                       the Twenty-First Century (HETC) project (P113402) was implemented between May 2010 and June 2016
                       and aimed to enhance the capacity of the Recipient’s higher education system, institutions and human
                       resources to deliver quality higher education services in line with equitable social and economic development
                       needs. The first project developed quality assurance protocols and processes and introduced competitive
                       funding for undergraduate programs. The second project widened the agenda, now covering undergraduate
                       and postgraduate education and included support to SLIATE and ATIs. This project also contributed to the
                       development of the qualification framework and the update of the quality assurance system. In addition, the
                       project launched support programs on a pilot basis on the development of skills for the workplace and for
                       postgraduate research and commercialization of innovations. The AHEAD Program built on the lessons and
                       achievements of the prior two projects and widened the scope by supporting the country’s higher education
                       strategy, putting a focus on STEM programs and research and innovation.

                       Country Capacity and Adequacy of PforR Instrument. This was the first PforR operation in the Sri Lanka
                       portfolio. It was deemed to be the appropriate instrument given that it aimed to support strategic
                       interventions within an overall Government program with a focus on outcomes. The integrated fiduciary
                       systems assessment (IFSA) showed that, subject to the implementation of an action plan to strengthen the
                       country FM system, there was reasonable assurance that funds would be used for their intended purpose.
                       The action plan identified specific risks and provided mitigation measures for them. The IPF component
                       provided the required technical assistance and resources to implement this action plan and develop capacity
                       throughout the system, as well as financing the verification of results.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Higher Education Institutions (HEI) STEM degree programs increase intake.



                Rationale
                At the time of appraisal, enrollment in STEM degree programs was low compared with other peer countries.
                The government prioritized increasing enrollment in these programs as they were critical for future economic
                growth through higher-value-added industries and services. This DLI measured the intake of first-year
                students enrolled in STEM programs in public and private universities only and was directly linked to PDO 1.
                The DLI was split into three DLRs to be measured throughout program implementation whereby increases in



                                                                                                                       Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



enrollment were measured. First year intake in SLIATE institutions did not have an equivalent DLI but was
monitored through an IRI.



Rating
High

DLI 2
DLI
Higher Education Development Strategy (HEDS) implemented and regularly updated.


Rationale
The Program aimed to support the continuous strategic development of the higher education sector, with the
HEDS as the key instrument to achieve this purpose. The HEDS would be updated every two years, and it
would be used to monitor progress in implementing targets. The DLI had two DLRs that measured these
updates.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
Faculty-level systems for Enriching Learning, Teaching, and Assessment (ELTA) and English Language Skills
Enhancement (ELSE) through competitive grants developed and outcomes achieved for arts management, and
science degree programs.

Rationale
The teaching-learning system in Sri Lanka in HEIs was outdated, using teacher-centered instruction. This DLI
aimed to foster university faculties to introduce modern curriculum approaches and delivery modes, especially
Outcome-Based Education (OBE) and Learner-Centered Teaching (LCT), promote new assessment
approaches, expand the use of digital and blended learning, improve English language skills of students,
facilitate international linkages with reputed overseas universities, promote industry placements for students,
and facilitate staff exchange programs between universities and private firms. This DLI incentivized demand-
side grants provided to university faculties through multistage peer review of proposals, in accordance with
detailed guidelines.



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



Department-level systems for Enriching Learning, Teaching, and Assessment (ELTA) and English Language
Skills Enhancement (ELSE) through competitive grants developed and outcomes achieved for arts,
management, and science degree programs.

Rationale
In a similar fashion to DLI 3, this DLI supported ELTA and ELSE initiatives at the department-level. Note that
a department is a subdivision of a faculty (for example, a Chemistry department in a Science faculty).
Separating these under two separate DLIs allowed strengthening of each within the scope of their specific
functions and responsibilities.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
PhD and master’s degrees and professional doctorates completed by university, non-state HEIs and SLIATE
academic staff.

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, there was a scarcity of qualified academic staff in HEIs, affecting the quality of
education and the development of research, innovation and postgraduate education programs. This DLI
would support the provision of PhD scholarships for academic staff members of state universities and soft
loans to non-state HEIs academics. The PhD programs would be provided by foreign universities directly or
jointly with local universities. The DLI would also support scholarships for professionally oriented doctoral
programs and master’s programs for academics from SLIATE.



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
University-level systems for Research and Development, Innovation and Commercialization (RDIC) programs
developed and outcomes achieved.

Rationale
Research and innovation were limited in Sri Lana at the time of appraisal. Research was seen as vital to
ensure that universities stayed up to date in their disciplines and to contribute to economic and social
development. This DLI provided incentives for a demand-based competitive grant program that would
promote performance-based research for STEM and HEMS subjects.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 17
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



                  High

                  DLI 7
                  DLI
                  Increased quality assurance of the university system.

                  Rationale
                  This DLI was created as part of the restructuring of July 2023. The COVID-19 Pandemic had caused lengthy
                  closure of HEIs in Sri Lanka and abroad causing those students undertaking their PhD studies to be delayed
                  by 6 to 12 months such that the last DLR under DLI 5 was dropped. This DLI supported the completion of the
                  QA review of all universities and was aligned with the PDO indicator 3. While there had been progress prior to
                  appraisal in the development of a QA system, it was still fragmented. This DLI supported the development
                  and implementation of a consolidated systematic process of QA reviews under standards described in the
                  University Grants Commission (UGC) Manual for Institutional Review of Sri Lankan Universities and Higher
                  Education Institutions (PAD, p. 61).



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The relevance of the objectives is rated as High given that the program had a strong alignment with country
                  context, government strategy, and World Bank strategy. Relevance of DLIs is also rated as High given that
                  they were well aligned with the objectives and provided realistic incentives for their achievement.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       Increase enrollment in priority disciplines in the higher education sector.

                       Rationale
                       Priority areas under this objective were those related to STEM. The theory of change for this objective stated
                       that the availability of STEM graduates for the labor market would improve through the increase in enrollment

                                                                                                                         Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



in STEM programs in state and non-state HEIs. In turn, this would be achieved by expanding capacity of
STEM programs by increasing the availability of equipment, technology and qualified staff in existing
programs and creating new STEM faculties, departments and programs. This objective also included a cross-
cutting activity involving the strengthening of the planning and management capacity of the higher education
sector through the regular updating of the HEDS.

Outputs

The HEI STEM degree programs increased first-year intake from a baseline of 14,300 students to 22,139
students, exceeding the target of 19,500 students (DLI 1).

The SLIATE STEM degree programs increased first-year intake from a baseline of 2,000 students to 5,357
students slightly exceeding the target of 5,200 students (DLI 2).

The HEADS was implemented and updated every two years, as originally planned.

Outcomes

Enrollment in HEI STEM undergraduate degree programs increased from a baseline of 42,800 students to
69,029 students, exceeding the target of 53,100 students. This was equivalent to a 10 percent increase at the
HEI level in the PforR period as compared to a 5.3 percent increase in the prior five years. At the end of the
program, STEM graduates from universities were 40.2 percent of the total graduating cohort as compared to
31.4 percent in 2016.

Enrollment in SLIATE STEM programs increased from a baseline of 6,000 students to 10,321 students,
exceeding the target of 9,200 students.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of degree programs in the higher education sector.

Rationale
This objective aimed to improve quality of degree programs to ensure that graduates were equipped with
knowledge, competencies, and skills for a stronger contribution to economic development. This would be
achieved through the introduction of modern teaching-learning and assessment methods and better qualified
university and SLIATE academic staff. In addition, a strengthened QA system would provide assurance and
incentives for continuous improvement in the quality of the degree programs. This would be achieved through
the strengthening of the Quality Assurance and Accreditation Council (QAAC), housed in the University
Grants Commission (UGC) and the implementation of the Internal Quality Assurance Units (IQAUs) within the
universities.



                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



Outputs

IQAUs were functioning to specified standards in at least 90 percent of the universities, meeting the end
target, as compared to a baseline where IQAU scorecards had been developed (DLI4).

44 departments awarded ELTA-ELSE grants achieved 80 percent or more of their outcome targets,
exceeding the target of 24 departments. All existing 15 universities were eligible for these grants. Universities
were divided into two tiers, on one hand Tier 1, with 5 well established universities, and Tier 2, with the
remaining newer universities, thus ensuring that weaker universities could also benefit from the grants
program.

40 academics out of the 210 academics from universities and SLIATE who were awarded a scholarship
completed their PhD or Master’s degree by July 2023, below the target of 200 academics (DLI 5). Further to
this, 137 additional academics expected to conclude their degrees during calendar year 2024, with 55 having
completed their degrees by October, 2024 (as per additional information provided by the task team).
Achievement of this DLI was hampered by the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to the lockdown and closing of
universities both in Sri Lanka as well as abroad. In addition, the economic crisis caused a lack of foreign
currency reserves in Sri Lanka resulting in the delay of transfer of funds to PhD students abroad. Given this
context, the last DLR (“At least 200 academics who were awarded the MHEH/UGC scholarships have
completed their PhD or Master’s degrees or professional doctorates”) under this DLI was canceled during the
restructuring of July 2023. The funds under this DLI were transferred to the new DLI 7.

Outcomes

QA reviews were completed and ratings were published for 100 percent of universities, exceeding the target
of 90 percent (DLI 7).

36 faculties that were awarded ELTA-ELSE grants achieved 80 percent of their outcome targets, exceeding
the target of 20 faculties (DLI3).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Promote research and innovation in the higher education sector.

Rationale
This objective aimed to develop a culture of research and development, innovation and commercialization
(RDIC) in universities in support of the development of higher education as a whole. This would be achieved
through the promotion of development-oriented research and of innovations with commercial applications. In
turn, this would be achieved through the implementation of competitive grants and establishing university
business linkage (UBL) offices.



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



  Output

  All UBL offices functioned to specified standards in universities, exceeding the target of 80 percent.
  Standards had been issued by the time of appraisal by the UGC.

  Outcome

  The number of RDIC grants that achieved 80 percent or more of their outcome targets was 91 (out of a total
  of 101 grants), exceeding the target of 48 grants. The outcomes of these grants included publications in peer-
  reviewed journals, conference papers and patent applications (DLI 6).



  Rating
  High




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Objective 1 (Increase enrollment in priority disciplines in the higher education sector) and Objective 3
 (Promote research and innovation in the higher education sector) are rated High as they were fully achieved.
 Objective 2 (Improve the quality of degree programs in the higher education sector) is rated Substantial as it
 was almost fully achieved. The resulting Overall Efficacy rating is High.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

Relevance and Overall Efficacy are rated High resulting in a Highly Satisfactory outcome rating.


    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The Program benefited from strong ownership on the side of the government. The HEDS provided a strong
framework for the Program. Its regular revision and updating made it a live document, ensuring its legitimacy
over time. Since the design was based on ample consultation, it enjoyed the support from a wide stakeholder
base. According to the ICR (p. 15), STEM enrollment in universities are being sustained by the government

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



and the ELTE-ELSE programs have been mainstreamed into the university curricula. A culture of research
and innovation has been established in universities including financial allowances for research and
innovation as part of university benefit schemes.

The MHEH underwent four institutional reforms, whereby the higher education sector was transferred from
one ministry to another, currently in the Ministry of Education. These institutional changes posed a risk to the
operation. However, according to the task team, the operation was protected because most of the
implementation happened at the university and SLIATE level. In addition, the government’s commitment to
higher education remained strong throughout the life of the operation.

The economic crisis of 2022, which led to a debt moratorium, posed a threat to the Program. Procurement
processes slowed down, payments to contractors were delayed, and transfers to PhD students abroad
stopped for a period of time. This context exposed the vulnerability of the higher education sector to
economic crises.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The operation was well embedded in a national program (HEDS) that reflected government priorities in
  the higher education sector. The Program design had a clear results chain. The operation built on the
  prior HETC project that had developed important instruments supporting the implementation of this
  program, namely the QA framework, and pilot experiences in the call for proposals for research and
  innovation. The operation also drew from the lessons learned from the HETC operation, the Education
  Sector Review and international best practices.

  The combination of the PforR and IPF instruments was appropriate. Given that this operation was
  founded on a clear government program, the PforR was well justified. On the other hand, this was the
  first time that such an instrument was being used in the country, so that an IPF component was included
  to provided funding to strengthen the capacity in government counterpart agencies. The Operations
  Manual for both components was prepared prior to launching the operation.

  Implementation arrangements were clear and accountability mechanisms were well defined. The MHEH,
  UGC and SLIATE were responsible for Program implementation at the national level, while universities
  and ATIs would implement at the institutional level. The Operations Management and Support Team
  (OMST) was created to ensure adequate coordination, provide technical assistance, build capacity, and
  carry out monitoring and evaluation of the Program.

  The overall risk assessment for the operation was rated as Substantial, driven by political and
  governance issues, technical design, and fiduciary aspects, of which the first two were rated as
  substantial, the latter one as high. The program design recognized that this operation, being the first
  PforR in the country, would pose a challenge for counterparts to understand its implementation. This risk
  was mitigated by the inclusion of the IPF component. In addition, the fiduciary assessment had identified
  weaknesses in the country’s accounting systems and audit processes, as well as weak procurement and
  financial management capacity in implementing agencies. The environmental and social regulatory


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



  framework was found to be consistent with World Bank policies, but compliance was weak. A Program
  Action Plan (PAP) was prepared to address fiduciary and safeguards risks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 There was continuity in the World Bank team from preparation to supervision of the operation. The team
 was, in part, based in the country office, thus facilitating the coordination with the client. There was an
 appropriate skill mix allowing for adequate technical and operational support to the client.

 Initially, there were two setbacks in the early implementation of the project. There were delays in
 establishing the OMST, both with hiring core staff and procuring goods and services to make it a functional
 office. The OMST was fully functional (a withdrawal condition under the Loan Agreement) eight months
 after signing. The results-based financing modality posed implementation challenges both with the MHEH
 and the Ministry of Finance, an issue that resurfaced when there were staff changes. The Bank team
 continuously engaged and supported counterparts to familiarize them with the instrument. The Bank team
 responded proactively to the adjustments required due to external shocks from the COVID-19 pandemic
 and the economic crisis by restructuring the Program accordingly.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The operation had a clear results framework. The indicators used were the same as those in the HEDS.
 The results framework included a year-by-year monitoring plan of the outcome and intermediate indicators
 as well as the DLIs. Verification of the achievement of DLIs was to be conducted by a third-party
 verification agency, commissioned by the OMST, prior to their submission to the World Bank.

 M&E was under the overall responsibility of the MHEH with the UGC and SLIATE being responsible for
 monitoring universities and ATIs, respectively. The existing monitoring systems were to be used to collect
 and monitor STEM enrollment data. Therefore, the M&E system was well embedded institutionally. OMST
 was responsible for coordination of the monitoring process, and for the collection of information of data on
 all other activities. OMST was to rely on branch Operations Technical Secretariats (OTSs) in each
 university to assist with monitoring. SLIATE was tasked to monitor each ATI and report to OMST.


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)




b. M&E Implementation
  M&E was carried out as designed throughout the operation implementation period. The OMST used
  several monitoring and reporting systems and collected data and information biannually, sharing the
  monitoring report with the Steering Committee and the World Bank task team. Occasionally, there were
  delays in data reporting due to multiple implementing agencies involved. DLIs were verified by an
  independent agency as designed.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E information was continuously used to monitor progress towards the achievement of Program
  objectives and to provide feedback for any necessary adjustments as well as to trigger disbursements
  based on the achievement of DLIs. M&E reports were also used during missions to assess progress and
  to determine whether corrective measures should be implemented. This review process led to the
  restructuring of the operation in July 2023.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Since the operation included two lending instruments, both the PforR and IPF were assessed under the
   corresponding Bank policies. An Environmental and Social Safeguards Assessment (ESSA) was carried out
   for the PforR. The ESSA concluded that the fundamental environmental and social legal regulatory structure
   was reasonably well developed and articulated. On the other hand, some weaknesses were identified in the
   application, supervision and compliance with the regulatory framework. The IPF component of the operation
   was rated as Category C, since funding would mainly go to services and equipment for the staff of the
   OMST and OTS offices.

   The PAP, which addressed a list of operational actions, included activities to be performed by the
   implementation agencies, such as the appointment of environmental and social focal points, the
   implementation of annual training and capacity building on environmental and social management, and
   carrying out monitoring of safeguards compliance in the universities. Except for some initial delays, the PAP
   actions were complied with, and no major safeguards issue arose. The OMST regularly worked with
   contractors to ensure that Ministry of Health guidelines were followed with respect to workers’ health and
   safety. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was operational. The PforR maintained a satisfactory
   rating throughout the implementation period.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   In accordance with World Bank policy for PforR operations, an IFSA was carried out for the Program to
   determine whether the fiduciary systems provide reasonable assurance that the Program expenditures
   would be used appropriately to achieve the intended objectives. The IFSA assessed the MHEH, UGC, a
   sample of 5 out of the 15 beneficiary universities, and SLIATE/ATI (ATIs were not financially autonomous
   from SLIATE). Based on this assessment, the fiduciary risk was rated High at appraisal due to outdated
   and non-uniform accounting systems used at the university level, weak internal and external audit
   processes, weak procurement and financial management capacity, and high turnover of relevant staff.

   Mitigation measures were included in the PAP, and financing for their implementation of this plan was
   provisioned through the IPF POTS component. The results framework also included two intermediate
   results indicators linked to financial management of the Program, IRI 5 (aiming to ensure that the cash
   released by Treasury, for the purposes of the Program, was channeled through the regular treasury
   system) and IRI 6 (which aimed to have the FY20 audit reports for all 17 implementation agencies made
   available within 9 months of the end of the financial year). By project closing, all PAP actions and financial
   management IRIs were achieved. Financial management performance was satisfactory throughout most of
   the implementation period, except for a few instances where rating was downgraded because of delayed
   mitigation of audit observations. Internal controls were considered adequate, audit reports and financial
   monitoring reports were submitted on time, and their quality was overall satisfactory. The external auditor
   had issued unqualified opinions except for audit observations which were rectified by OMST. Fiduciary
   systems rating was Moderately Satisfactory at closing.

   Procurement activities under the IPF component were rated Moderately Satisfactory during the initial
   period of the project due to delays resulting from a lack of understanding of the World Bank procurement
   rules and shortage of procurement staff at the OMST. These issues were later resolved, and ratings were
   upgraded to a Satisfactory rating.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None



d. Other
   N/A



10. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



Quality of M&E                   High                  High

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


11. Lessons

The ICR provided important lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons restated
by IEG Review:

The combination of the two instruments, PforR and IPF, in one operation can facilitate the
achievement of results. The PforR has the advantage of focusing on results and aligns the multiple
stakeholders towards a common objective. In this case, it was the first time that the instrument was
being implemented in Sri Lanka. The IPF provided targeted financing to ensure that activities
supporting the implementation of the PforR were carried out as planned. In particular, the IPF
facilitated hiring staff to implement and monitor the operation, as well as supporting the
strengthening of the fiduciary and safeguards aspects that were identified as weak during
preparation.

Engaging appropriate staff in the design and management of the operation can significantly
contribute to successful implementation. In this case, academics experts were drawn from
universities and the University Grants Commission, specialized in the fields of STEM, humanities,
and social sciences. Their involvement contributed to high quality technical inputs into the design
and facilitated the dialogue during implementation with academic institutions.

Bottom-up planning generates ownership of activities and reforms. This operation used the results of
pilots implemented in the prior Higher Education for the Twenty-First Century project, which
introduced funding of initiatives coming from academic institutions through competitive grants. This
approach resulted in greater ownership and ensured institutionalization and sustainability over time.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written and provided a good analysis of a very complex Program. The document provided a
good description of the government program. The theory of change was adequate. The ICR was results-
oriented and candid. The quality of evidence was high and the ICR also provided additional information on
results, beyond the results matrix. The quality of analysis was also high and with sufficient interrogation of the
evidence. The lessons were specific and were derived from the Program experience. It was internally
consistent and aligned with the guidelines. Its narrative was clear, well focused, and very concise, with a main
text of 15 pages. On a minor note, the ICR could have provided an explanation of the multiple reforms at the



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Accelerate Higher Education Development (P159995)



ministry level that led the higher education sector to be moved several times until it became part of the overall
Ministry of Education.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 17
