     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024263

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P151155                                   CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                  Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61400                                 31-Dec-2023                                        25,857,458.05

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Nov-2017                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           31,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                            27,967,850.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                        25,857,458.05                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Sarosh Sattar              Judyth L. Twigg              Kandi Magendo                 IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Cameroon – Strengthening Public Sector Effectiveness and Statistical Capacity Project
   (SPSESCP) Financing Agreement (FA) dated May 16, 2019 (p. 5), the Project Development Objective (PDO)
   was:

   To improve the effectiveness of public spending in selected sectors and strengthen the statistics
   system for evidence-based decision making.


                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



   The PDO was not revised under the first or second restructuring of the project. Similarly, the essence of the
   PDO indicators did not change, though they were revised to provide greater specificity. Consequently, a split
   rating is not necessary.

   For this review, the PDO has been parsed as follows:

         PDO1: To improve the effectiveness of public spending in selected sectors.
         PDO2: To strengthen the statistics system for evidence-based decision making,

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 20) states that the project would target (a) public investment
   management in the context of the implementation of the 2007 Public Financial Management (PFM) Act and
   the procurement reform and (b) the national statistical system.

   The PAD (p. 20) stated that the intended beneficiaries were government officials, policy makers, and the
   citizens of Cameroon. These groups would benefit from better quality services, access to information from
   national statistics, and public finance (i.e., budget, spending, and investment budget execution). The PAD
   further identified the specific beneficiaries as Ministry of Finance (MINFI), Technical Committee Supervising
   the State Own Enterprises, Ministry of Civil Service, Ministry of Economy, Planning, and Regional
   Development (MINEPAT), Public Investment Budget Execution Monitoring Committees, Ministry of Public
   Contracts (MINMAP), Public Procurement Regulatory Agency, Ministry of Basic Education (MINEDUB),
   Ministry of Health (MINSANTE), National Institute of Statistics, and Census Bureau.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had five components as follows:

   Component 1: Consolidating the program budgeting reform in selected sectors (PAD, p. 21). (Cost at
   approval: US$6.0 million. Revised cost after restructuring: US$5.5 million. Actual amount disbursed: US$5.5
   million.) This component aimed to ensure the implementation of program budgets by (i) consolidating the
   budget reform process at the MINFI and MINEPAT and (ii) addressing PFM issues that hindered the
   implementation of program budgets. There were four subcomponents:

         Strengthening program budgeting to increase capacity in the ministries of education and health to
          adopt a program-based approach by supporting their budget departments in strategic resource
          allocation.
         Enhancing programs' implementation and monitoring systems in the ministries of health and
          education and capacity to implement and monitor their programs.
         Deploying a new payroll management system and introducing the implementation of an integrated
          human resources system in the ministries of health and education.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



      Strengthening state-owned enterprise (SOE) portfolio management by supporting the government’s
       efforts to strengthen corporate governance, oversight, and management.

Component 2: Improving the quality of public investment in selected sectors. (Cost at approval:
US$5.5 million. Revised cost after restructuring: US$5.0 million. Actual amount disbursed: US$5.0
million.) This component aimed to address selected key bottlenecks in programming, budgeting, execution,
and monitoring processes of public investment activities. There were three subcomponents:

      Strengthening public investment budget programming and budgeting to improve the public
       investment budget preparation process.
      Enhancing public investment budget execution monitoring by improving data consolidation from
       subnational levels, disseminating public investment budget data, and promoting citizen monitoring.
      Strengthening the management of public investment projects financed by international and bilateral
       donors by supporting the development of regulations and guidelines to improve the seamless
       implementation of these projects and building capacity of MINEPAT in project implementation.

Component 3. Strengthening the performance of the public procurement system and developing
capacity for better service delivery. (Cost at approval: US$7.0 million. Revised cost after restructuring:
US$6.0 million. Actual amount disbursed: US$6.0 million.) This component focused on supporting improved
efficiency, effectiveness, and value for money in the public procurement process. There were four
subcomponents:

      Strengthening the competencies of public officials responsible for public procurement by providing
       training to create a critical mass of procurement officials.
      Enhancing the capacity of organizations in the procurement system to carry out their functions by
       providing resources such as equipment, manuals, forms, and checklists to guide staff in carrying out
       public procurement.
      Streamlining the procurement regulatory framework by providing technical assistance for its design
      Improving management and monitoring of procurement performance by supporting the introduction
       of a performance contracting approach and a mechanism to collect and use data from three
       ministries.

Component 4. Improving the use of statistics for policy making. (Cost at approval: US$9.0 million.
Revised cost after restructuring: US$11 million. Actual amount disbursed: US$11.0 million.) The component
focused on supporting the production and dissemination of poverty and economic data. It had three
subcomponents:

      Improving production of poverty-related data by improving methodology and support to data
       collection, analysis of the population census, poverty mapping, and design of a labor statistics
       production system.
      Strengthening the national accounts production by providing technical assistance to improve the
       methodology for quarterly national accounts estimation, establishing a methodology and baseline to
       capture regional cross-border trade, and creating an economic simulation tool for MINEPAT.
      Enhancing statistical data dissemination and use by the government to improve policy making and
       implementation by supporting improvements in archiving procedures and systems, data



                                                                                               Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



         dissemination activities, and better physical conditions in the statistics headquarters and regional
         offices.

Component 5: Project coordination. (Cost at approval: US$3.5 million. Revised cost after restructuring:
US$3.5 million. Actual amount disbursed: US$3.5 million) The two subcomponents were:

      Management support
      Just-in-time technical assistance

Significant changes during implementation

Restructuring No. 1: A first restructuring was approved on July 14, 2022, to improve project
implementation after the mid-term review (MTR). The specific objectives of the restructuring were to: (i)
streamline and select priority interventions most directly linked to the achievement of targeted results; (ii)
revise the project Results Framework (RF) to ensure indicators were clear and measurable and remained in
the sphere of influence of the project, and to strengthen the links between activities and results sought; (iii)
identify key gaps in terms of technical interventions to achieve the PDO; and (iv) reallocate resources to
Component 4 to address financing gaps (Restructuring Paper, 2022, para. 7).

The PDO, the number of components, and the overall budget of the project remained the same. Specific
changes undertaken were:

      Rewording of Component 1. The revised wording was “Consolidating the program budgeting reform
         and improving the management of public funds.”
        Subcomponent 1.3 “Deploying new payroll management” was dropped.
        Activities under Subcomponent 2.3 were merged with Subcomponent 2.2.
        Activities under Subcomponent 3.3 were merged with Subcomponent 3.1.
        Activities under Subcomponent 3.4 were merged with Subcomponent 3.2.
        Five PDO indicators were revised for greater specificity, and one was dropped (see Table 1). This
         led to changes in the RF.
        Nine IRIs were revised, one was dropped, two remain unchanged, and one was added (see Table
         1). This led to changes in the RF.
        Reallocation of funds between components (see Table 2).

TABLE 1: Changes to PDO and IRIs

Original PDO Indicator                        July 2022 Restructured PDO Indicator Status
                                              Variance between the annual budget
Average variance by economic                  allocation and the MTEF projection for
classification between annual budget          the first MTEF year in MINSANTE
                                                                                     Revised and split into 2
allocation and medium-term expenditure
                                                                                     indicators
framework (MTEF) projection in selected       Variance between the annual budget
sectors                                       allocation and the MTEF projection for
                                              the first MTEF year in MINEDUB
Public investment projects in selected                                               Dropped
sectors included in the national budget


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



that fully complied with the new selection
manual
Average time for procurement process of Average procurement time of public
public investment project for MINMAP         contracts subject to MINMAP's prior     Revised
contracts                                    review
Decentralized Public investment execution Public investment execution rate by
rate by December 31 in selected sectors December 31 in selected sectors              Revised
(MINEDUB)                                    (MINEDUB)
Decentralized Public investment execution Public investment execution rate by
rate by December 31 in selected sectors December 31 in selected sectors              Revised
(MINSANTE)                                   (MINSANTE)
Satisfaction of public statistics users from
                                             Satisfaction of public statistics users Revised
public administration
                                             July 2022 Restructured Intermediate
Original Intermediate Results Indicators                                             Status
                                             Results Indicators
Number of program budget and
associated result indicators redesigned
                                                                                     Dropped
(based on the new budget classification)
revised
                                             Annual performance plans prepared on
                                             the basis of the new program format and New
                                             indicators in MINEDUB
                                             Annual performance plans prepared on
                                             the basis of the new program format and New
                                             indicators in MINSANTE
Publication of annual budget and spending Publication of annual budget and
through on-line BOOST database by            spending through on-line BOOST          Revised
January 30                                   database by July 31
Publication of key annual financial and      Publication of audited financial
                                                                                     Revised
performance data of the 10 largest SOEs statements of SOEs
Validation of Public Investment Selection Validation of Public Investment
Manual that include Poverty in selection Selection Manual that include Poverty in Same
criteria                                     selection criteria
Comprehensive budgeted Investment
                                             Public investment projects database
Projects database available online and
                                             available online and updated at least   Revised
updated quarterly within 4 weeks after the
                                             twice a year
end of each quarter
                                             Average procurement time of public
Average for procurement process of public
                                             contracts under MINEDUB's exclusive Revised
investment projects of MINEDUB
                                             competence
                                             Average procurement time of public
Average for procurement process of public
                                             contracts under MINSANTE's exclusive Revised
investment projects of MINSANTE
                                             competence
                                             Procurement staff trained with
Procurement staff trained with
                                             demonstrated competency in              Same
demonstrated competency in procurement
                                             procurement

                                                                                               Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



   Female beneficiary of procurement           Beneficiaries of procurement training
                                                                                        Revised
   training                                    among women
   Interval between two Population Census
                                               4th Population Census mapping revised Revised
   reduced
   Cameroon Household Survey (ECAM 5
                                               ECAM 5 survey revised methodology is
   survey) revised methodology is aligned
                                               aligned with new international standards Same
   with new international standards on
                                               on poverty surveys
   poverty surveys
   Regions for which cross border trade        Regions for which cross border trade
   statistics are produced and taken into      statistics are produced and taken into   Same
   account in National Accounts                account in National Accounts

   Restructuring No. 2: A second restructuring cancelled US$3.0 million of the US$9.4 million undisbursed
   amount prior to the project’s closing date of December 31, 2023. No other changes were made to the
   project.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$31.0 million. After the first restructuring, the project
   commitment remained the same. After the second restructuring, the revised project commitment was
   US$27.97 million. The cancelation of US$3.0 million was made at the government’s request following the
   MTR.

   Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit of $31 million. The total amount disbursed was
   US$25.86 million.

   Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Cameroon did not provide any counterpart funding.

   Dates: The World Bank (WB) approved the project on November 20, 2017, and the project became
   effective on June 27, 2019. The delay in project effectiveness was due to the government’s known lengthy
   timeline for “project maturation and approval” (ICR, para. 73). The MTR was on April 1, 2022. The first
   restructuring was approved on July 12, 2022. The second restructuring was approved on December 29,
   2023. There were no extensions to the project closing date of December 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Cameroon is a lower-middle-income country where 23.0 percent of its population lived in
extreme poverty in 2023, slightly less than 25.7 percent in 2014. The annual gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was 5.1 percent between 2011-2016, though GDP per capita grew by only 2.0 percent
yearly. Cameroon's vision to become an upper-middle-income country by 2035 would require an annual
GDP per capita growth rate of 5.5 percent. Cameroon’s goals have been difficult to achieve because of (i)


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



low rural productivity, particularly in northern regions; (ii) an unfavorable business environment for the
formal and informal private sector; and (iii) fragility and poor governance.

Cameroon faced significant macroeconomic challenges that required fiscal consolidation and structural
reforms. It had pursued a growth strategy centered on public investment, which led to public sector debt
increasing from 17 percent to 33 percent of GDP between 2012 to 2015 and Cameroon being classified at
high risk of debt distress under the IMF-Bank Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA). Furthermore, the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community (CEMAC) – of which Cameroon was the largest
member – was suffering a macroeconomic crisis that led to rapid depletion of foreign exchange reserves
and consequent pressure on the currency peg to the Euro. To preserve the peg, members of CEMAC
undertook fiscal adjustment. Cameroon also pursued greater economic diversification with the support of
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the WB. An IMF Extended Fund Facility was approved in July
2017, under which the Government of Cameroon committed to narrow its fiscal deficit from 6.5 percent of
GDP in 2016 to 1.6 percent of GDP in 2020, through a reduction in capital and recurrent spending, and an
increase in non-oil revenue. The WB's supported a series of three Development Policy Operations, the first
of which would be submitted to the Board in November 2017.

Cameroon had been pursuing public sector reform since 2007, aiming to enhance its PFM system by
adopting CEMAC directives and transitioning from a traditional, input-based budget to a multiyear program
budgeting approach. Despite these efforts, the effectiveness of the reforms had been limited. The
implementation of new budgeting tools faced significant challenges, including poorly formulated
performance indicators, inadequate integration of national statistics, and unclear reporting chains. These
issues hindered timely adjustments and led to inconsistencies between program activities and ministry
missions, with program budgets lacking comprehensiveness. Moreover, poor governance affects
Cameroon's PFM and procurement significantly, reducing the efficiency of public expenditures and
investments.

Consequently, Cameroon's public investment efforts had not substantially improved service delivery,
particularly for disadvantaged groups. The IMF’s 2020 Public Investment Management Assessment (PIMA)
report highlighted a significant efficiency gap in Cameroon's public investment compared to the best-
performing countries. Cameroon's public investment efficiency was notably low, falling between the
minimum and first quartile of low-income countries and Sub-Saharan Africa region. The public investment
preparation process lacked systematic, evidence-based appraisals and economic return assessments,
affecting the selection and prioritization of investments, and ultimately impeding their effectiveness.

WB strategy. The FY17–FY21 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) identified three focus areas aligned
with the Systematic Country Diagnostic. Improving governance was one of the three areas, with objectives
aiming at more efficient public expenditure and service delivery; improved regulation in key sectors; and
increased citizen engagement in service delivery. The project’s objectives aligned effectively with the CPF’s
strategy. By providing targeted support to line ministries in public investment management and program
budgeting, the project aimed to enhance benefits with ongoing sector operations in health and education,
thereby improving procurement processes within the portfolio. The project’s focus on improving the
statistical system aimed to strengthen macroeconomic and poverty analysis, facilitating better design and
monitoring of indicators linked to program budgets. This, in turn, was expected to improve the overall
impact of public spending. Furthermore, the project was strategically aligned with the then-upcoming budget
support operation involving the WB, IMF, French Agency for Development (AFD), African Development
Bank, and European Union, in areas such as public investment management, procurement reforms, civil



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



               service reform, and public finance modernization, ensuring a cohesive approach to advancing these critical
               areas (PAD, p. 18)

               Government strategy. The project's objectives were well-aligned with the Government of Cameroon’s
               Strategy for Growth and Employment 2010-2020 (DSCE), particularly in its focus on macroeconomic and
               budgetary management and state governance. By targeting improvements in PFM, the project supported
               the DSCE’s emphasis on consolidating budgetary discipline and redirecting resources towards growth and
               poverty reduction priorities. The project’s activities, such as supporting program budgeting and enhancing
               procurement processes, were in line with the Public Finance Management Plan’s objectives to introduce
               results-oriented methodologies and strengthen the effectiveness of public services. By addressing specific
               challenges in the health and education sectors, the project also aligned with DSCE’s goals of improving
               service delivery and strategic management, demonstrating its commitment to achieving inclusive and
               sustainable growth.

               Level of ambition of the project. The level of ambition of the project was high. The project addressed
               several complex challenges covering PFM, public investment management, human resource management,
               SOEs, and statistics (ICR, p. 19). In addition, the number of government agencies that were direct
               beneficiaries was high (a total of 11). Adjusting activities and indicators during the project was appropriate.
               The overall relevance of the PDO was Substantial because the project was relevant and aligned to the
               country strategy.




               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the effectiveness of public spending in selected sectors.

                             Rationale
                             The Theory of Change (TOC) identified the overall impacts of the project as improved service delivery,
                             enhanced growth, and poverty reduction. The project had two long-term outcomes: (i) improved effectiveness
                             of public spending (discussed in this section) and (ii) high-quality data available that informs policy. These
                             long-term outcomes combined constituted the PDO of the project, though with greater specificity by referring
                             to the education and health sectors rather than selected sectors. To achieve the first long-term outcome of
                             improved effectiveness of public spending, the short-term outcomes were (i) program-based budgeting in the
                             education and health sectors, (ii) enhanced quality of public investment in the education and health sectors,
                             and (iii) reduction of procurement time.


                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



The ICR included a TOC, though one was absent from the PAD since it was prepared prior the introduction of
the requirement. The ICR’s TOC was incomplete, since it included only outputs, short-term and long-
term outcomes, and impact. It did not include information on activities or inputs. The causal links between
impact and outcomes were logical. While the causal link between outputs and short-term outcomes was
partial, – the outputs were necessary but not sufficient to achieve the short-term outcome of program-based
budgeting. The project activities aimed to improve management and transparency of public finances through
adoption of data management tools, preparation of annual performance plans, elaboration of selection
methodologies, publication of the budget-related information, and improving procurement practices. Though
progress was achieved in several areas, two areas lagged: (i) the finalization of annual performance plans of
the ministries of health and basic education and (ii) efficiency of the procurement process, especially in the
ministry of basic education. Though the proposed outputs were necessary prerequisites to improving public
spending in health and basic education, they did not guarantee achievement of the objective.

Outputs

The 11 outputs from the TOC associated with the first objective were:

    1. Publication of the annual budget and expenditures through an online micro fiscal database (based on
         the WB's “BOOST” program that collects categorized disaggregated fiscal data).
    2.   Drafting of annual performance plans based on the new program format in MINEDUB and
         MINSANTE. These sectors were chosen given their importance for the achievement of development
         outcomes and because of their long-standing partnership with the WB (PAD, p. 20).
    3.   Publication of audited financial statements of SOEs.
    4.   Development of a database to monitor the physical and financial execution of investment projects
         (SISBIP).
    5.   Completion of the public investment selection manual, which includes poverty in the selection criteria.
    6.   New budget manual that has harmonized concepts, improving the quality and timeliness of budget
         documents from ministries to the Budget Commission.
    7.   A reference system (criteria) for the inclusion of projects in the annual borrowing plan.
    8.   Inclusion of a new classification of externally financed (FINEX) project expenditures to more
         accurately capture capital expenditures in the budget law.
    9.   Standardized methodology for evaluating and incentivizing the performance of Project Implementation
         Units (PIUs) within a larger framework for monitoring the performance of investment programs and
         projects.
   10.   Assessment of the Cameroon procurement system using the MAPS (Methodology for Assessing
         Procurement Systems).
   11.   Adoption of the Cameroon Online e-Procurement System (COLEPS) by 15 Ministries, Departments
         and Agencies, including MINSANTE and MINEDUB.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs)

The IRIs from the RF provide the key intermediate results accomplished under the project. These IRIs are
closely linked to the outputs in the TOC.

      IRI1: Annual performance plans prepared on the basis of the new program format and indicators in
         MINEDUB. Baseline: No in 2022. Target: Yes. Actual: No in 2023. Though the annual performance
         plan was drafted, it was not approved nor implemented. (IRI 1: Not achieved).

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)




      IRI2: Annual performance plans prepared on the basis of the new program format and indicators in
         MINSANTE. Baseline: No in 2022. Target: Yes. Actual: No in 2023. Though the annual performance
         plan was drafted, it was not approved nor implemented. (IRI 2: Not achieved).
        IRI3: Publication of annual budget and spending through on-line BOOST database by July 31st.
         Baseline: No in 2017. Target: Yes. Actual: Yes in 2023. (IRI 3: Achieved).
        IRI4: Publication of audited financial statements of SOEs. Baseline: 0 published in 2017. Target: 10
         published. Actual: 12 published in 2023. (IRI 4: Exceeded).
        IRI5: Validation of Public Investment Selection Manual that includes poverty in selection criteria.
         Baseline: No in 2017. Target: Yes. Actual: Yes in 2023. (IRI 5: Achieved).
        IRI6: Public investment projects database available online and updated at least twice a year. Baseline:
         No in 2017. Target: Yes. Actual: Yes in 2023. (IRI 6: Achieved).
        IRI7: Average procurement time of public contracts under MINEDUB's exclusive competence.
         Baseline: 128 days in 2017. Target: 90 days. Actual: 189 days in 2023. (IRI 7: Not achieved).
        IRI8: Average procurement time of public contracts under MINSANTE's exclusive competence.
         Baseline: 128 days in 2017. Target: 90 days. Actual: 86 days in 2023. The project exceeded its target.
         (IRI 8: Exceeded).
        IRI9: Procurement staff trained with demonstrated competency in procurement. Baseline: 52.6 percent
         in 2017. Target: 70 percent. Actual: 76 percent in 2023. The project exceeded its target. (IRI 9:
         Exceeded).
        IRI10: Beneficiaries of procurement training among women. Baseline: 0 percent in 2017. Target: 70
         percent. Actual: 34 percent in 2023. Some progress was made in training women in procurement. (IRI
         10: Not achieved).

The ICR exhibited inconsistencies between the narrative and the RF and adopted some imprecise and/or
unclear measures. Examples of these are:

      Inconsistencies in the assessment of target achievements (i.e., IRIs) between the RF (shown above)
       and the ICR (pp. 13-14): The ICR provides a conflicting assessment on the achievement of IRI3. The
       RF (ICR, p.28) clearly indicates that the target was met. However, in Table 4 (p. 14), the ICR states
       that the publication of the annual budget and spending through BOOST was only partially achieved:
       they were published in 2019, 2020, and 2021 but not in 2022. One possible reason for the confusion is
       the ambiguity of the time period over which the indicator was evaluated and definitions of words such
       as “prepared” in IRI1 and IRI2. The annual performance plans were drafted but not approved or
       implemented, thus not meeting the threshold of what is considered “prepared."
      The wording of IRI10 is unclear, “beneficiaries of procurement training among women.” It is not clear
       whether the goal was for 70 percent of all trainees to be women or that 70 percent of women working
       in procurement should be trained.
      The lack of achievement of one PDO1 indicator (see below) and one IRI related to the MINEDUB
       appears to indicate that the basic education ministry had greater challenges than the health ministry
       (MINSANTE), which successfully achieved its targets. The ICR does not discuss the discrepancy in
       the performance of these two ministries.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired short-term outcomes of (i) program-
based budgeting operational in education and health sectors, (ii) improved effectiveness of public spending,

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



and (iii) reduction in procurement time. Achievement of PDO1 is assessed by the following indicators (ICR, p.
25):

      PDO Indicator 1: Variance between the annual budget allocation and the medium-term expenditure
         framework (MTEF) projection for the first MTEF year (MINSANTE). Baseline: 50 percent in 2017.
         Target: 20 percent. Actual: 0.25 percent in 2023. The project exceeded its target. (PDO Indicator 1:
         Exceeded).
        PDO Indicator 2: Variance between the annual budget allocation and the MTEF projection for the first
         MTEF year (MINEDUB). Baseline: 50 percent in 2017. Target: 20 percent in 2023. Actual: 0.31
         percent in 2023. The project exceeded its target. (PDO Indicator 2: Exceeded).
        PDO Indicator 3: Public investment execution rate by December 31 in selected sectors (MINSANTE).
         Baseline: 52.6 percent in 2017. Target: 75 percent. Actual: 95.1 percent in 2023. The project
         exceeded its target. (PDO Indicator 3: Exceeded).
        PDO Indicator 4: Public investment execution rate by December 31 in selected sectors (MINEDUB).
         Baseline: 50 percent in 2017. Target: 85 percent. Actual: 71.8 percent in 2023. The project partially
         achieved its target. The ICR did not elaborate on the reasons why this outcome was not achieved.
         (PDO Indicator 4: Partially achieved).
        PDO Indicator 5: Average procurement time of public contracts subject to MINMAP's prior review.
         Baseline: 255 days in 2017. Target: 180 days. Actual: 107 days in 2023. The project exceeded its
         target. (PDO Indicator 5: Exceeded).

Though the RF indicates that four of the five PDO1 indicators and six of the ten IRIs were achieved, the ICR
(para. 24) questions the quality and reliability of the data, especially for public investment execution rates.
The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) received the information from government agencies/ministries, but it did
not have processes in place to verify the data. In addition, the bunching of spending just prior to project
closing may have adversely affected data on public investment execution. Consequently, the rating for
Objective 1 is Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen the statistics system for evidence-based decision making.

Rationale
The TOC for this objective identified the long-term outcome as high-quality data available that informs
policies. The short-term outcomes were (i) improved poverty-related statistics and (ii) regular statistics
produced and data disseminated. The causal link between outputs and short- and long-term outcomes was
strong. The project was to improve the ability of the National Institute of Statistics (INS) in the areas of poverty
measurement, national accounts, and population censuses. These three critical sources of information
are essential for helping policymakers understand the national socio-economic situation better and
providing a stronger foundation for evidence-based decision making.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



Outputs

The 5 outputs from the TOC associated with the second objective were:

          Adoption and implementation of a new methodology for poverty measurement
          Technical assistance to the INS on poverty measurement
          Support for data collection on informal cross-border trade completed in all seven border regions
          Related trade statistics integrated into the national accounts and into the balance of trade
          Support to preparatory activities for the implementation of the fourth population and housing census,
           linked to the agricultural census

IRIs

The IRIs from the RF for the second objective were:

        IRI11: 4th Population Census mapping revised. Baseline: No in 2017. Target: Yes in 2023. Actual:
         Yes in 2023. (IRI11: Achieved).
        IRI12: Enquête Camerounaise Auprès des Ménages (Cameroon’s household survey) (ECAM 5)
         survey revised methodology is aligned with new international standards on poverty surveys. Baseline:
         No in 2017. Target: Yes in 2023. Actual: Yes in 2023. (IRI 12: Achieved).
        IRI13: Regions for which cross border trade statistics are produced and taken into account in national
         accounts. Baseline: 0 regions in 2017. Target: 4 regions in 2023. Actual: 7 regions in 2023. The target
         was exceeded. (IRI 13: Exceeded).

The IRIs indicate that the project successfully improved the methodologies for the census and the household
survey. ECAM5 was conducted in 2021, and subsequent analysis yielded poverty estimates. Though steps
had been taken to improve the methodology for the population census, the actual data collection has been
indefinitely delayed due to lack of funding. Of the 10 border regions in Cameroon, 7 regions collected cross-
border trade statistics, which improved the comprehensiveness and quality of national accounts.

Outcomes

The outputs listed above were expected to contribute to the desired short-term outcomes of (i) improved
poverty-related statistics and (ii) regular statistics produced and data disseminated. The long-term outcome is
high quality data available that informs policies. Achievement of PDO2 is assessed by the following indicator
(ICR, p. 27):

        PDO Indicator 6: Satisfaction of public statistics users. Baseline: 0 percent in 2017. Target: 70
           percent in 2023. Actual: 82.3 percent in 2023. (PDO Indicator 6: Exceeded).

This indicator is inadequate for determining progress towards the objective of strengthening the statistics
system for evidence-based decision making. Satisfaction of users at best provides a subjective assessment
by end-users of the data rather than an assessment of whether the statistics system as a whole is stronger.

The project could have focused on identifying an objective way of assessing improvements in the statistical
system and the publication of data in user-friendly form.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



                            Though the target for PDO indicator 6 on user satisfaction was achieved and the 3 IRIs were achieved, PDO2
                            is rated as Modest since the indicator is insufficient to demonstrate the achievement of the objective.




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall project efficacy is rated Modest. The efficacy of PDO1 and PDO2 is rated Modest due to two key
                            issues: the lack of reliable information, which undermined the ability to accurately measure the achievement
                            of PDO1, and the use of an indicator that was inadequate for assessing the achievement of PDO2.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Insufficient evidence


    5. Efficiency
   The appraisal methodology for evaluating the project focused on assessing improvements in Cameroon’s
   public investment management by analyzing benefits, costs, and assumptions. It estimated a net present value
   (NPV) of approximately US$564 million, reflecting the expected gains from enhanced execution rates, reduced
   cost overruns, and increased efficiency. The total project cost was US$31 million, considered reasonable given
   the substantial projected savings from addressing previous inefficiencies. The analysis employed the
   Incremental Capital Output Ratio (ICOR) to estimate gains from reduced non-execution and cost overruns. It
   relied on assumptions that better management would lead to higher execution rates, lower cost overruns, and
   improved efficiency scores, as well as increased transparency and data availability that would enhance financial
   management (FM) and borrowing conditions (PAD, pp. 87-93).

   Data gaps. The ICR was not able to measure well the efficiency of the project due to several critical data gaps.
   First, detailed budget execution rates specific to the basic education and health sectors were lacking, making it
   difficult to assess the financial impact of the project. The available data from the Lois de Reglement were
   insufficiently detailed and disaggregated, preventing robust economic and financial analysis. Additionally, post-
   project closure, data retrieval from the PIU proved challenging, further complicating the task of attributing


                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



development results directly to the project. Consequently, in the ICR, the efficiency analysis was constrained to
estimating financial gains from cross-border trade and economic benefits from increased public
investment, without a complete picture of how the project's investments and interventions impacted the targeted
sectors directly.

Economic efficiency. The ICR attempts to measure (i) the project’s impact on growth through increased public
investment and (ii) the financial benefits of enhancing the use of statistics for policy making. Undertaking this
type of analysis is challenging because of the limitations of data and the difficulty in parsing causality. However,
the ICR undertakes economic analysis that relies on estimated multipliers and assumptions to approximate the
potential growth impact, and financial analysis that relies on the estimating the net present value of additional
revenue collection.

The ICR’s economic analysis quantifies the impact of increased public investment on national output. Based
upon the WB’s Public Finance Review multiplier of 1.1, the project’s contribution to economic growth is
assessed based on scenarios of increased public investment attributable to the project. The project presents
both a conservative and optimistic scenario where 10 percent and 25 percent of the increase in investment is
attributable to the project, respectively. The results are that the internal rate of return ranges from 63 percent to
126 percent. These figures suggest that the project has significant potential to enhance economic growth
through public investment.

The financial analysis of the project component of enhancing the use of statistics for policy making focused on
improving Cameroon’s national statistical system to better capture informal cross-border trade. An INS survey
found that informal trade constitutes about 5 percent of Cameroon’s total trade. By implementing effective
taxation policies for this sector, the government could potentially boost its international trade tax revenue by up
to 5 percent. The analysis projects that over a 10-year period, the net present value of the additional revenue
could range from US$156 million to US$234 million, with an internal rate of return of 79 percent, highlighting the
high profitability and significant financial benefits of capturing these informal trade resources.

Operational efficiency. The duration of the project was from 2017 – 2023, but its effectiveness was from 2019-
2023 (which included the period of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020-2021). The project was restructured twice, and
the amount was decreased from US$31 million to US$28 million in 2023. Total disbursement as a share of the
original allocation was 63 percent on December 30, 2023. By the end of the project’s grace period in June 2024,
83 percent of the original approved allocation, or 92 percent of the revised allocation, was utilized. Thus, during
the grace period, US$6.2 million was disbursed at a much faster rate than at any time during the project.

The appropriateness and timing of the disbursements indicate that operational efficiency was likely lower than
implied by the overall amount of disbursement as a share of the total credit. The ICR refers to possible
questionable use of funds which were or are currently being investigated by the WB. Moreover, there was a
“large number of activities carried out only a few weeks before the closing date, with a high risk of inefficient use
of project funds” (ICR, pp. 21-22). The WB hired an auditor to determine whether the activities were indeed
completed.

The project’s efficiency was impacted by the performance of the PCU. Shortcomings in the areas of FM,
procurement, and M&E adversely affected the PCU’s main fiduciary function. Project implementation was
negatively affected by extended delays in consultant selection and contract execution. There was lack of
oversight of staff and management performance as well as of project performance. Furthermore, despite support




                                                                                                        Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



to FM and procurement, there was significant fiduciary non-compliance that appears to have been long standing
and unresolved; for example, there was a history of ineligible expenses.

It is difficult to capture the full economic impact of the whole project or to fully appreciate the progress made
given the unstable political situation in Cameroon throughout the project's lifetime. Despite the problems with the
project, its implementation yielded some positive outcomes, such as the improvement in PFM, which led
possibly to an increase in public investment and the identification of a new source of government revenue.
Consequently, despite significant shortcomings in implementation efficiency, the overall efficiency of the project
is rated as Modest.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was relevant to government strategy and the WB's strategy for Cameroon. Despite achievement of
most output, intermediate outcome, and outcome targets, efficacy is rated Modest due to the questionable
reliability of the information provided by the government and some misalignment between the objective and the
indicators. Efficiency is also rated as Modest, since the project demonstrated moderate operational efficiency
with concerns of questionable use of funds and only a partial assessment of economic efficiency due to data
limitations. However, if the government sustains the reforms to public spending and levies taxes on informal
trade, the project could be considered good value for money in a fragile country context. The overall Outcome of
the project is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)




The project facilitated some progress that needs to be sustained and regularized outside the context of a
project. Development outcomes could be constrained by the following factors:

Technical risk

      There is a risk that the institutional capacity needed to implement and sustain reforms, as outlined in
       the updated Global Public Finance Management Reform Plan, may not be fully achieved, potentially
       undermining the project's developmental outcomes.
      The challenge of maintaining momentum for reforms, especially given worsening fiscal and debt
       vulnerabilities, could impact the effective implementation of the government's PFM reform strategy
       and related projects.

Financial risk

      The government's fiscal and debt vulnerabilities, exacerbated by a high inflation rate (5.9 percent in
       2024), pose a risk to the sustainability of financial commitments and reform funding.

Social risk

      Though not discussed in the ICR, the increase in violence and social instability may limit the role of
       citizens in monitoring project implementation.

Political risk

      The election cycle may also pose a challenge as it could increase pressure on government spending.

Additional risks not raised in ICR:

      Inadequate training in key areas of FM, procurement, and M&E.
      Lack of public sector accountability, potential misuse of financial resources, and poor execution of
       investments.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The WB's performance in ensuring quality of entry was enhanced by the following:

         The PDO was strategically relevant as it aimed to address persistent governance challenges in
          Cameroon by building on successful reform examples, such as performance-based financing and
          enhanced transparency in the public sector, to drive meaningful changes in governance and
          economic management especially as related to public spending. Despite past setbacks, this
          approach was built on proven successes to foster improved public sector performance and
          accountability.

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



   Government commitment was strong, as the government sought assistance in revitalizing the
      stalled progress of the PFM reform. In 2007, the government took a major step when it passed the
      PFM Organic Law 10, transitioning from a traditional, input-based budget to a multi-year program
      budget effective from 2013. A new Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
      (PEFA) assessment completed in September 2017 set the stage for a PFM reform strategy.
      Additionally, a September 2016 Prime Minister directive outlined key reform areas: finalizing
      CEMAC PFM Directives into law, enhancing the linkage between sector policies and program
      budgeting, improving multiyear budget management, upgrading the accounting framework,
      implementing change management in public administration, and updating the Integrated Financial
      Management Information System.
     The project’s policy and institutional aspects aligned with significant government reforms and
      strategies, such as the 2007 PFM Organic Law and the Growth and Employment Strategy. It built
      on prior technical assistance and policy dialogue, ensuring continuity and building on previous
      achievements. Additionally, the project addressed gaps in institutional coordination and task
      sequencing by integrating feedback from previous assessments and aligning with new PFM
      directives, thereby strengthening its design and implementation framework.
     The project’s financial and economic aspects incorporated lessons from financing and
      successful public sector reforms that had demonstrated tangible improvements in service delivery
      and governance. This approach grounded the project in practical, evidence-based solutions,
      increasing its potential for impactful results.
     The project integrated poverty criteria into the public investment selection manual and sought to
      improve poverty-related data collection and analysis, ensuring that public resources were more
      effectively directed toward poverty reduction. It also included social measures to increase citizen
      engagement, such as publishing budget data in a user-friendly format and stimulating community
      participation, which contributed to greater transparency and accountability. Additionally, the
      project incorporated gender-sensitive aspects by including women in procurement training and
      empowering them in local monitoring committees, fostering more inclusive participation in public
      spending initiatives.
     The project's technical aspects sought to ensure alignment with key regulatory frameworks and
      incorporate lessons from prior WB activities, thereby leveraging both successful strategies and
      addressing previous shortcomings in public sector management.
     The project's fiduciary aspects sought to establish a well-defined structure for FM and
      procurement, including the recruitment of experienced staff and the development of detailed plans
      and strategies. This approach aimed to mitigate substantial fiduciary risks through rigorous
      oversight, training, and regular implementation support, with the expectation of ensuring effective
      management and accountability throughout the project's duration.
     The implementation arrangements involved establishing a well-structured PCU led by an
      experienced project coordinator and staffed with dedicated FM and procurement specialists,
      ensuring effective oversight and fiduciary management. The involvement of key ministries,
      including MINFI, MINEPAT, MINMAP, and INS, with experienced civil servants in managing and
      monitoring components, facilitated efficient execution of technical activities and provided
      performance-based incentives for staff. Additionally, the formation of an Orientation and
      Monitoring Committee enabled regular oversight and prompt resolution of institutional challenges,
      enhancing coordination and accountability.
     The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework relied on a comprehensive "Guide On
      Operational-Level PFM Reform Indicators" to track progress and identify bottlenecks effectively.
      The M&E system was designed to support regular assessments and midterm review, ensuring

                                                                                              Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



         timely adjustments and continuous alignment with project objectives. By employing existing
         government frameworks and actively engaging civil society for independent monitoring, the
         project aimed to improve transparency, accountability, and the overall effectiveness of public
         investment execution.
        The risk assessment enhanced the project’s quality at entry by identifying and addressing high
         institutional and political risks through proactive measures such as implementing an agile
         approach and forming a dedicated Orientation and Monitoring Committee. By recognizing
         substantial macroeconomic and technical risks, the project incorporated specific mitigation
         strategies, including fiscal adjustments and performance incentives, to maintain progress and
         adapt to emerging challenges.

  In addition, project design was built on technical assistance activities and policy dialogue by the WB team
  on PFM and procurement reforms. For example, in the period preceding 2017, several fundamental steps
  were taken, such as introduction of the management control function to support program budgeting, a
  joint IMF-WB public investment management assessment, setting up of an initial BOOST database, and
  a Rapid Result Initiative and value chain analysis in the procurement system (PAD, p. 28).

  The project suffered from some shortcomings at quality-at-entry:

        The ICR notes that the implementation arrangements proposed at appraisal were complex in
         Cameroon’s fragile and conflict-affected (FCV) context of limited capacity and institutional
         fragmentation (ICR, pp. 22 and 24).
        The M&E section of the operations manual was not finalized. According to the ICR, this
         “significantly affected the project performance and achievement of objectives” (ICR, p. 24). There
         was lack of clarity on how the indicators in the Results Framework were to be calculated.
         Consequently, there was no consistent approach adopted, and there appeared to be not
         adequate quality control over the data received to measure achievement of targets.
        In the original RF several indicators had to be revised (5 of the 6 PDO indicators and more than
         half of the IRIs). The revised RF included still some weak indicators (e.g., all indicators using
         percentages failed to specify what those percentages referred to). It did not include an indicator
         for citizen engagement in project monitoring, even though its importance was acknowledged and
         referred to in PAD, and the CPF highlighted citizen engagement in service delivery.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WB team undertook the following supervision activities that were beneficial during implementation: (i)
 regular implementation support missions and an MTR, which allowed for ongoing assessment and
 adjustments, (ii) virtual meetings to maintain regular follow-up on critical issues, especially crucial during
 the COVID-19 pandemic, (iii) effective use of Aide Memoires, Implementation Status Reports (ISRs), and
 Management Letters to report issues and communicate both with the government and within the Bank, and




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



 (iv) ensuring of fiduciary compliance by providing support in FM and procurement and conducting an in-
 depth fiduciary review covering the period from July 2022 to September 2023.

 Two challenges that could have adversely affected project supervision did not: (i) the COVID-19 pandemic
 caused delays due to the suspension of in-person missions, though virtual meetings and fiduciary field
 missions helped mitigate some of these effects, and (ii) despite these issues, the project management
 team managed changes in project managers well, with adequate handover and ongoing guidance,
 minimizing potential disruptions or delays in project closure.

 There were two areas where supervision could have been strengthened and would have had positive
 impact on the project. First, the supervision team did not possess sufficient M&E expertise (ICR, p. 24).
 The absence of this expertise resulted in the team delaying the resolution of monitoring and evaluation
 issues, thus adversely impacting the project's ability to effectively track progress and offer better guidance
 to the PCU. This weakness was exacerbated by the absence of an approved M&E manual in the PCU.
 Second, during the restructuring the project could have reduced the activities and targets to fit in the
 shorter time frame available due to the delay in government approval by one-and-half year.

 Another notable shortcoming was that, despite the support to FM and procurement, there was significant
 fiduciary non-compliance that appears to have been long standing and unresolved (ICR, pp. 21-22). For
 example, the PCU's procurement capacity was not adequate, and there was a history of ineligible
 expenses. Though the WB conducted an in-depth fiduciary review for the period July 2022 - September
 2023, greater proactive due diligence by the WB may have been warranted.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework presented in the Result Framework mostly captures the high- and medium-level
 results that were expected to be achieved, though with some noteworthy exceptions. For example, the
 indicator for the second objective (PDO2), strengthen the statistics system for evidence-based decision
 making, made it difficult to assess if the objective was achieved.

 The original RF had to be revised after the MTR because of poorly formulated indicators. At the time of
 restructuring, some but not all of the original shortcomings were addressed. These points were noted
 earlier in the quality-at-entry section (8a).




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



 The M&E design did not include an indicator that would capture the quality of investments. Though
 Component 2 (improving the quality of public investments in selected sectors) had a subcomponent on
 promoting citizen monitoring of project implementation, the RF did not include a direct measure of quality.

 The ICR notes that the project's arrangements for assessing implementation progress were not well
 designed. While the RF outlined data sources and responsible institutions, the M&E manual was not
 finalized, which the ICR notes as an important oversight. Moreover, the M&E framework was complex,
 involving multiple institutions and a senior government official leading each project component.
 Data collection was managed by the PCU, which delegated M&E tasks to a team comprising an M&E
 specialist, an assistant, and focal points assigned to each component.

 The ICR included a TOC, but it was partial since it did not list the project activities/inputs and link it to the
 outputs and outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E framework was critical for monitoring progress toward achieving the PDOs and identifying
  potential bottlenecks. The PCU had primary responsibility for coordinating the M&E system and reporting
  on project results and outcomes. All ministries and agencies involved in this multi-sectoral project were
  responsible for collecting and sharing their data with the PCU. MINEPAT was tasked with assessing and
  reviewing the project's result indicators data. An MTR conducted in 2022 aimed to ensure that the project
  remained on track, offering recommendations for actions or adaptations needed to address challenges
  and improve implementation. The PCU did publish progress and annual reports.

  M&E implementation experienced two main challenges: (i) an M&E manual was drafted at the beginning
  of the project but was not finalized; (ii) the M&E specialist was not proactive, and did not always
  implement corrective actions identified during WB implementation missions, and failed to communicate
  performance issues to beneficiaries in advance, including insufficient progress on the RF.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization could have been improved with better data quality assurance, more timely reviews, and
  more detailed reporting to enhance M&E effectiveness:

        Data Quality Verification: The Project’s M&E unit did not verify the quality of the data collected.
        MTR: The MTR, essential for assessing progress and making necessary adjustments, was
         conducted with a significant delay in June 2022—18 months before the project's end—due to the
         COVID-19 pandemic. This delay affected the timely evaluation and adjustment of the project's
         strategies.
        Reporting: Quarterly and annual reports were prepared but did not always include all the details
         required by the RF, potentially leading to gaps in monitoring and reporting project performance
         comprehensively.

  However, the project took steps to use M&E data constructively and adapt its approach, despite facing
  challenges. There were several positive aspects:


                                                                                                         Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



        Utilization of Data for Restructuring: M&E data were used to inform the project’s restructuring,
         which included revising the RF to ensure indicators were clear, measurable, and within the
         project's control. This indicates a proactive approach to using available data for improving project
         implementation.
        Clarification of Indicators: The restructuring process used M&E data to clarify how certain
         indicators, such as average procurement times and the number of women beneficiaries of
         training, should be calculated. This helped in refining and setting clearer targets for project
         outcomes.
        Increased Ambition for Indicators: The restructuring raised the ambition for the indicator related
         to cross-border statistics, expanding the target from 4 to include all 7 border regions. This
         demonstrated a commitment to enhancing the scope and impact of the project.
        Preparation of Reports: Quarterly and annual reports were consistently prepared by the project.
         Even though they did not always provide all the required details, the preparation of these reports
         reflects ongoing efforts to document and communicate project progress.




  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The project was classified under Category C at appraisal,
   indicating that it was not expected to have significant environmental or social impacts. This assessment did
   not change during implementation and restructuring.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management. The project's FM showed significant issues throughout its implementation.
   Performance was rated Satisfactory until December 2020. However, from June 2021 until closure, the
   rating was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to recurring problems. These included slow
   implementation of recommendations, insufficiently justified expenditures, and lengthy delays in accounting
   for mission advances. The 2022 audit reports were delayed by five months and included a qualified
   opinion, highlighting questionable expenditures. A detailed fiduciary review by the WB in October 2023
   uncovered over US$2.0 million disputed expenditures and internal control weaknesses, (ICR, para. 64).
   The review's final conclusions, communicated to the government in April 2024, revealed ineligible
   expenditures of XAF154 million (US$0.3 million) and potential fraud or corruption involving XAF609 million
   (US$1.0 million), currently under investigation. Additionally, with several activities carried out shortly before
   the project’s closing, there is a high risk of inefficient fund use. An auditor has been hired to assess
   whether these activities were completed effectively, However, the report, due by the end of February 2024,


                                                                                                      Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



   has not yet been received, and it may reveal further ineligible expenditures. The final audit reports
   were expected by June 30, 2024, but were delayed and not received by the WB as of September 30, 2024.

   Procurement. Procurement was not carried out consistently in accordance with WB procedures. An end-
   of-project fiduciary review revealed mis-procurement, including contracts awarded outside the updated
   procurement plan and noncompliance with procurement regulations. There were several contributors to the
   poor performance in procurement: (i) the PIU exhibited limited project management skills; (ii) the
   procurement specialist had limited capacity and struggled with applying the provisions of the procurement
   regulations and in using the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) despite support
   from the Bank; (iii) institutions in charge of component implementation did not prioritize and implement
   project activities on time; (iv) contract execution was negatively affected by the inadequate
   contract management skills; (v) institutional arrangements lacked clarity on technical responsibilities; and
   (vi) a two-tiered procurement evaluation structure caused delays.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR did not note any unexpected impacts.



d. Other
   The ICR did not raise any additional issues.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                     IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately              Moderately
Outcome
                               Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                     Modest


12. Lessons

The ICRR agrees with the lessons from the ICR but would like to highlight the following:

In a country facing instability, such as Cameroon, project design should be simple and focus
on a few key areas. Cameroon was added to the FCV list in 2018, after the project was approved.
However, the political situation had been deteriorating. Despite many needs and requests from the
government and other stakeholders, it is important to choose clear, manageable objectives from the


                                                                                                     Page 22 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)



start. This helps overcome capacity constraints and challenges in coordinating with multiple
stakeholders.

M&E should be a key part of a project's operations and managed effectively to provide timely
data for project management. It is important for the PCU to develop and use an M&E manual even
if not required, and to ensure that M&E specialists have the necessary skills. The WB team should
also actively address M&E issues, including during project restructuring.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a reasonable overview and justification of the project’s objectives and components. The
document conveyed the challenges faced during implementation and elaborated on some of the complexities of
working with a range of stakeholders with different administrative structures. The ICR was also candid about
the potential “inefficient use of project funds” that necessitated the WB's hiring of an auditor to determine
whether activities were completed. IEG reached out to the project team to obtain the results of the audit
report but did not receive any information.

The ICR could have been improved if it had covered four additional topics. First, the ICR did not discuss citizen
engagement in monitoring the progress of investments, though this was raised prominently in the PAD. This
lack of coverage of citizen engagement in holding government accountable raises the concern of whether there
is sufficient internal pressure to achieve sustainable reform of the effectiveness of the public sector and whether
the project paid attention to this important component of governance. Second, the lack of information on actual
investments is a significant gap in understanding whether the reforms pursued under the project (such as better
budget execution and strengthening the procurement system) led to more successful results on the ground.
Third, the ICR would have benefited from a discussion of how the project could have improved oversight of the
use of project funds, for example, how the Project Coordination Unit and the supervision missions could have
reduced the potential risk of misuse of funds. Fourth, the ICR was inconsistent in several areas. For example,
the Outcome rating is recorded as “moderately unsatisfactory” in the Data Sheet but “moderately satisfactory” in
the main text (ICR, p. 18). Additionally, the narrative is contradictory with the evidence presented. The ICR (p.
68) states that the “the Bank team also provided adequate support to ensure fiduciary compliance, including in
the areas of FM and procurement.” However, the report indicates that there were “questionable expenditures
and numerous internal control weaknesses,” and many activities in the weeks before the project closed led to
the Bank hiring an auditor to determine whether they were completed (p. 23).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CM - Strengthening PSE and SC Project (P151155)




                                                                               Page 24 of 24
