      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024213

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P175742                                      Indonesia Human Capital DPL

 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 Indonesia                                    Social Protection & Jobs



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-93950                                  30-Jun-2023                                         351,376,780.00

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  29-Jun-2022                                 30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                           350,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Revised Commitment                            350,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Actual                                        351,376,780.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Peter Darvas                 Judyth L. Twigg               Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective, based on the Program Document “Indonesia Human Capital
Development Policy Loan” and signed May 26, 2022, was to enhance human capital development in
Indonesia by (i) improving the effectiveness of public spending for human capital and (ii) protecting existing



                                                                                                      Page 1 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



human capital investments. These objectives were consistent with Schedule 1 of the Loan Agreement signed
on November 24, 2022, by IBRD and November 29, 2022, by the representative of the government.

For the purposes of this ICR Review, the PDOs are taken as:

     i. PDO 1 Improving the effectiveness of public spending for human capital
    ii. PDO 2 Protecting existing human capital investments


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation contained two pillars:

Pillar A: Improving the effectiveness of public spending for human capital

      Prior Action 1: formalization of governance arrangements, institutional roles and mandates for
       maternal nutrition and decrease stunting.
      Prior Action 2: institutionalization of regulatory mechanism for TB control program.
      Prior Action 3: establishment of legal and regulatory framework for telemedicine.

Pillar B: Protecting existing human capital investments:

      Prior Action 4: taxation measures related to incentivize behavior change related to reduce smoking.
      Prior Action 5: introduction of unemployment insurance.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Financing: Total financing for the DPL was $351,376,780, which was $1,376,780 higher than the original amount
of $350,000,000 due to currency exchange fluctuations, as both the Project Document and the Loan Agreement
defined the value as 331,300,000 Euros.

The DPL was approved on June 29, 2022, and closed as scheduled on June 30, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Indonesia has had relatively solid macroeconomic performance including high GDP growth (interrupted briefly
 by the COVID pandemic), low inflation, well-managed fiscal policy, and poverty gains measured in key human
 capital indicators including under five and adult survival, stunting, and expected years of schooling. At the
 same time, low absolute levels of human capital, the negative impact of the COVID pandemic, and other
 aspects of the broader human development agenda, including a lack of social assistance to unemployed
 people, have put pressures on the country’s economic and social development agenda. Importantly, both
 human development outcomes and social services are inequitably distributed, affecting and benefiting
 differently remote and central areas, urban and rural locations, poor and middle-class communities, women

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



and men, and populations in different demographic and age profiles. Finally, both economic and human
development gains are being threatened by climate change, especially in terms of food security, public health,
and economic livelihoods, including jobs.

The government response has been both ambitious and comprehensive and has been set up across sectors.
Following a strong response to COVID-19 in human capital-related areas including health, education, and
social protection, the government also set out a wide-ranging reform agenda along the lifecycle of human
development spanning early childhood nutrition, quality education for children and youth, health care, and
social protection. The steps have included Omnibus Laws on job creation (in 2020 during COVID), in the
financial sector, and in health. Importantly, the government has in place a national strategy to accelerate
stunting prevention (Stranas Stunting) and various strategies in place to improve educational and learning
outcomes.

The DPL objectives were highly relevant, as they were closely aligned with the government development
plans, the Indonesian National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) and the National Long‐Term
Development Plan (2005‐2025, RPJPN) as well as with the government’s Human Capital Development Master
Plan 2020-2045 that was in draft stage at the time of DPL appraisal. In addition to the country’s human capital
development goals, the objectives addressed the goal of improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and equity of
public expenditures in the selected areas of nutrition, communicable and non-communicable disease
prevention and treatments, and protection of employees.

Out of the ambitious government human development reform programs, the DPL selected a set of reforms that
were deemed to have high impact, some in the short term, and some in medium- to long term, with the aim of
enhancing human capital outcomes. While human capital outcomes may only improve in the longer term
clearly beyond the scope of the DPL, improved effectiveness in public spending and greater protection of
existing human capital through adjustments in laws, regulations, and institutional roles are relevant,
sustainable, and credible steps towards the government’s strategic human development agenda.

The objectives were also strongly relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Fiscal Year 2021-
2025. Under the CPF's Engagement Area I, “Strengthening Economic Competitiveness and Resilience," there
was Objective 1.2 to “increase efficiency, equity and effectiveness of public spending" with the recognition that
“public spending is not sufficiently translating into developmental outcomes, particularly in lagging regions,
leading to poor infrastructure, education and health” (CPF Page 50, Annex 1). Under CPF Engagement Area
III, “Nurture Human Capital," there were Objectives 3.2, “strengthening quality and equity nutrition and
health," and 3.3, “inclusiveness and responsiveness of social and workers protection."

The DPL's relevance was further enhanced by the cross-cutting nature of reforms across various human
development sectors, ranging from stunting to communicable and non-communicable diseases, access to
healthcare, anti-smoking, and unemployment. Moreover, while the DPL was a single operation, it was aligned
with previous reform programs and policies as well as subsequent ones that had also been and are expected
to be part of the World Bank’s CPF and both lending and non-lending operations. It was also timely, taking
advantage of the window of opportunity of “one-off" policy actions (PAD, p. 30) to engage in a standalone
operation.

However, in the context of relevance, it must be clear that beyond the objectives of improving the effectiveness
of public spending for human capital and protecting existing human capital investments, the overall objective of
enhancing human capital development requires sustained efforts, policies, and financing in a broader set of
areas. Whereas the project design makes a strong case for selectivity, including, for instance, leaving out


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



education from the human capital development focus, the targeted program areas of stunting,
tuberculosis control, access to health services through telemedicine, smoking, and unemployment insurance
will lead to measurable enhancements in the long term only if policies and institutions are further and
continually strengthened.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Based on the Loan Agreement, the PAs have been defined as follows:

 Objective 1: Improving the Effectiveness of Public Spending for Human Capital
 PA 1. To improve nutrition of pregnant women and decrease childhood stunting across Indonesia, the
 Borrower has introduced a regulation to formalize the governance arrangements of central ministries and
 agencies as well as districts and villages, institutional roles and mandates underpinning the expansion of
 the anti-stunting program, as evidenced by Presidential Regulation No. 72/2021.
 PA 2. To reduce the health and economic burden of tuberculosis (TB), the Borrower through the Ministry of
 Health has institutionalized a comprehensive and integrated TB control program with formal governance
 arrangements including a high-level multi-stakeholder oversight mechanism, specific institutional roles and
 mandates, and a monitoring and evaluation framework that tracks performance at all levels of the
 government, as evidenced by Presidential Regulation No. 67/2021.
 PA 3. To facilitate improved access to healthcare in remote areas and in emergency situations, the
 Borrower through the Ministry of Health has (i) standardized the practice of telemedicine, and (ii) provided
 detailed regulatory guidelines to be followed by public and private sector entities that provide health
 services through telemedicine during the COVID-19 pandemic, as evidenced by Ministry of Health Decree
 No. 4829/2021.
 Objective 2: Protecting Existing Human Capital Investments
 PA 4. To discourage smoking and use of tobacco, the Borrower through the Ministry of Finance has: (i)
 increased the average rate of excise taxes for machine-made cigarettes by at least twelve (12) percentage
 points; (ii) simplified the tobacco classification for white and kretek (clove) cigarettes by reducing the
 number of tiers from ten (10) to eight (8), and (iii) introduced specific taxes on non-combusted tobacco
 products including e-cigarettes, as evidenced by Ministry of Finance Regulation No. 192/2021 and MOF
 Regulation No. 193/2021.
 PA 5. To protect workers' income in the case of unemployment, the Borrower through the Ministry Of
 Manpower has established an unemployment insurance scheme based on mutual obligations principle
 establishing procedures and conditions for the provision of cash benefit, job training and job-search support,
 as evidenced by Ministry of Manpower Regulation No. 15/2021

Altogether, the PAs addressed identified sector constraints and targeted policy reforms adequately. As the ICR
argues (pp. 8 and 11), the PAs addressed significant constraints including lack of convergence in nutrition
programs across government, inefficiencies in TB programs, shortage and variations in health services, high
incidence of smoking, and lack of support for the unemployed. Whereas these constraints cut across sectors in
human development, policy reforms in most of them can lead to long-term enhancement of the more narrowly
defined human capital outcomes as outlined in the operation's theory of change (ICR, p. 11).


                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



PA1 is considered Highly Satisfactory. There is a strong case (a case made in the ICR [Table A4.1], based on
the Spending for Better Results: Indonesia Public Expenditure Review in 2020 and an “Upgraded Indonesia
Economic Quarterly" in 2017) that the introduction of a regulation to formalize institutional roles and mandates
across government is necessary to improve effectiveness. Whereas Indonesia had historically high stunting
rates, with some 31 percent of children under age 5 being stunted, the government launched Stranas Stunting
in 2017 and provided a $4 billion (equivalent) national priority project across 23 ministries to address the
problem. PA1 was based on the above-cited analytical work and established a “convergence” approach
whereby interventions across sectors are jointly targeted to selected geographical areas and align incentives
across stakeholders to improve service delivery, quality, and utilization. Prior to the PA, according to the PD
and the ICR, there was a lack of clarity on the roles and responsibilities of central, district, and village
governments, and related effectiveness issues, duplications, inconsistencies, and inefficiencies were seen as
critical, especially as the program was being scaled up. Stranas Stunting was scaled up following COVID-19
and necessitated a firmer policy foundation to a Presidential Regulation to make it sustainable, to clarify and
formalize roles and responsibilities of central, district, and village governments, and to address critical
governance, management, and accountability challenges.

PA2 is considered Highly Satisfactory. Indonesia is the second largest contributor to the global TB burden with
over 1 million new cases reported annually. However, prior analytical work ("Tuberculosis in Indonesia:
Endemic Projections and Opportunities to Accelerate," Hafez et al.2020.) showed that 28 percent of all active
(new and relapse) cases remained undiagnosed and only 34 percent were successfully treated. Prior to the PA,
the public health and medical response was based on the Ministry of Health National Strategic Plan and funded
partially by domestic and partially by international sources; still with a significant funding gap. It was expected
that international support would decline due to Indonesia’s nearing upper middle-income status. The
government program to control TB was further disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as notifications of TB
cases declined by 31 percent. Overall, Indonesia needed to spend more (in view of a funding gap) resources on
TB and spend them better. Better spending requires clarity and accountability through oversight, governance
across sectors, clear institutional roles, mandates, and budgetary arrangements, and strong M&E to improve
the effectiveness of service delivery along the TB service delivery cascade, leading to better case identification,
diagnosis, and treatment as well as verification of treatment success. While spending more on TB was not part
of PA2, the establishment of a comprehensive and integrated TB control program with formal governance
arrangements, institutional roles and mandates, and M&E framework through a Presidential Decree was highly
relevant.

PA3 is considered Satisfactory. Equity and quality of health services are particularly challenging in remote rural
areas of Indonesia, where health outcomes are significantly worse than the average. According to the PD (p. 6),
"effective policies …will both reduce inequality and promote growth… and the persistently low and unevenly
distributed quantity and quality of health services have been limiting the effective availability of health
services." Health services are also disrupted by extreme weather events and climate change. At the same time,
while internet penetration exceeds 73 percent, the availability and utilization of telemedicine was negligible, with
a low baseline of 1 percent in 2019. PA3 aimed to address these challenges by standardizing the practice of
telemedicine and providing regulatory guidelines to create a legal basis for telemedicine providers to incentivize
the engagement of new providers and for already existing providers to scale up their services. Standardization
in this context referred to a regulatory framework that would be applied across diverse geographical areas, and
across public and private providers in terms of access, quality, and costs of services. The PD and the ICR
made a strong case that without the regulatory guidelines and sound legal framework for telemedicine for both
public and private suppliers, regional disparities in equity and quality of health outcomes would persist. Prior to
the PA, according to a policy brief by the WB (Gilson et al, 2020, "Health Services Trade and the COVID-19
Pandemic”), administrative restrictions and privacy protection issues were limiting the provision of

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



 telemedicine services. At the same time, while the PA addressed the constraints on the supply side, better
 targeting could also have been considered on the demand side. Strong local participation could have helped
 assess whether there were specific impediments in using the internet to acquire medical services (accessibility,
 trust, capacity, etc.) and how access to telemedicine services could be supported for the 27 percent of the
 population without internet access (among whom the poorest communities were likely over-represented).

 PA4 is considered Satisfactory. Smoking prevalence has been high and rising in Indonesia, with 68.1 percent of
 adult Indonesian men smoking, causing health risks to both smokers and non-smokers and leading to tobacco-
 related causes of death, including heart disease, TB, diabetes, and respiratory diseases, and also leading to
 high direct and indirect economic costs. The burden falls hardest on low-income communities. The PA
 supported government action through taxation, including increasing taxes and simplifying related tax categories.
 The simplification resulted in reducing loopholes in the taxation of tobacco products that were seen as ways for
 sellers and users to avoid taxes. While addressing the issue through taxation is both credible and important, it is
 less clear if it is sufficient by itself to lead to fewer people smoking or to reduce smoking without complementary
 measures including education of young smokers, sensitization in communities, or provision of support to
 smokers to incentivize the reduction of smoking and protection of non-smokers. This issue of buy-in is
 especially more pronounced in the poorest communities where education is the lowest, and in general there
 may be lack of awareness of smoking’s impact on health or less access to non-smoking environments to
 protect families from second-hand smoke.

 PA5 is considered Highly Satisfactory. While the unemployment rate in Indonesia declined from 4.5 percent in
 2015 to 3.4 percent in 2023, there is still significant welfare risk for the country and for communities with people
 losing their jobs due to catastrophes or other reasons. Until the related government action, Indonesia did not
 have an unemployment insurance scheme, which meant that in case of job loss, the defined contributions to
 their pensions (“old-age savings”) became the de facto severance pay, reducing the future incomes of people
 beyond working age. Until the unemployment insurance scheme, the main social assistance programs included
 social health insurance, work accident benefits, death benefits, and pension benefits. There is both country and
 global evidence about the importance of a modern unemployment insurance system, which had not existed in
 Indonesia, and—in view of the recent shocks (COVID-19, climate, economic)—increasing the resilience of
 workers and households is critical to protecting existing human capital.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

                                                                Actual
                                                   Target                                Most       RI
                Associated RI        Baseline                   value      Actual
 RI Description                                    (units,                               recent     Achievement
                PA         Relevance (units, date)              (target    Change
                                                   date)                                 value      rating
                                                                date)
 Objective 1: Improving effectiveness of public spending for human capital


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



RI 1:                                                                                         Substantial

Number of                                                                                     (reduced
districts                                                                                     from High
                 PA1       MS          260(2020) 514(2023) 514           100%
implementing                                                                                  due to
multi-sectoral                                                                                shortcomings
nutrition                                                                                     in relevance
actions                                                                                       of the RI)
RI2:

Percentage of
pregnant
women taking
               PA1         HS          38.1(2018) 50 (2023      44 (2023) 50%                 Modest
a minimum of
90 iron
supplement
tablets during
pregnancy
RI 3:

Percentage of
new and
                 PA2        HS         42 (2020) 60 (2023)      77 (2023) >100%               High
relapse cases
diagnosed in
the TB control
program
RI 4:
                                                                                              Substantial
Percentage of
                                                                                              (reduced
households
                                                                                              from High
that have ever
                 PA3        MS         1 (2019)      8 (2023)   14 (2023) >100%               due to
used
                                                                                              shortcomings
telemedicine
                                                                                              in relevance
for their health
                                                                                              of the RI)
needs
Objective 2: Protecting existing human capital investments
RI 5:
                                                                                              Substantial
Percentage of
                                                                                              (reduced
GDP per
                                                                                              from High
capita per day                                       13.78      14.3
               PA4         MS          11.3 (2019)                       >100%                due to
required to                                          (2022)     (2022)
                                                                                              shortcomings
purchase 20
                                                                                              in relevance
cigarettes at
                                                                                              of the RI)
average retail
sales price
RI 6:          PA5         HS          0 (2020)      52.7%      76.4     >100%                High
Percentage of                                        (2022)     (2023)


                                                                                                Page 7 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



eligible
salaried
employees
covered by
unemployment
insurance

Objective 1: Improving effectiveness of public spending for human capital

RI1 (Moderately Satisfactory)

The RI monitored how many of Indonesia’s 514 districts implemented multi-sectoral nutrition actions that
had been planned and implemented through a prior and parallel nation-wide program, Stranas Stunting.
These actions, according to the PD, were to enable households to receive multi-sectoral services
including maternal, infant, and young child nutrition, early childhood care, and health and wash behaviors.
Situating the indicator at the district level was reasonable as, according to the regulations, responsibility
for program implementation lies with the districts, although the central government provides inputs,
capacity development, and oversight, and Indonesia’s 75,000 villages also play some role in anti-stunting
programs. Stunting, according to the PD, is more significant in rural areas and among the most vulnerable
groups.

Importantly, it is not entirely clear how the formalization of government arrangements under PA1
accelerated the rate of this district roll-out. The CPF offers one alternative and possibly more robust
indicator. Under the CPF objective of Strengthening Quality and Equity in Nutrition and Health, a related
indicator aims to measure the percent of districts “exceeding 60 percent score on priority nutrition services
targeting index," a measure that was introduced in 2018 and is expected to cover all districts by 2024.
This indicator, if monitored, could be considered as a supplementary or complementary measure of
performance under PA1.

RI2 (Highly Satisfactory)

The RI measured the percentage of pregnant women taking a minimum of 90 iron supplement tablets
during pregnancy. This result, in conjunction with the other RI under PA1, adequately and clearly
measured the improved effectiveness of health spending in line with the result chain. Taking fortifiers and
mineral supplements is clear, credible, and easily monitorable, as it measures not only the delivery and
reception of the supplements but also the consumption, which, in this case, turned to be a significant
factor during implementation (to be discussed in the Bank Performance section). Within the multi-sectoral,
multi-agency context that the presidential decree regulated, prenatal checkups were identified as another
key factor in maternal health and, consequently, in stunting. Stranas Stunting for Indonesia and CPF
FY21-25 also identified RI2 as a key indicator.

RI3 (Highly Satisfactory)

Prior to the program, the TB service delivery cascade, from testing to diagnosis to treatment to follow-up,
had significant gaps, and COVID-19 added further disruptions. Under PA2, RI3 measured improvement in
the percentage of new and relapse cases diagnosed and treated in the TB control program and the impact
on value for money (effectiveness) through improved service delivery along TB cascade, which are the



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



 most critical results in terms of the increasing challenge of TB infection and the limited resources to tackle
 them.

 RI4 (Moderately Satisfactory)

 Under PA3, the result of standardizing telemedicine and related regulatory guidelines was to be assessed
 by the percentage of households that have ever used telemedicine for their needs. This result is clear and
 adequate with credible data towards the expected outcomes according to the results chain. However, with
 improving the effectiveness of human capital expenditures as a project objective and with the compelling
 case made that in-country shortages (of qualified doctors and services) and distribution challenges
 disproportionately affect the poorer quintiles of the population as well as those living in rural and remote
 areas (PD, p. 25), the project explicitly and plausibly links the objective of effectiveness in human capital
 expenditures with equity and quality of medical services, including the limited availability of specialists and
 their distribution within the country. The need of greater access to telemedicine especially for some of the
 most remote and vulnerable population groups is part of the rationale of the PA. Yet, the RI target of
 households ever using telemedicine at least once does not indicate how telemedicine is “bought in” in
 such poorer and remote locations or among the most vulnerable population groups. On a positive note,
 the data collected through monitoring the household use of telemedicine should make it feasible to
 monitor the equity effects in the future.

 Objective 2: Protecting existing human capital investments

 RI5 (Moderately Satisfactory)

 Under PA4, RI5 monitored the GDP per capita per day required to purchase 20 cigarettes at average
 retail sales prices. According to the PD, there is a proliferation of classification tiers, causing distortions.
 While this indicator of increased costs of tobacco via taxation has a clear and credible reference to the
 results chain, it is unclear if this increase by itself is sufficient to lead to a reduction in the number of
 people using tobacco or e-cigarettes; complementary measures are likely needed that target more directly
 the potentially affected populations. Also, the use of GDP per capita as a denominator may not sufficiently
 show how the tax increase affects households especially in different income groups, presumably with
 variations of smoking habits and financial implications in terms of the out-of-pocket costs of
 tobacco consumption and e-cigarette use.

 RI6 (Highly Satisfactory)

 Under PA5, RI6 measured the beneficiaries of a hitherto non-existent unemployment insurance system
 that appears to be a first line of defense of protecting employees from unemployment stemming from
 external shocks. This RI fully and clearly measured the direct impact of the prior action and has a clear
 and credible data source for the future as well.




Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Improving the effectiveness of public spending for human capital

               Rationale
               RI1 was achieved, as all 514 districts implemented multisectoral nutrition actions. From Stranas Stunting’s
               initial 100 priority districts in 2018, the number of districts was increased to 160 in 2019, 260 in 2020, 360 in
               2021, and 514 by 2023. However, it is unclear to what extent the presidential regulation led to increasing the
               number of participating districts that had already been growing as part of Stranas Stunting, or how the
               regulation led to improved health care effectiveness. However, additional evidence was provided regarding
               the budget for Stranas Stunting declining from by 20 percent, from US$3.784 billion USD in 2020 to 3.055 in
               2023, while stunting fell from 26.9 percent to 21.6 percent in the same period. These data indicate that the
               cost-effectiveness of the program improved, although it is unclear whether the new organizational structure
               led to this improvement.

               The ICR provides additional evidence that can be considered as an additional result relevant to PA1, in terms
               of the percentage of pregnant mothers receiving all four prenatal checkups. This indicator was set in the CPF
               FY21-FY25 to increase from 74.1 percent in 2018 to reach 80 percent, and this target was surpassed and
               reached 86.2 percent by 2023.

               RI 2 targeted the increase in the proportion of women taking a minimum of 90 iron supplement tablets during
               pregnancy. While the distribution system has been set up and women receiving the tablets increased from
               73.2 percent in 2018 to 92.2 percent in 2023, there remained a gap between distribution and consumption,
               according to the National Health Survey. The target of 50 percent of women taking the tablets (from a
               baseline of 38.1 percent) was not achieved, with achievement reaching only 44 percent due to side effects
               and palatability issues.

               RI 3 targeted the percentage of new and relapse cases of TB diagnosed and treated in the TB control
               program. The target of 60 percent in 2023 as compared to the baseline of 42 percent was surpassed
               significantly, at 77 percent.

               RI 4 targeted the percentage of households that have ever used telemedicine for their health needs to
               increase from 1 percent in 2019 to 8 percent in 2023. The target (as measured by the High-Frequency
               Monitoring of COVID-19 Impacts Rounds 1-8, 2020-2023, World Bank) was surpassed, as 14 percent of
               households used telemedicine for their health needs. As noted earlier, this RI did not capture progress
               among the likely most poor and vulnerable households without internet access.

               With one RI target highly achieved, one modestly achieved, and two fully achieved but downgraded because
               of issues with relevance of the RIs, achievement of this objective is rated Satisfactory.



               Rating



                                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)




                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      Protecting existing human capital investments

                      Rationale
                      RI 5, the increase of the percentage of GDP per capita per day needed to purchase 20 cigarettes at average
                      retail prices, had a baseline of 11.3 percent in 2019 and target of 13.78 percent in 2023. According to WB
                      staff calculations based on Statistics Indonesia and related Ministry of Finance information, the target was
                      surpassed to reach 14.3 percent. However, according to the ICR (p. 17), these price increases relative to
                      GDP per capita did not lead to decreases in the percentage of the population who smoke, which remained
                      steady, as 28.7 percent of people smoked in 2020 and 28.6 percent smoked in 2023. No data were provided
                      on whether the price increases prompted smokers to consume less tobacco. Additional interventions, most
                      likely including further education, are needed to influence the behavior. In addition, no information is available
                      on the affordability of e-cigarettes, the use of which showed growing trends.

                      RI6 was the percentage of eligible salaried employees covered by unemployment insurance. Coverage was
                      targeted to increase from zero in 2020 to 52.7 percent in 2023. The target was significantly surpassed to
                      reach 76.4 percent by 2023. The RI had high relevance in terms of improving worker protection and economic
                      efficiency.

                      With one RI highly achieved and one fully achieved but with caveats around the relevance of the RI,
                      achievement of this objective is rated Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

With both objectives rated Satisfactory, overall efficacy is Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome


                                                                                                                         Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)




Rationale

With Satisfactory relevance of the RIs and Satisfactory efficacy, the DPL's Outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project identified relevant institutional and policy changes that lead towards enhanced human capital
outcomes through improved effectiveness of public spending and through greater protection of existing
human capital investments. By the project’s own definition, such outcomes may only be observed in the
medium and long-term through sustained efforts.

In terms of effectiveness of public spending, the reduction of stunting will likely need to go beyond extending
the creation and implementation of nutrition actions and plans to all 514 districts, especially as existing social
and geographical disparities will likely be further exacerbated by external challenges and fragilities, including
the impact of climate change, global conflicts’ impact on food supply, and others. The ICR also indicates that
funding for Stranas Stunting declined between 2020 and 2023, while stunting itself was reduced. Part of the
reason for these trends may have been GNI growth (possibly leading to improved consumption figures). But,
at times of sustained inequality, these trends require stronger targeting of the program. Once the stunting
rate is reduced, complementary measures, larger demand for maternal health, nutrition, and social services,
and accommodation of a larger number of children in the school-system, especially in deprived, remote
locations, will be required. A follow-up Program for Results (PforR) and Programmatic Advisory Services and
Analytics (PASA) in nutrition will help promote sustainability of achieved outcomes.

Sustained improvements in TB identification and treatment will also require sustained financing, better district
capacities (especially in the most deprived locations), and better targeting of national policies and
interventions. Here, too, there is a follow-up PforR, the Strengthening National Tuberculosis Response
program, supporting sustainability.

Better targeting is also likely an important condition to ensure quality and equity of primary health care
services, take-up of medical services through telemedicine, and confidence that such telemedicine programs
complement instead of substitute for face-to-face health services. A follow-up IPF, the Indonesia Health
System Strengthening Project, and technical assistance on Digital Health and Universal Health Coverage
DPL promise sustainability.

The PA4 goal to reduce smoking through increased out-of-pocket costs showed no evidence of effect on the
number of smokers, indicating that such a reduction requires actions, including education, to sensitize
affected people, and also that measures are needed to assist tobacco farmers to diversify their agricultural
activities. While the government is committed to continue the tobacco taxation reforms, little tangible
information is available about complementary measures. The WB is not presently engaged in the tobacco
taxation reform, nor is it involved in any complementary program.



                                                                                                      Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



For PA5, the PD and the ICR provided projections that suggest that unemployment insurance is sustainable
and may have long-term positive effect on household incomes, savings, and economic resilience. A related
Social Protection Reform ASA and the Labor Market Information and Skills System Transformation for Labor
Market Flexibility Project provide support to developing information systems and services and
to implementation of the unemployment insurance system.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The design was based on extensive prior experience, lessons learned both from operations and from
analytical work in the related sectors, including a parallel PforR program focusing on stunting, ASA work
focusing on health service delivery, TB control, and tobacco consumption, and broad global experience
developing modern unemployment benefit systems.

The analytical underpinnings of the PIs and RIs were robust and adequate. While the operation was
ambitious, especially in terms of a broad cross-sectoral approach to human capital development, it was
also selective in adopting an approach with focus on actions and policies where there was the biggest buy-
in by the government and willingness to engage in significant institutional changes both in coordination
through one governmental agency, implementation by decentralized entities, and monitoring by sector
ministries. Risks in terms of institutional capacities and monitoring of take-up by beneficiaries were
considered, and mitigation measures were identified. A good example is the adjustment of the prior action
focusing on the iron supplement given to pregnant women, which was found to have side effects and
palatability issues and required adjustment to the program, which led to a micronutrient supplementation
design. Also, the same program measured the percentage of pregnant mothers receiving four prenatal
checkups, a result that was targeted by the CPF but not included among the result indicators. These
adjustments indicate that while the performance of this RI could only be rated as modest, other indications
helped to conclude that the overall performance of this PA was satisfactory.

The PD identified risks and constraints and went into good detail about mitigation. At the same time, for
some constraints that were listed in the risks and mitigation section of the program document, and within
this standalone DPL, it was not entirely clear how fully the DPL mitigated these risks. For instance, the
institutional capacity-related risks were rated at appraisal high and were planned to be mitigated by
implementation through one central executive agency, Kemenko PMK. Beyond the centralized
implementation, however, decentralized context was identified to posing additional risks, and yet it is
unclear whether the most remote and deprived locations and the poorest and most fragile population
groups benefited from any type of special targeting.

The operation clearly reflected extensive consultations with government at various levels and with
stakeholders. IEG also notes that, while the PAs added substantive and credible contributions to achieving
the objectives, they were also strongly linked with prior related government programs and also appeared to
require necessary subsequent follow-up reform actions. There should perhaps be more clarity in terms of
the specific impact of the prior actions, distinguished from the impact of previous programs. While these


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



contingencies across phases of reform are clearer in programmatic series, they may be more difficult to
assess in a stand-alone DPL.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

There is an in-country WB presence to facilitate hands-on support to implementation, both to the coordinating
agency and to the sector ministries involved. In most relevant sectors, especially in the areas of nutrition,
maternal health, and labor, there were complementary operations, allowing for regular monitoring. For
telemedicine, a survey conducted by the WB in partnership with the Ministry of Health helped monitor
telemedicine use. For tobacco taxation, the public expenditure review informed the DPL, leading to decisive
reforms requiring less follow-up hands-on support.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The Bank used its extensive global knowledge and experience and also its corporate vision to design an
ambitious program for human capital development while addressing relevant country-specific issues and
challenges while also aligning with the government's own strategic agenda across sectors with strong focus
on institutional development. This was also observed during implementation, when feedback from
implementation performance required adjustment and day-to-day advice.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



The DPL PD provided poverty/social analysis on each prior action. Given the project’s focus on nutrition, health,
and employment; the expected positive impacts are strong. However, given that enhancement of human capital
outcomes is only expected in the medium to long term, these impacts may only be projected through the DPL
but not captured in a one-year operation. Still, the focus on stunting, TB, access to health care in remote
locations, smoking, and unemployment, the targets are by definition pro-poor, and inasmuch as measurable
improvements are achieved in stunting, TB detection and treatment, access to telemedicine, and unemployment
insurance, the direct impacts are straightforward to recognize. In the meantime, the fact that the number of
people smoking has not changed, but the costs of tobacco increased, makes the social and poverty impact of
the tobacco taxation less clear or positive.



b. Environmental

As per the PD and the ICR, the environmental impacts are negligible apart from the assumption that allocation
of lands to tobacco production would be reduced in the long term, with benefits in terms of reduced harm to soil
and use of pesticides.



c. Gender

The gender impacts of the PAs are significant, starting from PA1’s impact on maternal health and the incorporation
of women’s empowerment programs in Stranas Stunting. In addition, there is a significant gender gap in smoking,
as men are at a disproportionately high risk of premature death due to tobacco use.



d. Other

As per the ICR’s finding of the project’s impact on institutional strengthening, the Coordinating Ministry of Human
Development and Culture (Kemenko PMK) has strong capacity for the future to coordinate human capital-focused
operations and related programs to be supported by the World Bank and other development partners.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR presents a strong, coherent, and credible evaluation report on the DPL. It flows logically. It is
referenced appropriately, using credible data sources and evidence both from the government and from the
WB. There is clear and concise presentation of the analytical underpinnings of the prior actions and overall
results chain. The ICR adheres well to established guidelines and methodologies. It covers the information that
is necessary for a sound self-evaluation. However, there are three areas where the analysis could have been
improved:


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



        First is the area of attribution, especially in the context of stunting, where the project was built on a
         strong pre-existing strategic program. Although there are indications that this strategic program was
         improved through mainstreaming and clearer definition of roles and responsibilities, it is not clear to
         what extent these institutional changes led to improved effectiveness in human capital investments and
         especially in improvements in nutrition.
        Second, the ICR should have interrogated data about the improvements in inequality among regions
         and income groups and how these inequalities, which were highlighted in the sector context of the PD,
         may have been addressed by better targeting of resources, capacity building, and addressing region-
         specific social challenges.
        Third, lessons drawn from the project could have been sharper. While the lessons
         cite comprehensiveness of the actions as a positive lesson, they also focus on selectivity as an
         important dimension of design. The ICR correctly mentions the need for political economy analyses
         (specifically in terms of anti-corruption, climate change planning, and gender dimensions), it remains
         vague about how such analyses can and should lead to improvements in future actions, i.e. steps like
         better targeting or stronger support to at-risk communities, regions, and income groups.



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                     IEG
                                                                                      Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                            Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                   Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                   ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                     ---                    High


12. Lessons

The operation's design and results offer some lessons:

Costs and benefits of preparing a DPL one-off loan or a DPL series. The DPL proved to be the appropriate
World Bank instrument, as it allowed for introduction of new policies and building of both central and local
institutional capabilities, complementing investments and technical sector analyses in the space of human
capital development. Pursuit of the DPL as a one-off loan instead of a series may have been intended to pursue
rapid action, but it requires prior as well as follow-up development programs, investments, and results-based
actions that build on the long-term development agenda and lessons learned. A DPL series may have had the
benefit of a rapid PA agenda while also aligning necessary follow-up policies and measuring medium- and long-
term impact.


                                                                                                          Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Indonesia Human Capital DPL (P175742)



Preservation of human capital in addition to improvements in it across sectors. Human capital
development allowed the government and the Bank to pursue policies and build institutional capacities across
sectors based on a shared vision but relying on deep-rooted technical capacities in health, nutrition, labor, and
taxation. At the same time, the project demonstrated the benefit of selectivity, not only selecting policies and
interventions that were necessary for human capital development but also offering momentum for change while
complementing parallel programs in other human capital-related sectors such as education. Also,
a project strength was its extension beyond direct human capital improvement, adding emphasis on protecting
existing human capital through its focus on tobacco use and building an unemployment insurance system.

Institutional capacities at central and local levels. Another of the DPL's strengths was its building of both
central cross-sectoral institutional capacities and decentralized institutional capacities (especially in the areas of
nutrition, stunting, and TB monitoring).

Targeted interventions aligned with diversity of local challenges. For the future, a key policy challenge is to
maintain and strengthen policy targeting by poverty and across social groups, regions, and communities. This
operation's design success shows that in the focus areas of nutrition, health, and medical services (including the
use of telemedicine), results depend on identifying the diversity of challenges across communities
and addressing them through tailored action.

Local M&E capacities so that interventions can be aligned with diverse local outcomes. Another lesson is
to build sustained decentralized M&E capacities to be able to pursue the necessary adjustments and alignments
required by these variations. For instance, the impacts of climate change on local communities affect most of
the targeted sectors (nutrition, health, local habits, labor market). The adjustment of using the appropriate
nutrition supplement could not be pursued without strong monitoring. Similarly, the taxation policy's impact on
the use of tobacco requires strong monitoring to be able to gain evidence that increasing costs lead to
reductions in smoking.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

Yes
ASSESSMENT_TABLE
Please explain
IEG notes that a PPAR would allow for examination of the longer-term impact of the supported policies and
institution-building actions, potentially informing follow-up programming for the Bank and for the government.




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 17
