     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024312

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P170113                                    Kosovo DPF

 Country                                    Practice Area (Lead)
 Kosovo                                     Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-70520                                  30-Sep-2023                                          53,828,280.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Mar-2022                                30-Sep-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           56,400,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            56,400,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        53,828,280.00                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 William F. Steel           Donna Kaidou Jeffrey          Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objectives (PDOs) for Kosovo Public Finances and Sustainable Growth
Development Policy Financing (DPF), as stated in the ICR (para. 9) and Program Document (PD) (para. 10)
and used in this ICRR, were to support the Republic of Kosovo’s efforts to:

      PDO1: Improve fiscal transparency;

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)



      PDO2: Enhance private sector development; and
      PDO3: Strengthen environmental sustainability in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The corresponding pillars and policy areas (PAs), as stated in the ICR (para. 11-13) and PD (para. 28), were:

   A. Improving fiscal transparency:

      Debt management;
      Fiscal policy: costing social protection initiatives.

B. Enhancing private sector development:

      Business inspections;
      Licensing and permit requirements in the agriculture and agribusiness sectors;
      Regulatory framework for electronic identification (e-IDs).

C. Strengthening environmental sustainability:

      Waste management;
      Legal framework for renewable power generation (reducing greenhouse gas emissions).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

An IDA credit to the Republic of Kosovo of EUR50.6 million (US$56.4 million) was approved for a stand-alone
development policy finance (DPF) operation for Public Finances and Sustainable Growth in March 2022. It
became effective in August 2022 and closed as expected on 30 September 2023. The Organization of
Petroleum-Exporting Countries (OPEC) provided parallel financing of US$40 million.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The Republic of Kosovo is Europe’s youngest country both politically and demographically. It declared
 independence from Serbia in 2008 after nearly a decade of United Nations (UN) administration following the
 Kosovo War of 1998-99. Its independence is widely but incompletely recognized, and ethnic tensions continue,
 making it subject to potential conflict and to “institutional capacity constraints which are typical for a young and
 fragile democracy” (Country Partnership Framework [CPF] FY17-FY21, para. 46). With the youngest
 population in Europe, the Risk and Resilience Assessment identifies youth disenfranchisement as the most
 relevant internal risk for Kosovo (CPF, para. 85).

 Kosovo grew at 4.6 percent per annum during the 2010s, achieving middle-income status in 2018 and
 reducing both poverty and reliance on foreign aid. However, the service- and consumption - driven economy

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kosovo DPF (P170113)



went into recession in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with particularly adverse consequences for the
private sector and public debt. Nevertheless, fiscal and policy support measures, along with remittances and
goods exports, enabled a strong recovery in 2021 (ICR, paras. 3-5).

In addition to the rapid rise in public debt due to pandemic response and untargeted social expenditures, the
program document (PD, paras. 4-6) for the Public Finance and Sustainable Growth DPF identified important
growth constraints, including a “burdensome and uncertain regulatory framework… inadequate energy supply,
and an incomplete legal framework for e-commerce.” It cited “heavy air pollution and environmental
degradation” as a consequence of “dependence on fossil fuels and inadequate waste management.”

Relevance of objectives

The PDOs were consistent with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) 2017, which highlighted fiscal
sustainability, increased competitiveness and inclusion, and environmental sustainability as development
priorities for poverty reduction and shared prosperity (SCD, 2017, para. 2.71, and SCD Update 2022, para. 3).
The PDOs addressed:

    1. Reprioritizing public expenditures and reorienting taxation to address critical development challenges,
       while preserving fiscal discipline;
    2. A more attractive environment for private sector investment and business expansion in tradable
       sectors;
    3. Better stewardship of the environment and natural resources.

The PDOs conformed with the three Focus Areas of the CPF FY17-FY21 (Figure 5), which in turn was aligned
with the Kosovo National Development Strategy 2016-2021:

    1. Enhancing Conditions for Accelerated Private Sector Growth and Employment;
    2. Strengthening Public Service Delivery and Macro‐Fiscal Management;
    3. Promoting Reliable Energy and Stewardship of the Environment.

PDO1 addressed fiscal discipline and management with a focus on costing and debt management. PDO2
sought to facilitate private-led growth by rectifying regulatory burdens on starting private sector businesses
and utilizing electronic identification. PDO3 supported energy and environmental objectives in the areas of
waste management and power generation.




b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The operation had seven prior actions (PAs), one with two distinct sub-actions, all dealing with laws and
regulations. Given the limited time frame of this standalone DPF, only one action required full enactment by
Parliament; two referred to submission of legislation to Parliament (which then undertakes a review of at least
nine months [ICR, para. 46]); one to adopting a law (for subsequent submission to Parliament); while



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kosovo DPF (P170113)



four involved only adoption of regulations (when administrative approval was sufficient under existing law). All
the PAs related closely to the stated objectives.

The ICR (Table 2) provided a detailed theory of change linking each PA to the PDOs through the expected
outputs and intermediate outcomes. The PD had no explicit theory of change or results chain, although this was
implicit in its discussion of the substance of the PAs and expected results, as evidenced in the ICR’s Table 2.

Table 1: Objectives, Policy Areas and Prior Actions (PAs) for Kosovo Public Finance and Sustainable
Growth DPF

PDO1: Improve Fiscal Transparency
Debt management
PA1: The Recipient has adopted and submitted to the Parliament the Law on State Debt and
State Guarantees that (i) codifies annual and quarterly debt reporting requirements and (ii)
requires annual reporting of the Government to the Parliament on the implementation of the
State Debt Program.
Fiscal policy
PA2: The Recipient has adopted requirements for conducting and publishing long-term costing
of new pension policy proposals and other social protection policy proposals, as well as regular
updating (at least every five years) for existing pension policies.
PDO2: Enhance Private Sector Development
Business inspections
PA3: The Recipient has enacted the Law on Inspections to (i) reduce the number of
inspectorates and legal overlaps, (ii) establish a general inspector’s office, and (iii) introduce
risk-based inspections.
Licensing and permit requirements in the agriculture and agribusiness sectors
PA4: The Recipient has adopted regulations to: (i) reduce the number of agriculture and
agribusiness sector licenses and simplify the licenses approval process, and (ii) reduce the
fees and documentation requirements for producers, exporters, and importers in the agriculture
and agribusiness sector.
Regulatory framework for e-IDs
PA5: The Recipient has adopted the Law on Electronic Identification and Trust Services in
Electronic Transactions that facilitates electronic identification and trust services for electronic
domestic transactions.
PDO3: Strengthen Environmental Sustainability
Waste management
PA6: The Recipient has (i) adopted and submitted to the Parliament the Law Amending and
Supplementing the Law No. 04/L-060 on Waste to create the legal basis for an extended
producer responsibility mechanism and procedures for the establishment of the deposit refund
system, and (ii) adopted the Integrated Waste Management Strategy (2021-2030) and Action
Plan (2021-23) which sets objectives, instruments, and targets to pave the way for a circular
economy and improve public service delivery.
Legal framework for renewable power generation
PA7: The Recipient has adopted a Concept Document on Renewable Energy Sources, that
initiates the required regulatory and legal changes to the current legal and policy framework.


                                                                                                       Page 4 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kosovo DPF (P170113)




Source: ICR, Table 1

PDO1: Improve fiscal transparency

PA1 strengthened the legal basis for debt reporting requirements, including to Parliament, as well as mandating
a risk assessment before issuing loan guarantees. Besides harmonizing different legislation on debt and better
aligning Kosovo with international practice, the action was expected to improve oversight of the Executive and
enhance fiscal transparency, thereby strengthening fiscal sustainability (PD, para. 32-33, ICR, Table 2). The
action was based on substantial prior analytical work on debt management (PD, Table 4) and directly
contributed to the PDO of improving fiscal transparency (though not necessarily fiscal sustainability).
Relevance of PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA2 contributed to the objective of fiscal transparency by requiring costing of new pension and other social
protection policy proposals, as well as periodic updating of pension policies. The growing fiscal burden from
introducing various special pensions schemes was threatening the ability to maintain the poverty-targeted
Social Assistance Scheme (ICR, para. 18). PA2 supported the requirement that all new proposals for pension
or social benefit schemes have a budget impact statement and that the long-term budgetary effects of all
existing pension schemes be assessed. Thus, it directly supported fiscal transparency, which was implicitly
assumed to lead toward the ultimate objective of fiscal sustainability. Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

PDO2: Enhance private sector development

PA3 drew on an especially strong analytical base of a decade of studies on inspection bodies, a Concept Paper
and the Country Economic Memorandum (CEM) to address the key challenges of an excessive number of and
lack of coordination between inspection authorities, as well as inadequate training and unclear procedures
(ICR, para. 19). The prevailing situation hampered private sector investment, productivity and competition by
imposing a “significant regulatory burden and creat[ing] uncertainty for businesses…. promoting rent-seeking
activities and corruption” (PD, para. 38). The PA supported enactment of new legislation, which was essential to
“consolidate the number of inspecting authorities, introduce risk-based inspections, and establish clear
rules…and procedures” (ICR, para. 19). It also established the General Inspector’s Office to help ensure
effective implementation and thereby achieve the intended outcome of improving the environment for and
performance of private businesses. Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA4 represented an important modification of regulations to reduce the time and cost for agriculture and
agribusiness to comply with multiple, redundant licensing and permission procedures. It drew on a
comprehensive review of procedures within the relevant agencies, which highlighted the negative impact on
competitiveness and exports (ICR, para. 20; PD, para. 41). The action only required amendment or repeal of
Administrative Instructions (ICR, para. 29). It was expected to support PDO2 through “compliance cost savings
for enterprises over the medium term” and “reduced discretionary practices and rent seeking” (PD, para. 43).
Implementation was supported with technical assistance (TA) under the International Finance Corporation (IFC)
Investment Climate Project. Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA5 was needed to facilitate commercial and government use of digital technologies by providing a legal
framework for electronic identification (e-ID). Digital technologies and internet were widely used in Kosovo by
2022, with growing numbers of digital transactions and electronic registers (ICR, para. 21). But a well-
functioning e-ID system was needed to “enable digitalization of firms, in particular e-commerce….and enable e-
government services and e-payments to develop at a faster pace with increased efficiency,” as well as “to

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)



 close the gender gap in entrepreneurship,” since “women entrepreneurs were digitally more ready compared to
 men” (PD, para. 44). The PA supported adoption of the Law on Electronic Identification and Trust Services, as
 a necessary step toward Parliamentary enactment and eventual implementation. Relevance rating: PA5:
 Highly Satisfactory (HS).

 PDO3: Strengthen environmental sustainability

 PA 6: The legislation to be submitted to Parliament under the first sub-action of PA6 was intended to address
 the environmentally unsustainable waste management system by establishing a legal basis for making
 producers bear responsibility for the waste in certain electronic and vehicle product streams and to establish a
 deposit refund system (PD, para. 49). The second sub-action supported an Integrated Waste Management
 Strategy and Action plan to “pave the way for a circular economy.” These actions represented important initial
 steps to address some of the environmental problems identified in the Economic Reform Program 2022-24.
 Nevertheless, the path and timeline to implementation was unclear and depended upon “the establishment of a
 new Producer Responsibility Organization (PRO) that facilitates self-organization by industrial producers
 towards greater recycling” (PD, para. 50). Although the Ministry of the Environment, Spatial Planning and
 Infrastructure was to provide oversight, there was no clear chain of enforcement to assure that the producers
 would indeed pursue the intended result of improved environmental sustainability. Relevance of PA6:
 Satisfactory (S).

 PA7: The Concept Document supported by PA 7 represented “a critical and mandatory step in the policy and
 institutional reform process… [that] involves significant analysis and public consultation” in order to facilitate
 greater private investment in renewable energy, which was needed for Kosovo to continue meeting its
 renewable energy commitments by offsetting reliance on coal-fired thermal power generation (PD, paras. 51-
 52). Besides clarifying procedures and responsibilities, and updating renewable energy targets, the Concept
 Document was intended to trigger preparation of a new law on renewable energy that would enable a market-
 based, auctioning approach to sustainable and competitive renewable energy investments. Thus, the action
 initiated a reasonable chain of steps toward achieving the objective of strengthening environmental
 sustainability through private investment in renewable energy. Relevance of PA7: Satisfactory (S).



Rating

Highly Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The seven results indicators (RIs) were generally attributable to their respective PAs and appropriate to
track achievement of objectives (with one exception). One sub-indicator provided a gender dimension.

Table 2: Results indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement




                                                                                                      Page 6 of 17
 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
 Kosovo DPF (P170113)



                                                          Actual
                                  RI                                              RI
Results indicator (RI)     Asso-        Baseline Target               Actual as %
                                                                                  Achieve-
                           ciated                         (Year)      of targeted
                                  Rele-                                           ment
                           PAs          (2021)   (2023)               change
                                  vance                                           rating
PDO1: Improve Fiscal Transparency
RI1: Regular reports on
the implementation of the
State Debt Program,
including all new                                         No (2023) 0%
borrowing and guarantee
operations conducted by PA 1 HS         No       Yes
                                                                                   High
the Government during
the previous fiscal period,                               Yes (2024) 100%
                                                                                   (with
are prepared and                                                                   delay)
submitted to the
Parliament.
RI2: Number of long-term                                  0 (2023)
financial analyses for                                                0%
                                                                                   High
existing pension schemes PA 2     HS    0        15       17 (2024)
and benefits completed                                                113%
                                                                                   (with
and published online.
                                                                                   delay)
PDO2: Enhance Private Sector Development
RI3: Number of                                            30
inspectorates affecting    PA 3 MS  36           20                   37.5%        Modest
private sector operations.                                (2023-24)
RI4: Percentage
reduction in total
compliance costs for                             25%
                           PA 4 HS  0                      53%        212%         High
simplified licenses and                          reduction
permits in the agriculture
and agribusiness sector.
                                                          2023: No
RI5: (a) Percentage of                                    data
businesses using digital                0        15%                  n.a.
                                                          available
ID as a share of total
                                                                                   Negligible
number of businesses.                                     0.7%
                                                          (2024)
                           PA 5   HS                                  4.7%
(b) Percentage of women
owned businesses using
                                                                                   Negligible
digital ID as a share of
total number of women-                                    0.1%
                                        0        20%                  0.5%
owned businesses.

PDO3: Strengthen Environmental Sustainability



                                                                                          Page 7 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)



   RI6: Establishment of a
   Producer Responsibility                                                         0%
   Organization (PRO) that                                            No           Administrator
   facilitates self-          PA 6      MS      No         Yes                     selection in
   organization by industrial                                         (2023-24)    process       Modest
   producers towards greater                                                       (2024)
   recycling.
   RI7: Number of auctions
   launched based on the
   new legal framework for                                            1
   market-based               PA 7      S       0          1                       100%           High
   mechanisms to support                                              (2023-24)
   renewable energy
   investments.

Note: Achievement ratings in the table reflect the level of achievement based on actual change relative to
the targeted change of the RI. Where the achievement rating is shown in brackets, the RI is not deemed
adequate for assessing achievement, and the ratings have been adjusted (noted in the Efficacy section); *
denotes rating based on additional information; [..] denotes a further downgrade to be taken in calculating
Overall Efficacy due to Relevance of RI.

Source: ICR, Table 1.

PDO1: Improve fiscal transparency

RI1 tracked whether the law submitted to Parliament under PA1 resulted in an annual report to
Parliament, and hence it was directly attributable to the PA. Although the indicator could not capture the
quality of the reporting, in the context of inadequate or contradictory existing laws (PD, para. 31), initiation
of reporting to Parliament under revised requirements can be considered a significant improvement in
fiscal transparency (PDO1). Relevance of RI1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2 adequately measured the extent to which the regulations supported by PA2 resulted in publication of
analyses of the budgetary implications of existing pension schemes. Such analysis was essential for a
more evidence-based approach to pension policy in pursuit of the ultimate desired outcome of fiscal
sustainability, and publication of such reports captured the stated objective of fiscal transparency.
Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2: Enhance private sector development

RI3 was directly attributable to PA3 in term of implementation of legislation to reduce the number of
inspectorates (although it did not capture the aspects of establishing a general inspector’s office and
introducing risk-based inspections). However, in terms of impact on the objective of enhancing the private
sector business environment, it “failed to establish a clear link in the results chain and capture efficiency
increases and improvements in procedures” (ICR, para. 25). Relevance of RI3: Moderately Satisfactory
(MS).

RI4 directly measured the extent to which PA4 regulations to reduce and simplify licensing for agriculture
and agribusiness reduced compliance costs, thereby achieving the objective of

                                                                                                         Page 8 of 17
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Kosovo DPF (P170113)



               enhancing competitiveness of private businesses in these sectors. The PD (para. 43) stated that “the
               methodology for measuring reduced compliance savings will be based on estimates of time and cost
               savings for businesses,” drawing on technical assistance from the IFC. Relevance of RI4: Highly
               Satisfactory (HS).

               RI5 tracked the extent to which the legislation supported by PA5 in fact yielded increased issuance of e-
               IDs to businesses, thereby contributing to the objective of private sector development through more
               effective use of internet commerce. The PD (para. 46) stated that “the use of e-IDs will be proxied by the
               number of e-IDs issued to active businesses by the Ministry of Economy.” A sub-indicator (with a higher
               target) tracked whether uptake of e-IDs by women-owned businesses could help close the gender gap in
               entrepreneurship (PD, para. 44). Relevance of RI5: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

               PDO3: Strengthen environmental sustainability

               RI6 related to only one of the two sub-actions under PA6. Establishment of an Extended Producer
               Responsibility mechanism (PRO) was mandated by the amended Law on Waste and was expected to
               “enable producers to coordinate their operations and establish a waste recycling process” (ICR, para. 23)
               and to help participating companies to share costs, fulfill their legal obligations, and monitor compliance
               (additional information from TTL). The second sub-action to adopt a Waste Management Strategy and
               Action Plan [not captured by RI 6] was also intended to “pave the way” for achievement and monitoring of
               results. A major challenge in devising more suitable indicators was that the time frame to actually achieve
               meaningful results substantially exceeded the time frame of this standalone operation. Relevance of RI6:
               Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

               RI7 reflected the desired outcome of a chain of steps triggered by adoption of the Concept Document on
               Renewable Energy Sources under PA7, including amendments of by-laws, enactment of a new
               Renewable Energy Law, and introduction of a market-based approach toward facilitating the objective of
               private sector investment in renewable energy. Utilizing an auction mechanism, as captured in RI7,
               represented an important stage in the implementation process, although the actual desired result of
               increased investment in renewable energy could not be tracked within the time frame of this operation.
               Relevance of RI7: Satisfactory (S).



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Improve fiscal transparency

                Rationale
                RI1 was eventually achieved, although the first report on the State Debt Program was submitted to Parliament
                more than a year after the operation closed. The delay was due in part to the longer-than-usual review


                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kosovo DPF (P170113)



process after submission to Parliament of the Law on State Debt and State Guarantees [PA1 involved
submission, as a step toward enactment]. Establishing a dedicated Debt Management Department
and overcoming staff shortages and turnover occasioned further delay (ICR, para. 26) – illustrating the
difficulty of implementing the chain of actions needed to achieve intended results during the limited period of a
standalone DPF. Achievement Rating: RI1: High

RI2 was achieved after some delay, also due to reorganization and staffing issues, as well as COVID-19
disruption, with some additional modeling support from the World Bank in order to develop the model needed
to analyze different scenarios (ICR, para. 27). The number of financial analyses undertaken by mid-2024 (17)
slightly exceeded the original target (15) for 2023. Achievement Rating: RI2: High



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Enhance private sector development

Rationale
RI3 saw only modest progress in reducing the number of inspectorates relevant to private sector operations
from 36 to 30 – only 37.5 percent of the targeted reduction to 20 and well above the 11 now mandated by the
new Inspection Law (ICR, para. 28). Further progress requires realignment of eight sectoral by-laws, only one
of which is beyond the stages of public consultation and drafting. Nevertheless, the ICR (para. 28) reported
some progress in terms of intermediate outcomes such as guidelines for risk-based inspections and
formulating workplans and checklists. Achievement Rating: RI3: Modest

RI4: The estimated reduction in total compliance costs due to simplification of licenses and permits in the
agriculture and agribusiness sector was more than double the targeted change. The methodology developed
through the IFC Investment Climate II project was applied to five amended licenses (out of the seven resulting
from consolidation of the original 22; PD, para. 43). This result directly benefited private businesses in the
targeted sector. Achievement Rating: RI4: High

RI5 was not achieved – due to the long process of developing the necessary software, which was disrupted
by the European Union’s imposition of sanctions on Kosovo in 2023 (due to election-related violence), but not
to delays in legislation (which was passed in 2021, with amendments in 2022). The national e-ID system was
not tested successfully until July 2024, meaning that no data were available for 2023, and only about 0.7
percent of registered businesses (0.1 percent of women-owned businesses) had been issued e-IDs as of ICR
preparation in September 2024 (ICR, para. 30). In addition, 12,000 e-IDs had been issued to citizens.
Achievement Rating: RI5(a): Negligible; RI5(b): Negligible



Rating



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 17
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Kosovo DPF (P170113)



                      Moderately Unsatisfactory


                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      Strengthen environmental sustainability

                      Rationale
                      RI6 had not been achieved at the time of the ICR. The long process of passing legislation and then
                      establishing a Producer Responsibility Organization (PRO) had only reached the stage of accepting
                      applications from companies to act as Administrator as of end August 2024 (ICR, para. 31). The TTL reports
                      that the Ministry of the Environment, Spatial Planning, and Infrastructure (MESPI) expects to complete the
                      selection process by December 2024, and then to formalize it and operationalize the deposit refund system.
                      Although not captured by the RI, the ICR (para. 31) cited some additional evidence of progress toward the
                      PDO associated with adoption of the Waste Management Strategy and Action Plan in terms of reduction in
                      illegal landfills by 37 percent from 2021 to 2022. In addition, MESPI has formulated a Construction and
                      Demolition Waste management plan, and the Ministry of Health has prepared a Health Care Waste
                      Management Strategy – which help lay the foundation for measures to achieve the objective (though not yet
                      at the implementation stage). Achievement Rating: RI6: Modest.

                      RI7 was achieved in that the government initiated a pilot auction for 100MW of solar energy in May 2023,
                      which concluded in January 2024 with a winning, competitively-priced bid to build a plant with a 30-year
                      concession (based on an Administrative Instruction, although the process of enacting the Law on Renewable
                      Energy was not fully completed until May 2024 (ICR, para. 32). The ensuing private investment in solar is
                      estimated at EUR 105 million (TTL). A second competitive auction, for wind energy, in November 2024 was
                      expected to generate around EUR 70 million in private investment (additional information from
                      TTL). Achievement Rating: RI7: High



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Although PDO1 achievement was Highly Satisfactory, PDO2 was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory and PDO3
Moderately Satisfactory, resulting in an overall rating of Moderately Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



                                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo DPF (P170113)



6. Outcome

Rationale

With PA relevance rated as Highly Satisfactory and Efficacy as Moderately Satisfactory, the overall Outcome is
Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Limited institutional capacity and access to TA may delay implementation and achievement of
results. The PD (para. 7) rated institutional capacity implementation risk as substantial “given Kosovo’s
young institutions and limited inter-ministerial coordination.” Achievement and implementation of PAs 1, 2, 3,
5 and 6 suffered from legislative and administrative delays, due in part to “high staff turnover and, in some
instances, labor shortages” (ICR, para. 44). TA under the IFC Kosovo Investment Climate II Project has been
important in overcoming capacity constraints, but it ended in June 2024 “with no clear successor in sight”
(ICR, para. 44). Nevertheless, further mitigation of capacity constraints may come from a new programmatic
DPF and from support by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the German
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ).

Kosovo’s fiscal and debt situation remains vulnerable to external shocks. Fiscal and economic
performance in recent years has been adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the energy crisis in
2022 (ICR, para. 44), and punitive measures taken by the European Union (EU) in 2023 in response to the
Kosovar government’s handling of ethnic tensions and elections.[1] Nevertheless, “extraordinary diaspora
inflows and sustained increases in net credit to the private sector” have helped to mitigate fiscal challenges
(PD, Annex 2), and steps that Kosovo has taken to ease ethnic tensions in the north have improved the
prospects for lifting of EU measures.[2]

[1] Group for Political and Legal Studies, “The One Year Anniversary of EU Measures against Kosova,” June
14, 2024. https://www.legalpoliticalstudies.org/the-one-year-anniversary-of-eu-measures-against-kosova/

[2] Euronews Albania, “EU measures against Kosovo are expected to be partially and gradually lifted,” June
20, 2024. https://euronews.al/en/eu-measures-against-kosovo-are-expected-to-be-partially-and-gradually-
lifted/


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)




Since Kosovo had no prior experience with DPFs, “the DPF team invested considerable efforts… to
prepare thoroughly and build client understanding of how the DPF instrument works enhancing the
government's capacity and raising awareness about the operation's design” (ICR, para. 39). The design
drew on a substantial amount of prior analytical work and diagnostics, including the SCD (and update) and
CEM, complemented by TA, particularly regarding debt management and pensions, as well as the IFC
Investment Climate II Project regarding regulatory reforms and inspections (PD, Table 4; ICR, para. 39).
The PD and ICR did not indicate any application of prior lessons learned (in the absence of prior DPFs).

Results chain and indicators

While the PD did not explicitly articulate a theory of change, the diagram in ICR Table 2 provided a logical
chain from PA reforms to outputs and results in terms of intermediate outputs and development objectives,
drawing on explanations of rationale and expected results in PD section 4.2. The selected indicators
generally tracked implementation of PAs and/or progress toward achievement of objectives. However, the
ICR (para. 41) noted some shortcomings in the linkage of some RIs to the results chain and the difficulty in
selecting indicators that could suitably track progress within the “short period available to assess the
impact of reforms…. [especially] in contexts of weak institutions and capacity constraints.”

Identification and mitigation of risks

The only risk identified in the PD (para. 78 and Table 2) as “substantial” was Institutional Capacity for
Implementation and Sustainability, which was to be “mitigated by close coordination with the government,
with parliamentary commissions, and the strong consensus among Kosovo’s development partners,” as
well as by TA. There was no discussion of potential risks emanating from ongoing ethnic tensions, which in
fact led to punitive measures by the EU that undermined public finances and impeded implementation of e-
ID reforms (ICR, para. 16, p. 5). Nor was there any mention of risks emanating from youth
disenfranchisement, identified in the CPF “as the greatest and most relevant internal risk for Kosovo’s
future” (CPF, para. 85) – perhaps because the reforms undertaken offered little immediate impact on the
problems facing youth (although private business development and environmental sustainability do have
important longer-term implications).

Consultation with stakeholders and development partners

Kosovo has a strong framework for public consultation, with “all legislation, …strategies, and concept
documents subject to mandatory public consultations …. conducted systematically through an online
consultation platform,” with “98 percent [of 184 draft documents in 2020] published on the official platform
for public consultations” (PD, para. 57). In preparing the reforms, the design team undertook substantial
consultations (through several changes in government) to build partnerships with “the MFLT [Ministry of
Finance, Labor, and Transfers], the Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and
Entrepreneurship, the Ministry of Economy, and the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning” (PD,
para. 58). Consultations “with business associations, with the private sector and with parliamentarians”
helped build consensus around the DPF program, as well the Kosovo CEM and the SCD Update
(PD, para. 58). Nevertheless, the ICR (para. 48) noted the need for “further consultations with stakeholders
to better understand the feasibility, complexity, and timelines of reform implementation.”

Strong consensus among development partners was evidenced by the OPEC Fund’s parallel financing of
US$40 million (ICR, para. 39) and by support by “the EU and GIZ, in the areas of inspections reform,


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo DPF (P170113)



simplification of licenses and permits, waste management, and e-IDs… [as well as] support provided
by USAID and EBRD in the area of energy sector reform” (PD, para. 58). The IFC’s Investment Climate II
Project provided TA that supported inspection reforms and other measures to reduce regulatory burdens
(ICR, para. 40).



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The RIs “were selected based on the best information available at the time,” though with some shortcomings,
especially in tracking expected outcomes during the limited time frame (ICR, para. 41). The TTL reports
systematic monitoring through a combination of in-country staff, technical assistance and in-person missions.
In-country staff included the Country Economist, Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, and
Environment Specialist, as well as the IFC team and some consultants, who coordinated closely with the
Government and development partners and tracked progress on RIs. Identification and preparation missions in
early 2023 for the Kosovo First Fiscal Effectiveness, Competitiveness, and Green Growth DPF provided further
occasion to monitor and support implementation.

Adaptation

The “unforeseen internal reorganization within the MFLT and consequent staff turnover” was addressed through
strong support, training, and TA to MFLT (ICR, para. 42). No changes were made to PDOs, PAs or other
elements of the operation during implementation.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Design is rated satisfactory (borderline highly satisfactory with respect to analytical underpinnings and
consultations under difficult FCV conditions). Highly satisfactory RIs, monitoring and adaptation of RIs yield a
highly satisfactory rating for implementation and overall.


Overall Bank Performance Rating


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kosovo DPF (P170113)



Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and other external
shocks.



c. Gender

It is too early for evidence to be available on impacts on women-owned businesses.



d. Other

n.a.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provided a coherent, well written narrative of the context, rationale, objectives, actions, and results,
consistent with the guidelines. A clearly articulated Theory of Change underpinned analysis of the relevance of
the PAs. The ICR interrogated the strengths and weaknesses of the RIs and thoroughly discussed efficacy. It
noted the importance of strengthening institutions – though it could have been more explicit in applying this
lesson to operations in a context of fragility, conflict, and violence (FCV).



a. Rating

High



                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kosovo DPF (P170113)



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                                                                   The team dealt with a difficult
                                                                                   context and lack of prior DPF
                                                                                   experience through extensive
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   consultations and analytical
                                                                                   work, technical assistance, and
                                                                                   intensive monitoring.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    High


12. Lessons

IEG offers the following lessons, drawing on those presented in the ICR, section VI.A:

A standalone DPF limits the scope for supporting enforcement and other implementation mechanisms
to assure the intended results. Only one PA was satisfied by Parliamentary enactment of a law prior to
approval of the DPF. Three of the PAs involved submission to Parliament of a new (or amended) law or
adoption prior to submission – with enactment taking at least nine months, often longer. The two-year time
frame of a standalone DPF means that the necessary underlying law would be passed only halfway through,
leaving little time for the implementation actions needed to meet RI targets that measure outcomes (rather than
just intermediate steps). For example, while holding an auction for renewable energy investment represented a
positive step, the desired result of increased investment in renewable energy could not be tracked within the
time frame of this operation. The ICR (para. 46) noted that adequate time is needed to overcome the complex
political and legal environment and to reflect and measure the intermediate outcomes of reform to adjust
implementation to achieve objectives. A series of two or three DPFs offers more scope to sequence
implementation measures in subsequent operations to follow through on initial legislation or regulations that set
a process in motion. In any case, articulation of a results chain (or theory of change) is essential to indicate what
further measures are needed in follow-on or parallel operations in order to maintain progress toward
achievement of objectives.

Institutional strengthening is critical when introducing reforms through a DPF in a context of FCV. As a
relatively young country arising out of (and still experiencing) ethnic conflict, building capacity in governmental
(and related) institutions was essential for policy reforms to be understood and implemented. The design team
devoted considerable efforts to preparing government counterparts for carrying out a DPF. While reorganization
within MFLT delayed implementation of PAs 1 and 2, the ICR (para. 37) noted that TA helped build MFLT’s
technical capacity to conduct budget impact assessments on its own. Similarly, the operation helped to establish
and train the General Inspector’s Office to undertake risk-based and joint inspections, and the Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development “has been equipped with methodologies to calculate compliance
costs associated with these licenses and permits.” Such TA and capacity-building is essential if reforms are to
be sustained and implemented.


                                                                                                      Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kosovo DPF (P170113)




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
