     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0023866

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P156849                                   Support for Autonomous Higher Education

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Viet Nam                                  Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60360                                 31-Dec-2022                                          96,687,083.60

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 15-May-2017                               30-Jun-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          155,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           106,058,079.20                                               0.00

 Actual                                        97,582,764.94                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Judyth L. Twigg            Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 1), the project's
   objectives were "to improve research, teaching, and institutional capacity at selected autonomous universities
   and strengthen the national higher education management system."

   The objectives were not revised during the project's lifetime, but key outcome targets were made less
   ambitious as one of the three universities planned to be supported under the project's first component was


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



   dropped at a November 2022 restructuring. A split rating methodology will therefore be used to assess project
   efficacy. At the time of this restructuring, 63.9 percent of the Bank credit had been disbursed.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  07-Nov-2022

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project had two components:

   1. Improved research, teaching, and institutional management capacity at three selected
   autonomous universities (appraisal: US$157 million, of which US$140 million from the International
   Development Association [IDA]; actual: IDA US$83.38 million). This component was to support each
   participating university—Vietnam National University of Agriculture (VNUA), Hanoi University of Science
   and Technology (HUST), and Industry University of Ho Chi Minh City (IUH)—with: (i) improved research
   through investments in laboratory equipment, the constituting and monitoring of research groups, the
   establishment of international peer review research committees, the holding of annual Research Weeks,
   and activities to strengthen collaboration with industry and the private sector; (ii) improved teaching through
   the implementation of program accreditation initiatives to ensure that teaching personnel are using up-to-
   date course content, engaging in frequent reflection on and updating of their teaching, and receiving regular
   feedback from students and employers, with support from investments in classrooms and facilities, student
   and employer surveys, and pre-accreditation processes; and (iii) improved institutional management
   through review and upgrading of management information systems, investments in physical and technical
   facilities, and production of an annual "Autonomy Implementation Report" covering the ways that each
   university's expanded choices under its autonomous regime are leading to greater financial and education
   independence, with resulting improvements in the quality and relevance of research and teaching.

   2. Strengthened national higher education management system and e-library establishment
   (appraisal: US$17.6 million, of which US$15 million from IDA; actual, IDA US$ 13.32 million). This
   component was to provide equipment, software, and technical support to strengthen four independent
   regional centers for education accreditation to enhance their capacity to conduct institutional and program
   accreditation processes following new national education quality assurance standards. It was also to
   provide training, technical support, and consulting services to advance the development of policies for
   sustainable financing of universities and for equitable access to tertiary education. It was to finance
   equipment, software, and technical support for the system design and operation of a new centralized online
   higher education management information system (HEMIS) at the national level, to replace the existing
   paper-based data collection and reporting system. Finally, it was to finance equipment, e-journals,


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



   courseware, and associated costs for an e-library to provide access to electronic learning resources for a
   network of 50 universities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was to be financed by a US$155 million IDA credit and US$19.6 million equivalent from project
   implementing agencies (the three participating universities, the Ministry of Education and Training [MOET],
   and the National Economic University [NEU], which was to implement the e-library), for total estimated
   project costs of US$174.6 million. Counterpart financing was to cover salary allowances for government and
   university staff seconded to the project, pre-investment expenditures, and initial consulting services to
   prepare proposals, construction designs, and safeguard documents. US$92.58 million of the Bank credit
   was actually disbursed, and US$55.4 million was cancelled. The ICR did not provide information on actual
   counterpart financing.

   The project was approved on May 15, 2017, became effective on December 27, 2018, underwent a mid-
   term review (MTR) in September 2021, and closed on June 30, 2023, six months later than its original
   closing date of December 31, 2022. It was restructured twice:

   November 7, 2022: IUH was removed from the project, as it was not able to complete resettlement and site
   clearance for the construction of new buildings. Results framework targets were adjusted downward to
   eliminate the expected outputs and outcomes that would have been attributed to IUH, and SDR 38.32
   million of the credit was cancelled. US$3 million that would have supported IUH was reallocated to VNUA
   for the purchase of new laboratory equipment. One outcome indicator, on the incorporation of lessons
   learned from university autonomy pilots into MOET policies, was downgraded to an intermediate indicator,
   as a December 2019 government decree conferred considerable autonomy in academic activities,
   organizational structure and personnel, and matters of finance and assets to all HEIs; as a result, the
   indicator was already meeting annual targets. An additional US$10.23 million of the credit was cancelled
   because of a May 2020 government decree that determined that all taxes should be paid from counterpart
   funding. The cancellation amount reflected the total value of unused taxes to be paid on expenditures
   financed by the credit proceeds to date.

   December 30, 2022: The closing date was extended by six months to allow for completion of construction
   activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The project was highly relevant to country context and government strategy. At appraisal, there were
concerns about specific risks that could impact Viet Nam's strong economic recovery following a downturn
in 2011. The country's "Socio-Economic Development Plan 2016-2020" cited the slow pace of improvement
in education, training, science, and technology as key issues. Skill requirements were rising, given the shift
of the labor force toward more productive segments of the economy. Demographic trends—rapid aging and
a projected five-percentage-point decline in the share of the population that is working age by the early
2040s—created an imperative for shifting toward technology-based jobs that would not require as many

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



               low-skilled workers. To this end, Viet Nam had made significant progress in increasing enrollments in higher
               education, but shortcomings remained in gender parity, quality of instruction, and responsiveness to labor
               market needs. Public universities lacked autonomy, impeding their ability to implement curricular
               innovations, raise revenue, and attract high-quality faculty. Viet Nam's 2011-2020 Socioeconomic
               Development Strategy, especially its "breakthrough area" of promoting human resources and skills
               development, focused in part on improving the quality of higher education research, teaching, and
               management. The 2005 Law on Education and 2012 Law on Higher Education loosened some restrictions
               on higher education institutions, and in October 2014, 15 pilot universities were given a three-year period to
               decide for themselves how many students to enroll, what courses and degree programs to offer, and how
               they would compensate faculty and staff. In parallel with movement toward greater autonomy for some
               institutions, the government also began a series of reforms related to quality assurance. Viet Nam joined
               several international higher education quality assurance networks, required each institution to establish an
               internal quality assurance unit and undergo external evaluation, and established four independent
               accreditation centers. The three universities envisioned for support under the project were among the 15
               pilot universities and were delivering training and research in areas critical to Viet Nam's economic and
               industrial development goals.

               The project was also highly relevant to Bank strategy. The Country Partnership Strategy (2012-2016) at
               appraisal contained a pillar on competitiveness that addressed weak innovation capacity and the low skills
               base of the labor force, an objective on increased capacity for innovation and value addition, and an
               outcome indicator on higher education students benefiting from improved curriculum, facilities, laboratories,
               and research activities. The project remained aligned with the Country Partnership Framework applicable at
               closing (2018-2022), which contained an objective to strengthen the relevance and quality of tertiary
               education and labor market institutions, under its second focus area on investing in people and knowledge.
               The Bank is currently conducting consultations with stakeholders for the 2023-2027 Country Partnership
               Framework.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve research capacity at selected autonomous universities (original outcome target)

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change for this objective held that construction of new facilities and procurement of equipment
                             for laboratories (financed by the Bank credit), supplemented with goods and supplies for research, provision
                             of research grants and fellowships, establishment and monitoring of research groups, establishment of an



                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



international peer review research committee, holding of annual Research Weeks, and strengthening of
collaboration with industry with the private sector, would improve research capacity.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

HUST sponsored research groups on developing robots and smart equipment for agriculture, health care, and
personal use; energy systems; and advanced materials for health care, energy use, and the environment and
electronics industries. It promoted an annual research week, a student research conference, and a young
innovation conference in collaboration with the private sector. It organized ongoing seminars, exchanges,
international conferences, peer review committees, and faculty training on laboratory operation and
management.

Similarly, VNUA established 11 groups to carry out joint research projects, peer review panels, training on
research methods and experiment implementation, and a course on writing in agricultural research. It
organized international conferences, national workshops, promotion of research cooperation with the private
sector, and scientific research weeks.

The number of new research collaboration projects approved and launched at VNUA and HUST reached 278,
exceeding the original target of 124 projects and the revised target of 87 projects.

The percentage of new research collaboration projects led by female team leaders increased from 26.52
percent at baseline to 36.12 percent at completion, not reaching the original target of 42.05 percent. It is
noteworthy that, with the exception of HUST having supported three female lecturers receiving training
abroad on research methodology, the ICR presented no outputs or activities that would have contributed to
this result.

The value of resources for research obtained through competitive selection at VNUA and HUST reached
US$14.37 million, not reaching the original target of US$42.73 million.



Outcomes

The number of students and researchers per laboratory workstation in VNUA and HUST decreased from 220
in 2017 to 81 in 2023, almost reaching the original target of 78 students and researchers. The original
indicator and target included IUH.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve research capacity at selected autonomous universities (revised outcome target)

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)




Revised Rationale
Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The value of resources for research obtained through competitive selection at VNUA and HUST reached
US$14.37 million, exceeding the revised target of US$3.34 million.

The percentage of new research collaboration projects led by female team leaders increased from 26.52
percent at baseline to 36.12 percent at completion, exceeding the revised target of 27.5 percent.




Outcomes

The number of students and researchers per laboratory workstation in VNUA and HUST decreased from 220
in 2017 to 81 in 2023, exceeding the revised target of 110.5.



While the outcome indicator alone does not reflect full achievement of the objective, as it focuses only on
laboratory workstations, some of the intermediate indicators on collaborative projects and, most importantly,
competitive funding for research provide a more robust reflection of improved research capacity. Achievement
of this objective under the revised targets is therefore rated High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve teaching capacity at selected autonomous universities (original outcome target)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that construction of lecture halls, classrooms, and practice rooms,
updating of curricula and programs, strengthening of quality assurance mechanisms, and collecting of data on
stakeholder satisfaction would lead to increases in program accreditation, indicative of improved teaching
capacity.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

HUST built and equipped new laboratories for training practice and student research. It developed training
programs based on the integrated undergraduate-postgraduate model with both an academic research


                                                                                                  Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



orientation (Bachelor-Master of Science) and a professional orientation (Bachelor-Specialized Engineer).
Training quality was addressed by upgrading the content of training, introduction of innovative teaching and
learning methods, and innovation in methods of evaluating students' progress and learning results.

VNUA upgraded equipment and curricula for all of its master's and PhD programs. It introduced three
bachelor's degree programs in response to labor market needs: agribusiness administration, financial
economics, and investment economics. It organized training-of-trainer courses on building and developing e-
curriculum, renovating course content and teaching methods, and assessment methods. At the time of the
ICR, self-assessments were ongoing for ten undergraduate programs, two master's programs, and two
doctoral programs.

Across both universities, 113 programs were updated, not reaching the original target of 288 programs. The
percentage of female students enrolled in updated programs increased from 24.33 percent at baseline to 33.4
percent, not reaching the original target of 40 percent. The ICR presented no outputs or activities that would
have specifically encouraged female enrollment. The ICR (p. 24) noted that "additional efforts are needed to
promote and communicate better on the quality of training delivered and employment prospects to encourage
all students, and particularly female students, to enroll in some programs (engineering and technology) that
appear to be less attractive for female students."



Outcomes

The number of additional internationally accredited programs at VNUA and HUST (five-year total) reached 28,
not reaching the original target of 34 programs. The original indicator and target included IUH.

622,743 students benefited from direct interventions to enhance learning, almost reaching the target of
700,000 students. Of there, 373,645 were female students, exceeding the target of 300,000 students.

VNUA conducted regular stakeholder surveys, finding that 97 percent of 2019, 2020, and 2021 graduates
were employed within 12 months after graduation.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve teaching capacity at selected autonomous universities (revised outcome target)

Revised Rationale
Outputs and intermediate outcomes

113 programs were updated, exceeding the revised target of 72 programs.




                                                                                                 Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



The percentage of female students enrolled in updated programs increased from 24.33 percent at baseline to
33.4 percent, not reaching the revised target of 36.5 percent.



Outcomes

The number of additional internationally accredited programs at VNUA and HUST (five-year total) reached 28,
exceeding the revised target of 19 programs.



The ICR (p. 17) explained that VNUA and HUST programs received international accreditation from a variety
of reputable accrediting agencies across the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, United States, and
European Union. The accreditation process covered a robust set of measures and assessments that
adequately measured improved teaching capacity. Achievement of this objective under the revised targets is
therefore rated High.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve institutional capacity at selected autonomous universities (original outcome target)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that upgrading the management information system for
institutional management, investments in physical and technical facilities, and production of annual autonomy
implementation reports would encourage and enable higher education institutions to review and revise their
strategic plans, including strategies for quality assurance, resource mobilization, financial planning, and
maintenance of facilities and equipment, all indicative of improved institutional capacity.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

HUST took 45 actions within the framework of its autonomy status, including carrying out training and
research tasks, organization of personnel, finance (related to tuition and fees, income, salaries, and use of
revenues), scholarships, investments, and monitoring mechanisms. It restructured and consolidated its units
(from 65 in 2016 to 49 in 2022) to minimize overlap in functions, strengthen interdisciplinary focus, and
improve operational efficiency. Three new schools (Mechanics, Information and Communication Technology,
and Electrical-Electronics) were established, and two additional new schools (Materials and Chemistry/Life
Sciences) were in the process of being established at the time of the ICR. HUST deployed a quality




                                                                                                Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



management system and an online university administration system (eHUST) for students and instructors to
conduct academic and administrative tasks.

VNUA organized a training course for about 200 managers and administrative staff to improve university
administrative capacity. Within the context of its autonomy status, it opened new training programs, revised all
existing undergraduate and graduate programs, determined admission quotas on the basis of existing
regulations, conducted accreditation of training programs, provided funding to implement faculty and student
research projects, ensured autonomy of the University Council in strategy and planning for the institution,
oversaw staffing and recruiting, renovated its operating mechanism toward full autonomy in expenditure
decisions, and developed a road map for increase of tuition and fees for all levels of study.



Outcomes

The number of proposed actions from the previous year's "Autonomy Implementation Reports" that were
implemented each year in VNUA and HUST (five-year-total) reached 123, not reaching the original outcome
target of 164 actions. The original indicator and target included IUH.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Improve institutional capacity at selected autonomous universities (revised outcome target)

Revised Rationale
Outcomes

The number of proposed actions from the previous year's "Autonomy Implementation Reports" that were
implemented each year in VNUA and NUST (five-year-total) reached 123, more than doubling the revised
outcome target of 52 actions.



The ICR provided sufficient information on the actions covered by “Autonomy Implementation Reports” to
support an assessment that those actions represented improved institutional capacity. Achievement of this
objective under the revised targets is therefore rated High.



Revised Rating
High



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)




OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Strengthen the national higher education management system

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that strengthening of the national accreditation system, support
for policy analysis for sustainable higher education financing and autonomy, development of a HEMIS, and
establishment of an eLibrary for a network of universities would lead to an increase in accredited universities
and university programs, indicative of overall strengthening of the national higher education management
system.



Outputs and intermediate outcomes

The project supported the development of training materials and training sessions to 1,335 officials of the four
National Centers for Educational Accreditation (CEAs) and a database of accreditation activities at the
institution and program levels. 96 universities were granted institutional accreditation by one of the CEAs
using newly adopted accreditation standards, not meeting the original target of 252 universities or the revised
target of 122 universities. The ICR (p. 20) noted that there was resistance to the process of institution-level
accreditation, a lack of expertise in self-evaluation procedures at many institutions, and a weak quality
assurance system that rendered accreditation processes "cumbersome and difficult to complete." There are
no policies in place to force institutions to carry out institution-level accreditation, and no incentive structure
that encourages them to do so. On the other hand, it is mandatory to carry out small revisions to individual
training programs every two years to fulfill a requirement for program-level accreditation. It is therefore not
surprising that 521 university programs were accredited by the independent accreditation centers, exceeding
both the original target of 471 programs and the revised target of 317 programs.

The project supported MOET in building and launching a higher education management information system
(HEMIS) that consolidates data from all higher education institutions in the country. The Ministry of Public
Security approved the system following security testing, and all legal documents and guidelines on data
migration have been approved. By project completion, 222 higher education institutions had provided data to
the HEMIS, almost reaching the original target of 239 institutions and the revised target of 235 institutions. In
2023, MOET began using HEMIS data to set enrollment quotas for all universities.

The project supported national conferences and other activities to support MOET in developing policies on
HEI autonomy and accountability. Feedback from HEIs was solicited and taken into consideration in
developing new higher education autonomy policies.

NEU built a shared eLibrary focused on economics, business, and management to serve universities and
institutes specializing in those fields. Around 50 HEIs were consulted to determine the eLibrary's features,
which include an entry portal, reading rooms and direct search rooms at NEU's central library, several core
specialized electronic databases, training on use of the eLibrary for staff of NEU and other schools, and wide
dissemination of eLibrary tools. By project closure, 2.7 million e-resources were downloaded by users of the
eLibrary Portal, far exceeding the unchanged target of 66,000 e-resources.




                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



                              Outcomes

                              Recommendations based on lessons learned from the university autonomy pilots were incorporated into
                              MOET policies. In December of 2019, the government issued a decree detailing and guiding the
                              implementation of the 2018 Law on Higher Education that, among other things, established the autonomy and
                              accountability of HEIs. Under this law, HEIs were conferred a degree of autonomy in academic activities,
                              organizational structure and personnel, and matters related to finance and assets. The ICR (p. 19) noted that
                              these policy decisions were informed by a large number of other factors in addition to the pilots financed by
                              this project.



                              Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Under the original outcome targets, the objectives to improve research capacity and strengthen the national
                            higher education management system were substantially achieved, but the objectives to improve teaching
                            capacity and institutional capacity at the university level were only modestly achieved (largely because the
                            original targets assumed contributions from IUH). Efficacy under the original outcome targets is therefore
                            rated Substantial, but barely so.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Under the revised outcome targets, which were adjusted to account for IUH's departure from the project,
                            three of four objectives were highly achieved, and one was substantially achieved. Overall efficacy under the
                            revised outcome targets is rated High.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            High



          5. Efficiency

                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



At appraisal, two cost-benefit analyses were performed: one on the returns to investments in improving the skills
and employability of participating university graduates, and the other on the returns to research and
development (R&D) expenditures. For the first, the net present value (NPV) was found to range between
US$67.3 million and $704.9 million, using a standard Mincer human capital earnings function to estimate the
private rates of return to additional years of education, and varying with assumptions on human capital
externalities, returns to tertiary education, and improvements in learning outcomes. The second yielded rates of
return between US$2.5 and US$3.2 for every dollar invested, based on the experience of eight of 14 countries
from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations +3 group that have adequate data to perform the analysis
(Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore, China, Hong Kong, Japan, and South Korea); as the data set
did not contain enough data points for Vietnam to be included in the estimation sample, and the overall data set
did not indicate the amount of R&D investments made by specific economic subsector, this analysis was useful
for illustrative purposes only.

The ex-post economic analysis replicated that at appraisal using actual costs and benefits (ICR, Annex 4, pp.
48-56). For the return on skills and employability investments, it found that, under an optimistic scenario, a
beneficiary graduate would earn 9.4 percent higher wages across their working life. Using a five percent
discount rate, the interventions were estimated to result in an NPV of US$418.81 million, with an internal rate of
return (IRR) of 15.82 percent. Intermediate and pessimistic scenarios found IRRs of 11.38 percent and 7.70
percent, respectively. The results exceeded those at appraisal because actual student intake at the two
universities was greater than expected, while actual expenditures were lower than budgeted. For the return on
R&D investments, the IRR under an optimistic scenario was 45.81 percent, and 13.71 percent under the most
pessimistic scenario.

There was evidence of significant shortcomings in implementation efficiency. The first three years of
implementation encountered serious issues due to delayed countersigning of the financing agreement
(12 months after Board approval) and declaration of effectiveness (19 months after approval); lengthy processes
of signing subsidiary agreements, which were signed between the Ministry of Finance and Vietnam's
Development Bank transaction office in March 2020 (33 months after approval), delaying the withdrawal of
project proceeds and the start of procurement processes; the government's decision not to use Bank funding to
finance the value-added tax, delaying some payments and affecting the implementation of some project
activities; and delays and ultimately failure to secure approval by the Ho Chi Minh City Municipality of the 1/500
map for IUH construction and of the feasibility study for the campus by the Ministry of Industry and Trade,
meaning that resettlement and site clearance could not be completed for the construction of new buildings and
leading to IUH's withdrawal from the project. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic interrupted research and
instruction, forced a shift to on-line learning from mid-2020 through early 2022, and disrupted global supply
chains for construction materials. Furthermore, instead of relying on its Project Management Board, MOET
established a new management unit specific to the project; this new unit was not included in the Project
Operational Manual (POM), and it was not assigned an operating budget. This situation was ultimately resolved,
but it required adjustments to the POM and operating arrangements within the participating universities. With
civil works contracted late and only completed at the end of the closing date extension, some procured
equipment had to be stored in temporary facilities until works were completed (ICR, p. 27). "Cumbersome"
MOET budgeting processes caused repeated delays in allocations to the participating universities and payments
to contractors (ICR, p. 30).


Efficiency Rating
Modest

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Under the original outcome targets, relevance is High, efficacy is Substantial (but barely so), and efficiency is
Modest, producing an Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

Under the revised outcome targets, relevance is High, efficacy is High, and efficiency is Modest, producing an
Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.

The project's overall Outcome rating is therefore Moderately Satisfactory, indicative of moderate shortcomings
in its preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project's objectives enjoy continued government support, with high-quality human resources and
strengthened science, technology, and innovation among the strategic priorities of the country's 2021-2030
National Master Plan. The Bank approved a US$295 million follow-on project in June 2020 (P166656) that
echoes the interventions supported by this project in three additional national universities. That project will
sustain support of MOET as it implements government priorities in the higher education sector. According to
the ICR (p. 32), the participating universities in the project under review are fully committed to sustaining
project-financed achievements, have plans to establish collaborations with other universities, and have the
necessary autonomy to establish their own priorities and allocate resources toward reaching goals.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                     Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's objectives were realistic and responsive to government priorities, and its design was
  appropriate for achieving the objectives. The results framework was well constructed to monitor progress
  (see Section 9). Project design drew heavily on lessons learned from six prior Bank-financed higher
  education support operations in Vietnam (three development policy operations that focused on the overall
  higher education policy framework, two that provided small grants to individual universities, and a New
  Model University project). These lessons were reflected in this project's focus on quality assurance
  through institutional and program accreditation and on institutional autonomy. The project's approach to
  quality assurance also drew from a systematic overview of international good practices, including in
  Tajikistan, Armenia, Estonia, the Netherlands, and Russia, where it was concluded that even strong and
  autonomous accreditation centers require ministerial leadership to set standards and guidelines.

  Risks were mostly well identified at appraisal, with mitigation measures clearly specified. Substantial risks
  focused on the four participating universities' limited experience with Bank guidelines and procedures and
  the requirement that recurrent expenditures be financed from university resources. To ensure that the
  necessary human resource and institutional development activities were developed to address these
  issues, the Bank team planned to provide ongoing support, and Project Management Unit (PMU) budgets
  included provisions for training in procurement and financial management. The Minister of Education and
  Training expressed his commitment to working with relevant line ministries (Ministry of Industry and
  Trade for HUST, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development for VNUA) to ensure that university
  budgets could meet counterpart financing requirements. A financial analysis conducted at appraisal
  concluded that participating universities' discretionary funds were adequate to meet their commitments to
  the project, and that the incremental costs of the project would have limited impact on the universities'
  financial sustainability (PAD, pp. 24-25).

  Despite these mitigation attempts, however, delays in university budget allocations routinely occurred. In
  addition, importantly, risks associated with land acquisition and resettlement were not adequately
  assessed; the materialization of those risks compromised effective project implementation, with IUH
  forced to withdraw from the project. The ICR (p. 31) indicated that project approval was rushed in 2017 to
  benefit from the last IDA allocation before the country graduated to the International Bank for
  Reconstruction and Development, leaving many elements of project preparation incomplete at the time of
  effectiveness.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR (p. 31) noted that Bank supervision "inherited a project that still required some preparation, and
 that immediately faced lengthy delays." The team worked diligently to bring the project up to speed. It was
 results-focused during its regular support missions and additional technical missions. Reporting was candid
 and realistic. Project monitoring was implemented effectively. The project team worked closely with the
 government on both restructuring requests, and with VNUA and HUST to monitor and complete civil works.
 However, there were some shortcomings. The MTR was delayed to September 2021 by the COVID-19
 pandemic. Although restructuring of the project had been agreed in principle in late 2020, the MTR did not

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



 discuss the changes that were to be introduced (including removing IUH from the project). The
 restructuring took over two years to be approved primarily because of lengthy government approval
 processes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Indicators were selected to measure improvements in the quality of research and teaching in each of the
 three participating universities, with additional university-level indicators on achieving program accreditation
 and implementing autonomy actions intended to measure improvements in institutional capacity, and
 system-wide indicators on the e-library and HEMIS intended to measure strengthening of the national
 higher education management system. Data sources were to include the management information system
 managed by MOET, university-level management information systems, and autonomy reports prepared by
 the participating universities. Baselines and targets for university-level indicators were set. A baseline
 survey was to be carried out during the project's first year to gather information on employer satisfaction
 with graduates of the participating universities.

 The five PMUs—one each from VNUA, HUST, IUH, and NEU, plus the MOET's Project Management
 Board (PMB), designated at its PMU for this project—were to be responsible for monitoring project
 implementation and results. The PMB in MOET was to collect and collate relevant data to provide an
 overall assessment of progress for review by MOET and the Bank team. All PMUs were to collect data
 disaggregated by gender wherever relevant. Ongoing support was to be provided to the PMUs to build
 capacity for measurement of project indicators and use of M&E data.



b. M&E Implementation
  Project monitoring was implemented as planned. The results framework was modified to reflect
  implementation experience and the removal of IUH from the project. However, these adjustments
  occurred relatively late, as the September 2021 MTR did not reflect changes that had been agreed in late
  2020, and the actual restructuring did not take place until November 2022. The original outcome indicator
  on incorporating lessons learned from the university autonomy pilots into MOET policies was
  downgraded to an intermediate indicator to reflect the government's adoption of the autonomy policy (as
  explained in Section 4, fourth objective).




                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E was used to track progress and address delays. Regular monitoring information informed
  both restructurings, with targets and dates adjusted to reflect implementation progress. The ICR (p. 29)
  noted that project M&E was particularly important in tracking the implementation of civil works in the
  project's final year to ensure that all works were completed by the closing date. Both HUST and VNUA
  invested in their university-level management information systems, strengthening their internal M&E
  systems to inform institutional reforms and policies.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was environmental assessment category B and triggered OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
   Assessment (construction and operation of laboratories, including the use and disposal of chemicals and
   waste water systems), OP/BP 4.09 Pest Management (possible use of pesticides in agricultural research),
   OP/BP 2011 Physical Cultural Resources (relocation of 31 graves as part of activities at IUH), and OP/BP
   4.12 Environmental Resettlement (screening showed that the project would have moderate resettlement
   impacts due to land acquisition associated with the extension of the IUH campus). Each university prepared
   an Environmental and Social Management Plan with measures to address identified impacts during the pre-
   construction, construction, and operations phases, including guidelines for pesticides purchases and use.
   Appropriate consultations were conducted with stakeholders potentially affected by project activities and
   by land acquisition for IUH, including 331 affected households near that campus. A Resettlement Policy
   Framework and Action Plan were prepared and disclosed. All safeguards-related policy frameworks and
   action plans were disclosed locally and on the Bank's website in a timely manner. Grievance redress
   mechanisms were made available at the project level and through the Bank's Grievance Redress Service.
   The ICR (p. 30) reported that "there were no issues with environmental safeguards during implementation."
   All Implementation Status and Results Reports from 2021 through 2023 rated safeguards Satisfactory,
   which is the project safeguards rating reported in the Operations Portal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The financial management and procurement assessments carried out at appraisal identified several risks:
   lack of experience with World Bank operations among university staff; unclear delegation of authority
   between line ministries and universities; and possibly insufficient annual budget allocations to participating
   universities. The ICR (p. 30) reported that these risks did not materialize, as overall financial management
   arrangements were adequate. Loan proceeds were used for their intended purposes, and reporting,
   through occasionally delayed, provided accurate and mostly timely information on
   implementation progress. Operating plans and budget allocations to HUST, VNUA, and NEU, as well as
   payments to contractors, were "almost continuously" delayed by the MOET's cumbersome budgeting



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



   process (ICR, p. 30). Procurement was rated satisfactory through most of the project's lifetime, with
   occasional delays resulting from issues outside the procurement process.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Shortcomings in achievement of
                                                                                key original outcome targets,
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                and evidence of significant
                                                                                implementation inefficiencies.
                                                                                Shortcomings in quality at entry,
                                                                                centering on the number of key
                                                                                preparatory steps that were not
                                                                                complete at the time of project
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                launch. The ICR reported that
                                                                                the lack of readiness resulted in
                                                                                delays that hindered project
                                                                                implementation.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 32-34) contained a range of insightful lessons, including:

It is possible to overlook key risks and preparatory steps when approving a project as a
country is transitioning from IDA to IBRD lending. In this case, rushing to take advantage of the
country's IDA allocation before graduation to IBRD meant that some essential preparatory activities,
approvals, risk analyses, and feasibility studies were not ready by effectiveness.

Decentralizing project management responsibility to beneficiary implementing agencies can
build ownership for results, but this is likely to be the case only when there are relatively few
implementers and capacity is already robust. In this case, university-level implementing
agencies, under MOET coordination, were able to ramp up quickly and effectively respite lack of


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Support for Autonomous Higher Education (P156849)



prior familiarity with Bank procedures and requirements. Delegation of responsibility to them helped
build their confidence and commitment to project activities and outcomes.

Completion of land acquisition processes, or at minimum, identification of acceptable
backup plans in the event that acquisition falls through, is a prerequisite for approval of
project financing. In this case, significant time and effort were expended on a university whose
participation could not move forward in the absence of these approvals.

Higher education institution accreditation requires not only capacity but incentivization. In
this case, targets for institution-level accreditation were not reached because of cumbersome
processes and lack of significant reward for having completed the process. Institutions need both the
carrot (assistance and incentives) and stick (compliance measures) to encourage them to navigate
complex, comprehensive assessment processes at the institution rather than just the department or
program level.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, candid, and adherent to guidelines. Its data were of high quality, with sources clearly
specified for each indicator. The analysis was focused on results and the integrity of the results
chain. Implementation processes and issues were clearly described. The ICR contained a useful annex on the
higher education sector context in Viet Nam. However, the ICR was highly repetitive.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
