     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024220

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P128276                                   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-52800,TF-14713                        31-Dec-2020                                         330,755,370.02

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Jun-2013                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          375,000,000.00                                    25,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                           375,739,892.98                                    24,999,892.29

 Actual                                       336,839,899.00                                    24,999,892.29




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing and Grant Agreements, (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document, (PAD,
   paragraph 22), the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) of this Bangladesh Coastal Embankment
   Improvement Project were to: (i) increase the area protected in selected polders from tidal flooding and
   frequent storm surges, expected to worsen due to climate change; (ii) improve agricultural production by
   reducing saline water intrusion in selected polders; and (iii) improve government capacity to respond promptly
   and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



   This review will parse the objectives into the following three sub-objectives:

           i. To increase the area protected in selected polders from tidal flooding and frequent storm surges
          ii. To improve agricultural production by reducing saline water intrusion in selected polders
         iii. To improve government capacity to respond to an eligible crisis or emergency



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

   Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
      1. Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polders: (US$291.0 million at appraisal, restructuring reduced
            this to US$274.1 million, US$215.6 million actual). This component was to finance civil works to (i)
            rehabilitate critical portions of polder embankments, including slope protection, (ii) increase
            embankment heights, (iii) repair and upgrade drainage and flushing systems within polders, and (iv)
            improve operation and maintenance (O&M) of the polders. 17 polders in three works packages
            across the following seven districts were to be rehabilitated and improved: Khulna, Bagerhat,
            Pirojpur, Patuakhali, Barguna, Jhalkathi, and Satkhira. In addition, this component was to finance
            afforestation activities to protect embankments from tidal flooding and storm surges.
         2. Implementation of Social and Environmental Management Frameworks and Plans: (US$56.0
            million at appraisal; restructuring reduced this to US$51.0 million, US$49.3 million actual). This
            component was to finance the implementation of three plans – (i) the social action plans (SAPs); (ii)
            the Social Management and Resettlement Policy Framework (SMRPF) and Resettlement Action
            Plans (RAPs); and (iii) the Environmental Management Framework and Environmental Management
            Plan (EMP). This component was also to finance the establishment of water management
            organizations (WMOs) in the target polders. WMOs are participatory water management
            organizations or schemes in a polder. These include Water Management Group (WMG) and Water
            Management Association (WMA). Each hydraulic boundary in a polder/scheme is a Water
            Management Unit (WMU). Each WMU may form a WMG. Representatives from each WMG form an
            apex body called a WMA. The WMGs and the WMA in a polder/scheme are known as WMOs.
            WMOs were to determine needs and uses for water resources and support the operation and
            maintenance (O&M) of hydraulic infrastructure. This component was to finance land acquisition,
            resettlement and rehabilitation of persons adversely affected by the project. In addition, this
            component was to finance (i) the environmental impact assessments (EIAs) for all remaining
            polders, (ii) the implementation of environmental mitigation measures, and (iii) the establishment of
            an environmental monitoring system within the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) to
            track the environmental performance of the polder system.
         3. Construction Supervision, Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Coastal Zone
            Monitoring: (US$32.0 million at appraisal; restructuring reduced this to US$30.8 million, US$36.6
            million, actual) This component was to finance surveys and designs of the target polders;


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



         construction supervision of the coastal embankment rehabilitation and improvement work; and the
         project M&E. In addition, this component was to finance a morphological assessment of the
         Bangladesh Delta, extend the current monitoring systems in coastal Bangladesh to generate data to
         assess the effects of multiple drivers to guide future design, rehabilitation, and improvement
         requirements of the coastal zone environment.
      4. Project Management, Technical Assistance, Training and Strategic Studies: (US$21.0 million
         at appraisal, restructuring reduced this to US$19.5 million, US$10.4 million actual). This component
         was to finance project management, audits, technical assistance, strategic studies, and training
         support to the BWDB. This component was to finance the updating of the strategic polder
         assessment, and preparatory studies for subsequent phases of the project.
      5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC): (US$0 million at appraisal, US$0 million
         actual). This component was to finance the government’s emergency response to a disaster.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$ US$400 million. The total project cost was reduced to
  US$375.74 million after cancelling US$24.26 million in IDA credit (or SDR18.2 million; see Dates below).
  The credit disbursed US$311.84 million in IDA funds and US$25.0 million in grants for a total disbursement
  of US$336.84 million.

  Financing: The International Development Association provided a credit equivalent to US$375 million. The
  Pilot Program for Climate Resilience under the Strategic Climate Fund (PPCR-SCF) provided an additional
  grant of US$25 million.

  Borrower Contribution: None.

  Dates: The World Bank Board approved the project on June 26, 2013. The credit and the grant became
  effective on November 24, 2013. The World Bank team conducted the Mid Term Review (MTR) on January
  13, 2017. The credit and the grant were originally scheduled to close on December 31, 2020. The project
  period was extended twice for a total of 36 months to close on December 31, 2023. The following
  restructurings occurred:

        On January 14, 2020 to reduce the scope due to financing constraints, and extend the loan closing
         date by 18 months, from December 31, 2020 to June 30, 2022 to complete delayed activities. The
         PDO was not revised. The following changes were made to targets of two PDO-outcome level
         indicators, three intermediate results indicators and three new intermediate results indicators were
         added to measure outputs that were part of the scope but not reflected in the original results
         framework.
              o Reduced the targets for the following PDO outcome indicators:
                        Gross area protected from 100,800 to 66,012 hectares (ha)
                        Direct project beneficiaries from 760,000 to 724,202 persons.
              o Reduced the targets for the following output targets
                        Number of polders from 17 to 10 polders
                        Length of embankment to be upgraded from 623 to 408 kilometers (km)
                        Length of drainage channels to be upgraded from 794 to 305 km
                        the replacement and repair of hydraulic structures
                        redefined flushing inlets (IRI 2 and 4) with reduced targets
                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



               o The following intermediate results indicators were added:
                       Dropped one output indicator – upgrading regulators
                       Increased the targets for the following output indicators
                              Area to be afforested from 300 to 600 ha
                              Number of water management associations to be formed from 4 to 10
                              Number of grievance redress committees to be formed from 17 to 36
         On March 06, 2022 to extend the loan closing date for an additional 18 months, from June 30, 2022
          to December 31, 2023 to complete ongoing critical works because of the impact of COVID-19;
          supply chain disruptions; delayed compensation; slow land acquisition; and severe weather. Two
          cyclones affected the project polders.
         On December 12, 2023 to cancel US$24.26 million, reduce the project cost from US$400 million to
          US$375.74 million. Cost savings from work contracts and foreign exchange gains reduced the
          allocations of the components.

   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The project scope was reduced during the
   first restructuring leading to the reduced targets for two outcome level indicators and adjustments of the
   targets for the intermediate results indicators. Cost overruns led to these adjustments because of (i) a 300
   percent increase in land acquisition costs following the implementation of a new Acquisition and Requisition
   of Immovable Property Act 2017; (ii) a 2.0 percent increase in value added tax; 2.5 percent increase in
   income tax for works, and a 10 percent increase in income tax for consultancy services; (iii) price
   escalation; (iv) foreign exchange gains resulting in a decrease from US$375.00 million to US$342.15 million
   as of November 7, 2019); and (v) emergency protection works during implementation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: Bangladesh is a low-lying delta where three great trans-Himalayan rivers — the Ganges, the
Brahmaputra or Jamuna, and the Meghna (GBM) meet. Only about 10 percent of the GBM catchment lies
in Bangladesh, but about 200 rivers and tributaries of the GBM drain through the country through a
constantly changing network of estuaries, tidal inlets, and tidal creeks, before emptying out into the Bay of
Bengal. Floods, cyclonic storms, and erosion frequent this topography. The Bangladeshi coastal zone is
home to nearly 42 million in 2010 and is estimated to grow to 61 million by 2050. Poverty indicators in the
coastal area show a higher percentage of the population live below the absolute poverty line compared to
the rest of the country. Coastal communities are often also the poorest, who rely heavily on subsidence
agriculture. Polders protect coastal communities from flooding, tidal inundations and salinity intrusion. The
polder embankments also provide emergency shelter to victims of riverbank erosion and flood inundations.
After the 2007 Cyclone Sidr, government agencies, development partners, and the World Bank conducted
consultations to prepare a long-term disaster risk reduction program. The government invested about
US$10 billion in key climate adaptation investments such as structural and non-structural disaster mitigation
and preparedness systems to upgrade the embankment system. The government constructed over 2,130
multipurpose cyclone shelters, 139 polders, and 2,900 water control structures. The Dutch term “polder”
refers to areas enclosed on all sides by dikes, or embankments, separated from the main river system.
Inlets and outlets control the water inside the polder and protect against tidal floods, salinity intrusion, and
sedimentation (PAD, footnote 12). The existing coastal embankments protect against the impact of climate

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



variability. To maintain their effectiveness, these required retrofitting and upgrading. The siltation of
peripheral rivers, poor maintenance, and inadequate management threaten the integrity and the
effectiveness of these embankments against damages.

National Plans: The government adopted a policy environment to mainstream water resource
management, disaster risk management, and climate change adaptation agendas in its major coastal and
development strategies. The project was relevant to achieving the goals of Bangladesh’s Eighth Five Year
Plan FY2020–25 by strengthening community capacity, building resilient infrastructure, and providing
technical assistance in O&M. The PDO was also relevant to the objectives of the Bangladesh Delta Plan,
which highlights reducing vulnerability to storm surges and building resilience to climate change and other
delta challenges. The PDO and this project supported the August 2021 update of the Bangladesh Nationally
Determined Contribution (NDC), where this project was noted as one of the key adaptation actions in
mitigating significant impacts of cyclones and enhanced emergency response in the coastal region. The
PDO was also relevant to the mitigation actions of the updated NDC noting that afforestation activities
promoted collaborative forest management and social forestry.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDO was relevant to the World Bank Groups’ Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Bangladesh FY2023–27 (Report No. 181003-BD). The PDO was relevant
to the CPF’s Objective 7 High-Level Outcome C: Enhanced climate and environmental resilience. This
objective focused on improved effectiveness of delta management to accelerate climate resilience through
activities such as the implementation of the Bangladesh Delta Plan, building climate-resilient infrastructure,
improved disaster risk management, and community-led adaptation and risk management. One of the
CPF’s progress indicators was the number of people benefiting from enhanced resilience to riverbank
erosion or inundation damage that this project supported. The PDO was also relevant to High-Level
Outcome B: Improved socioeconomic inclusion, through enhancing economic opportunities for vulnerable
groups, by improving resilience in agriculture.

World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: The multi donor Climate Investment Fund
(CIF) in the World Bank established a Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) in 2011 and selected
Bangladesh as one of nine pilot countries to implement a national strategy for climate resilience. Following
Cyclone Sidr in 2007, the World Bank financed the Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery and Restoration
Project (P111272) and the Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Project (P146464) to construct and rehabilitate
disaster shelters and coastal embankments. The World Bank has also financed the ongoing Resilient
Infrastructure for Adaptation and Vulnerability Reduction Project (P173312) to reduce vulnerability to river
and flash floods and improve disaster preparedness and response. The ongoing Climate-Smart Agricultural
Water Management Project (CSAWMP, P161534) is expected to promote resilient agriculture. The World
Bank also has a track record of financing disaster risk management globally. The World Bank experience in
the sector and in Bangladesh point to a strong justification for Bank financing of this project.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and specific. The
level of ambition relative to the Bank's experience in the country and the expected
outcomes was appropriate. The scope was limited to a target number of polders to showcase how to
reduce the impact of cyclone-induced storm surges on embankments, hydraulic structures, drainage
channels, and cropping intensity. The scope was downscaled during implementation because of design and
implementation constraints. Numerous cyclones hit the coastal areas of Bangladesh during the project
period - Roanu (2016), Mora (2017), Fani and Bulbul (in 2019), Amphan (2020), Yaas and Jawad (in 2021),
Sitrang (2022), and Mocha, Hamoon, and Midhili (in 2023). At completion, the PDO remained relevant to



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



               the Bank's CPF and the Government disaster risk management priorities. Overall, the relevance of the
               PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase the area protected in selected polders from tidal flooding and frequent storm surges.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC): No TOC was prepared at appraisal. It was prepared at the ICR using the causal
                             links established by the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes in the results framework at appraisal (PAD,
                             Annex 1). Climate change was expected to worsen tidal flooding and cause frequent storm surges.
                             Rehabilitating and improving targeted polders would increase community resilience. Multicriteria analysis
                             guided the prioritization of selected polders. These included the condition of the embankment and the
                             drainage system, economic activities in the polders (agriculture, fishery), population and socioeconomic
                             conditions, environmental and economic considerations such
                             as proximity of polders to facilitate the efficient execution of works). Afforestation was to protect from erosion,
                             stabilize the embankments by countering floods, tidal surges, wave attacks, and strong winds. Afforestation
                             was to support the livelihoods of local communities. Selected mangrove and salt tolerant species were to be
                             planted as a protective greenbelt on the tidal inundation zone to the foreshore of the embankment. A range of
                             commercial wood, fuel wood, fruit, other tree, palm and grass species were to be planted
                             along foreshore slopes of embankments using participatory social forestry practices. These were to support
                             the livelihoods needs of landless, marginalized and poor villagers, including women.

                             Inputs: were to be the financing and technical assistance of the activities in the target polders such as the
                             rehabilitation and improvement of the polders and the afforestation of the target area.

                             Outputs: were to be the area protected, the upgraded embankments with improved slopes and protective
                             works; the repaired and replaced drainage and flushing systems; the upgraded drainage channels; and the
                             area that has been afforested.

                             Outcomes: were to be the increase in area protected from tidal flooding and frequent storm.

                             Overall, the causal link between inputs, outputs and outcomes were established. The TOC identified three
                             critical assumptions that if realized, were to enhance the likelihood that the outcomes would be achieved: (i)
                             a multicriteria analysis was to guide the assessment that would prioritize the targeted polders; (ii) the
                             government would allocate adequate O&M budget for these polders; and (iii) BWDB would maintain O&M
                             capacity after the project closed. The World Bank Task Team clarified that these last two critical assumptions

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



referred to the government providing BWDB with O&M budgets allocated for the polders completed under
this project. Adequate O&M budget for BWDB would then allow BWDB to maintain its O&M capacity.

OUTPUTS:

        10 polders were improved (the original target was 17 polders).
        405.67 km of embankments were upgraded to resilient standards. The original target was 623 km.
        afforested 700 ha as a nature-based solution for climate resilience (original target was 300 ha).
        Completed 29 km of slope protective works (original target was 28 km), and 9.85 km of bank
         protective works (original target was 9.37 km).

OUTCOMES: The following outcomes were not achieved:

      The area protected from tidal flooding and frequent storm surges reached 65,657 ha (the original
       target of 100,800 ha).
      720,573 persons were the direct project beneficiaries of the increased resilience to climate change,
       the original target was 760,000. The original and unrevised target that 50 percent of direct project
       beneficiaries were female, was achieved.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective against the original targets is rated Modest. While
the outputs achieved some level of protecting selected coastal polders against the risk of flooding, storm
surges, coastal erosion, and salinity intrusion, the original targets for both outcome indicators and some
outputs were not achieved.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 1 was not revised. The targets for outcome indicators were reduced.

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: No change.

Revised Inputs: Resources and correspondingly, the scope of the project were reduced.

Revised Outputs: The January 2020 restructuring reduced the scope to target 10 instead of 17 polders and
targets of the output indicators were proportionately reduced. The end target for afforested area was
increased from 300 (ha) to 600 (ha) due to actual requirements.

Revised Outcomes: The outcome indicators were not changed but its targets were reduced.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



Revised Critical Assumptions. No change. Overall, the TOC retained the reasonable causal link between
inputs, revised target outputs, and reduced targets of the original outcome indicators.

Revised OUTPUTS: The following outputs with revised targets were achieved or almost achieved:

      Improved 10 polders (the revised target was 10 polders).
      The project upgraded 405.67 km of embankments to resilient standards. The revised target of 408 km
       was proportionate to the reduced target of polders from 17 to 10.
      afforested 700 ha as a nature-based solution for climate resilience (revised target was 600 ha)

Revised OUTCOMES: The following revised outcome targets were achieved or almost achieved:

      Increased the area protected from tidal flooding and frequent storm surges to 65,657 ha (revised
       target was 66,012 ha).
      720,573 persons were the direct project beneficiaries of the increased resilience to climate change.
       (The revised target was 724,202)

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the objective against revised targets is rated Substantial. The
outputs protected the targeted polders against the risk of flooding, storm surges, coastal erosion, and salinity
intrusion.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve agricultural production by reducing saline water intrusion in selected polders.

Rationale
Theory of Change: A TOC was prepared at completion. The inputs, outputs and expected outcomes were
reasonably linked. Reducing saline water intrusion in selected polders was to increase cropping intensity
and improve agricultural production. Forming the water management organizations was to strengthen the
operations and maintenance (O&M) of the investments to reduce the saline water intrusion. The cropping
intensity would increase because of the improved O&M. Cropping intensity refers to the number of crops a
farmer grows on the same field in a given agricultural year. This is calculated by taking the total gross
cropped area (single, double, and triple crops) divided by the total arable land area in a cropping season for
the 10 selected polders. The ICR did not mention other factors that affected cropping intensity other than
saline intrusion. However, the World Bank Task Team clarified that environmental factors such as land
elevation, inundation patterns, and climate change also affected cropping intensity with impacts generally
secondary to the dominant constraint from salinity intrusion. The critical assumption noted above in Objective
1 – the government would allocate adequate O&M budget – was to support BWDB to improve its capacity to
maintain the completed polders. The World Bank Task Team clarified that the WMAs were community-based
organizations designed to participate in water management of the polders. This project created a structured



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



benefit-sharing scheme for WMAs to carry out minor maintenance from the sales proceeds of the social
afforestation activities after the customary rotation period.

Inputs: were to be training and technical assistance to support target beneficiaries to form water
management bodies and the financing of physical structures that would reduce saline water intrusion in
selected polders.

Outputs: were to be the organized water management associations, newly constructed and rehabilitated
drainage, regulators, and flushing structures.

Outcomes: was to be the rate of increase in cropping intensity.

Critical Assumptions: The same assumptions from the TOC of the first objective also applied here.

Overall, a causal link was established between the outputs and some of the expected outcomes.

OUTPUTS: The following target outputs were exceeded or achieved:

      10 water management associations (WMAs) were organized (original target was 4), are overseeing
       the overall polder operations and maintenance (O&M) including the minimal upkeep during cyclones
       to ensure overall sustainability (such as closing the gates to avoid tidal flooding).
      BWDB delivered 1,200 person-days of training (original target was 160 days). The target indicator was
       revised at restructuring (see below).
      Client days of training provided to women was not reported because this was dropped at restructuring.
       The target was 60 women.
      Completed two studies to meet the PPCR indicator target on improving coastal monitoring by using
       climate information in decision making (original target was 2 studies).
            o Modelling of the long-term physical processes and other relevant phenomena (subsidence,
               climate change, river morphology etc.) (scale: macro, meso, and micro)
            o An investment plan describing a phased polder improvement roadmap for Bangladesh Coast.

The following target outputs were unmet:

      Upgraded 305.85 km of drainage channels (original target 794 km)

OUTCOMES:

      The cropping intensity at the project sites increased from a baseline of 140 percent to 192 percent,
       exceeding the original end target of 180 percent.
      The project enabled a two-crop cycle annually. This outcome reflected an improvement in agricultural
       practices, enhanced both agricultural efficiency, and community resilience. The annual 2-crop cycle
       resulted in tangible benefits for the community, such as optimized land use, increased food
       production, higher incomes for farmers, improved food security, and greater crop diversification.
       These outcomes were not valued.
      From 2015-2016 to 2022-2023, watermelon cultivation in the project polders under the first works
       package increased from 3 to 9 percent of the total cropped area. Non-project polders saw an increase
       from 1 to 5 percent.: The World Bank Task team further clarified that the resulting increase in

                                                                                                 Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



       watermelon production for the project-assisted polders was significant. In 2022-2023, project polders
       reported a watermelon yield of 12.36 tons per hectare, which is nearly double the yield of 6.86 tons
       per hectare in non-project polders. This substantial difference in yield highlights the effectiveness of
       the interventions and support provided under the project in enhancing the productivity of watermelon
       cultivation in the project polders.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial. Cropping intensity was
achieved; and was attributed to reduced salinity intrusion. The World Bank Task Team clarified that other
factors also affected cropping intensity, but the impacts from these socio-economic factors were generally
secondary to those of salinity intrusion.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Objective 2 was not revised. Targets for the output indicators were revised.

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: No changes.

Revised Inputs: Financing resources were reduced.

Revised Outputs: The January 2020 restructuring reduced the number of polders from 17 to 10
polders. Targets of output indicators were proportionately reduced. Three new output indicators and targets
replaced two indicators in the original results framework to distinguish the outputs of specific interventions.
Hence – “drainage structures replaced” and “drainage structures repaired” replaced “drainage structures
replaced/upgraded” – and “flushing inlets replaced” and “flushing inlets repaired” replaced the indicator
“flushing inlets upgraded.” Two new indicators were added because the original results framework
inadvertently omitted these – "riverbank protection” and “slope protection." One output indicator – regulators –
was dropped because it was part of the drainage structure.

Revised Outcomes: No change.

Revised Critical Assumptions. No change.

Revised OUTPUTS: The following new output indicator targets were achieved or exceeded:

      Upgraded 305.85 km of drainage channels. The January 2020 project restructuring, decreased the
       drainage channel target to 305 kilometers (from 795 km) proportionate to the reduction of the project
       scope from 17 to 10 polders.
      10 water management associations (WMAs) were organized (revised target 10). The January 2020
       restructuring revised the indicator from “Water Management Organization (WMO)” to “Water
       Management Association (WMA).” End target was increased from 4 to 10 because each polder is


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



         required to have one WMA per the institutional requirement. Initial project design targeted 4 WMA to
         be piloted in a few polders. Restructuring acknowledged the need to form WMA for each polder.
        New indicators – Replaced and upgraded drainage structures –
              o 89 drainage structures replaced, target 88
              o 8 drainage structures repaired, target 8
        New indicators – replaced and repaired flushing inlets
              o replaced 85 flushing inlets – target 80
              o 46 flushing inlets repaired – target 44
        Constructed 9.85 km of riverbank protection works – target 9.37 km. BWDB reported an additional
         7.91 km of precautionary protection works for a total of 17.75 km. However, only 9.85 km met the
         uniform design standards.
        new indicator - 29.1 km in Slope Protection was part of the original project scope, but not reflected in
         the original results framework. Target was 28 km.
        BWDB delivered 1,200 person-days of training (revised target was 1,200 person-days).

Revised OUTCOMES: No changes.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve the objective using revised targets is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the government’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change: This objective was to be triggered when the government declared an emergency. No
resources were allocated to this objective. Once triggered, the government would have the ability to reallocate
uncommitted resources to finance previously agreed eligible activities to respond to a disaster or emergency.
The ICR acknowledged that a belated World Bank guidance was to include “if applicable” in formulating the
PDO. The government did not declare an emergency. There were no outputs or expected outcomes to be
reported.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the government’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 22
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)




                              Revised Rationale
                              Same as above. The CERC was not triggered, so the objective is Not rated.



                              Revised Rating
                              Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives against the original targets is rated Substantial
                            with moderate shortcomings. Some increase in the area covered by the improved polders increased cropping
                            intensity, due to the reduced saline intrusion. The efficacy of the project to achieve Objective 1 is rated
                            Modest, that of Objective 2 is rated Substantial and of Objective 3 is not rated.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The revised overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives against the revised targets is rated
                            Substantial. Sufficient impact was reported on meeting the target area covered by the improved polders and
                            the increase in cropping intensity and agriculture production because of reduced saline intrusion. The revised
                            outcome targets were achieved or almost achieved. The efficacy of the project to achieve Objective 1 against
                            revised targets is rated Substantial, that of Objective 2 is rated Substantial. Objective 3 was not rated. The
                            revised overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency. At appraisal, an economic cost benefit analysis was conducted for the investments in
   rehabilitating and improving the polders and investments in implementing the social and environmental
   management framework and plans. The total cost was US$264.80 million or 85 percent of the total project cost.



                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



Appraisal used a 10 percent discount rate. The NPV at appraisal was estimated at US$398.6 million and the
estimated EIRR was at 22 percent.

At closing the analysis of the economic efficiency of the physical investments used a 12 percent discount rate
while investments related to the implementation of the social and environmental management framework and
corresponding plans used a 6 percent discount rate. The resulting Net Present Value (NPV) ranged from
US$372.80 to US$1,177.50 million. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 25.7 percent.
The benefit cost ratio (BCR) ranged from 2.9 to 5.1. The scope and methodology used at appraisal differed for
what was used at closing and cannot be compared given the difference in coverage.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Cost overruns downscaled the project scope. Five factors caused
cost overruns. First, land acquisition costs increased by 300 percent because the government implemented the
2017 Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable Property Act. Second, the value added tax rate increased by 2.0
percent, the income tax rate for works increased by 2.5 percent, and the income tax rate for consultancy
services increased by10 percent during the project period. Third, prices increased since the project was
approved. Fourth, the SDR lost against the US$ as of November 7, 2019, reducing the original project cost
equivalent from US$375 to US$342.15 million. Fifth, periodic cyclones caused severe inland riverbank erosion
adversely affecting the property and livelihood of local farmers and fishermen. Additional resources were
needed to undertake urgent rehabilitation protection works at these severely eroded sites to protect these
embankments from further erosion. Scope was reduced to complete only 10 of the planned 17 polders because
of increased costs for land acquisition, and changes in the prevailing value added tax and income tax.
Procurement and contract management issues delayed the contracting for polder rehabilitation. The COVID-19
pandemic also contributed to the delays. The frequent cyclones – 6 during the project period – interrupted
implementation in vulnerable areas – up to 47 months for the first works package, and up to 35 months for the
second works package. Numerous hartals (strikes) and blockades that took place during the project period also
contributed to implementation delays. Delayed works extended the implementation period twice and closed 36
months later than originally planned. All these affected the disaster risk vulnerability of the population. For
example, the target beneficiary farmers in some areas had no access to irrigation facilities for an entire year
because of delayed installation of gates to repair sluices or the construction of structures.

The project demonstrated substantial operational efficiency by completing the rehabilitation of 10 polders mostly
within cost estimates, except for the contract prices adjusted to accommodate the impact of tax legislation (ICR,
paragraph 45). Project management costs were 50 percent lower than appraisal estimates even as resources
were added for detailed design construction supervision and project management support (a 41.42 percent
increase) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) consultants (a 48.13 percent increase) to supervise the works
and associated M&E activities under Component C. The World Bank Task Team clarified that the lower actual
cost for project management compared to the original estimate was due to BWDB's strategic decision to embed
capacity building and training components within existing consultancy service contracts (Components C1, C2,
and C3). BWDB achieved significant cost savings by having the hired experts provide technical assistance and
training to BWDB officials in the course of their regular duties, rather than treating these as separate line items.
The integrated approach resulted in less cost while still achieving the intended outcomes for institutional
capacity building and training.

Overall, project efficiency is rated Modest. Substantial operational and administrative inefficiencies resulted in a
36-month extension of the project period. The project economic efficiency at closing was substantial, but could
not be compared with the method used at appraisal.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

                                      Before Restructuring                    After Restructuring
Relevance of Objective                High
Efficacy of the project to achieve
Obj 1 Increased area protected from
tidal flooding and frequent storm     Modest                                  Substantial
surges
Obj 2 Improved agricultural
production by reducing saline water   Substantial                             Substantial
intrusion
Obj 3 CERC                         Not rated                                  Not rated
                                   Substantial with moderate
Overall Efficacy                                                              Substantial
                                   shortcoming
Efficiency                         Modest
Overall Outcome                    Moderately Satisfactory                    Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical value of Overall Outcome 4                                          4
Disbursements (in US$ millions)    US$203.77                                  US$330.6
Disbursement Rate (in percent)     203.77/330.6 = 61.6                        330.6-203.77/330.6 =38.4
Numerical Value of Outcome         4*.616 = 2.46                              4*.384 =1.54
Overall Outcome                       4 or Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                    Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcome:

      Technical risk: This is a substantial risk. The completed protective works, hydraulic structures, and
       drainage channels incorporated climate-resilience technical designs. These require frequent update
       based on climate induced threats. For example, severe riverbank erosion could easily threaten the
       integrity of the completed embankments and hydraulic structures. Storm and tidal surges could cause
       a breach, increase the area exposed to flooding and saline intrusion, degrade agricultural land, and
       negatively impact the lives and livelihoods of residents. The government would need to adopt urgent
       engineering solutions and management strategies to prevent erosion and maintain the technical
       resilience of the polders.
      Financial risk. This is a substantial risk. The 141 Water Management Groups (WMGs) and 10 Water
       Management Associations (WMAs) implemented O&M of the polders to mitigate this threat. However,
       the Project Management Unit (PMU) confirmed that the O&M of the infrastructure built and
       rehabilitated under the project had no adequate budget assigned. No follow-on coastal resilience
       operation is planned.
      Government ownership or commitment. This is a moderate risk at closing. The government has
       adopted plans and invested in infrastructure that address the environmental risks faced by the coastal
       zone area. The government maintains their commitment to these plans by adopting measures in
       Bangladesh’s 8th five-year plan and Delta Plan 2100. The government marked CEIP-I as a key
       initiative for ongoing disaster risk management efforts emphasizing continued investment in reducing
       and mitigating the effects of the underlying risks of coastal polders as well as sustainable
       development of climate change resilient coastal polders. However, recent events in Bangladesh and
       the resulting change in government heightens this risk.
      Exposure to natural hazard risks. This is a substantial risk. The country’s geographic location and
       topography exacerbate this risk. The mitigating solutions adopted by the project points to a long-term
       disaster preparedness by constructing new disaster-resilient embankments with build-back-better
       elements. Increased cropping intensity improved agricultural production. A bottom-up approach in
       coastal monitoring is expected to lead to the long-term capacity of the BWDB and address resilience
       against this exposure to natural disasters.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team designed this project to contribute to Objective 7 High-Level Outcome C:
  Enhanced climate and environmental resilience of the World Bank Group’s current Country Partnership
  Framework for Bangladesh. The World Bank team used the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and
  Restoration Project (P111272) to plan and design this project as part of the government’s policy
  environment to mainstream water resource management, disaster risk management, and climate change
  adaptation agendas reflected in its major coastal and development strategies. The PDO statement
  expressed three different objectives with a wide scope to respond to a complex and rapidly changing
  climate induced environment. The World Bank team designed the project to pilot innovative solutions,


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



  targeting several polders; and phased, to test run the approach of improving agricultural production by
  reducing tidal flooding, storm surges, and reducing saline intrusion. The ICR acknowledged that the Bank
  issued recent guidance to include “if applicable” in the formulation of the CERC related PDO (ICR,
  paragraph 38). The World Bank team did not adequately provide for mitigating measures to address the
  implementing agency’s lack of capacity to implement large value works contracts on time (see delays
  below). In addition, the project design in the PAD did not match the government’s Development Project
  Proforma (DPP), the basis of its budget process. This led to a mismatch of end targets for the project
  interventions and corresponding cost allocations.

  Overall, the Bank team performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 20 in-person, virtual, and hybrid supervision missions over the 10-year
 implementation period, including technical field missions, various reviews, and high-level discussions with
 the BWDB and the Ministry of Water Resources. Operational staff were mostly in the country. The Bank
 team provided training for hands-on procurement, FM, and social and environmental safeguards. Key
 procurement and technical documents were ready at effectiveness. Yet, the implementation arrangements
 took two years to establish. The project team acknowledged this delay was not anticipated at appraisal.
 The ICR acknowledged a shortcoming in supervision by the World Bank team by not facilitating the timely
 request by the government to officially request restructuring (ICR, paragraph 82). The World Bank team did
 not implement the corrective measures identified during the January 2017Mid Term Review (MTR) to
 address implementation challenges until three years later when the results framework was revised (see
 Section 9 M&E below). The timing of the three restructurings appeared to be ill-timed. The first
 restructuring reduced the scope, and the results framework was approved three years after the MTR. The
 second restructuring took four months to review. The last reallocated costs among the components and
 cancelled IDA funds 17 days before the project closed (ICR, paragraph 62). The Bank team conducted
 fortnightly progress review meetings with the PMU and monthly technical field missions to effectively
 resolve problems caused by a lack of construction materials and changes in the construction design. In
 some cases, the Bank team helped BWDB establish a time-bound action plan to address case-specific
 land acquisition payment bottlenecks and arranged to monitor BWDB after the project closed to monitor the
 remaining land acquisition payments (ICR, paragraph 83).

 Factors that the government and the implementing agency could control included the delays in land
 acquisition. The typical land acquisition process took 12 to 15 months from initial surveys to compensation
 delivery but was further delayed by unclear land ownership records and inconsistent Land Acquisition and
 Resettlement Action Plans. The shifts in the embankment alignment caused by river erosion also affected
 approved plans. The slow government approval process for large-value service contracts, the
 implementing agency’s contract management challenges, and a change in the procurement process
 caused implementation delays (ICR, paragraph 58). Limited contractor capacity, design modifications, and
 the need for supplementary works also affected supervision performance (see Section 10 Other Issues
 below).


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



 The unanticipated extensive erosion that caused morphological changes of the rivers; numerous hartals
 (strikes) and blockades during the project period; Cyclone Yaas in May 2021, unprecedented rainfall, and
 flooding that affected not only the project polders but also contractors’ sites and marketplaces; and the
 COVID-19 pandemic that caused nationwide lockdowns, health risks to staff, and supply chain disruptions
 were outside the control of the project.

 Overall, Bank performance at supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory because of the minor
 shortcoming in using timely restructuring to effectively address implementation challenges.

 Overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, with minor shortcomings in both quality of
 performance at entry and at supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change prepared during the completion of the ICR used the causal links between the
 outputs and expected outcomes of the results framework. The TOC linked the outputs to the expected
 outcomes. The initial intermediate results indicators used showed their contribution to achieving the
 expected outcome, although some indicators were missed and added during implementation (see below).
 The indicators were specific, measurable, timebound and relevant. The intermediate results indicators did
 not differentiate between “upgrading” or “replacing.” The intended impact on gender gaps by the project
 interventions noted in the results framework were not measured (ICR, paragraph 66). All identified
 indicators had targets. Baseline data was to be collected at implementation (see below).



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bangladesh Water Development Board implemented the M&E system through a third-party M&E
  consultancy firm using a web-based MIS. Consultants conducted overall monitoring and supervision of
  the project components including compliance with environmental safeguards. However, the M&E
  consultants were only hired two years into the project. The World Bank Task Team clarified that this
  delay did not affect the implementation of the M&E system as designed because physical works were
  also delayed; the baseline survey was conducted before the works began; and the BWDB PMU stepped
  in the interim. Indicators in the results framework were reported in the Implementation Status and Results
  Reports. The January 2020 restructuring addressed M&E design weaknesses. Indicators were clarified,
  targets adjusted to correspond to the reduced scope. Output indicators for project activities previously
  missed were added to capture its contributions to achieving the PDOs. Baseline data for the three works
  packages were collected in 2016. Delays in implementing the second works package updated the

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



  baseline data in 2018 using the 2017 agricultural data. Comparative data was collected from non-CEIP
  polders. Surveys were conducted on two groups: the general population (entire polder) and project-
  affected households.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data informed decisions made by project management and the World Bank team in formulating
  corrective measures to address implementation challenges. The public and other stakeholders had
  access to the M&E data through the project website. The project team identified and conducted
  corrective measures to address delays and noncompliance using real-time information from the M&E
  system in place.

  Overall M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was categorized a safeguards category “A” requiring a full
   assessment because environmental impacts were expected to be triggered by the following activities:
   upgrading embankments (height increased and base widening), limited realignment, embankment slope
   and river bank protection work by concrete block and vegetation, disposal of drainage substrate
   obtained from drainage channels re-excavation and construction/repair and operation of hydraulic
   structures. The sensitivity, extent and duration of the impact of activities would affect agricultural land, fish
   habitat, flora and fauna, physical and cultural structure and livelihood of the people. The project triggered
   the following environmental safeguards policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP) 4.01), Natural
   Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). According to
   the ICR, the environmental safeguards performance of the project was satisfactory (ICR, paragraph 74).
   The project implemented a framework approach with site specific safeguards assessments for the selected
   polders, together with community consultation. The BWDB developed an environmental management
   framework and polder-specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for the original 17 polders.
   Polder-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were prepared following consultations with
   communities and stakeholders. The BWDB also disclosed the EIAs and environmental management
   framework on the project website and conducted a national-level consultation to finalize the documents. The
   Department of Environment issued environmental clearance certificates for the first two works packages
   renewed annually. EMP implementation costs for mitigating measures were included in the Bill of Quantity
   items. Contractors for the first and second works packages prepared contractor environmental and social
   management plans (C-ESMP). The World Bank reviewed and cleared these as well as the updated ones
   based on site requirements. The contractors of both the first and second works packages conducted
   monthly environmental training programs. the project prepared monthly, quarterly semi-annual, and annual
   environmental monitoring progress and environmental audit reports. The project conducted environmental
   enhancement activities, including constructing fish conservation sanctuaries, studying fish catch

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



  assessment, conducting net pen culture, raising awareness on aquatic biodiversity conservation, and
  promoting social afforestation in the polder areas. The World Bank Team clarified that the BWDB prepared
  an environmental action plan for the operation of the polders.

  Social Safeguards: The project triggered OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The ICR reported that
  the project complied with the requirements of the social safeguards, including involuntary resettlement,
  grievance redress, and labor influx monitoring (ICR, paragraph 75). The project complied with land
  acquisition and compensation requirements although by April 2024, land acquisition payment was at 92.4
  percent. The balance was attributed to the incomplete embankment works, small value of compensation
  (even as little as BDT 345/US$4.00), and lack of ownership (e.g., unavailable mauza (cadaster) maps,
  khatians (landholding records for the payment of land tax), transfer/succession documents, possession
  records, disputed claims with objections and parcels of land under sub-judicial cases). The BWDB
  developed a system at closing to monitor household-level compensation payment status and implemented a
  time-bound action plan to address case-specific land acquisition payment bottlenecks. According to the
  World Bank Task team as of June 2024, land acquisition payment progress reached 94 percent. The Key
  Focal Point for the project, the executive engineers of the concerned BWDB O&M divisions, and the Deputy
  Commissioner offices of concerned districts were to complete payments to the remaining affected
  landowners and report to the Bank monthly. Resettlement assistance for involuntarily displaced non-titled
  persons were completed prior to the commencement of works for the respective sections. BWDB prepared
  a Social Management Resettlement Policy Framework (SMRPF), which included a resettlement policy
  framework, a social inclusion/gender framework, and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the first works
  package. BWDB prepared the RAPs for the remaining works packages, updated the RAPS for the first
  works package, following the SMRPF. After reaching agreement with the World Bank, the documents were
  disclosed locally and implemented. BWDB established 36 grievance redress committees in each Union
  Parishad in the 10 polders with representatives from the BWDB, the Union Parishad, local educational
  institutions, project-affected persons, women’s groups, and the RAP team. Leaflets with the grievance
  redress mechanism were distributed to project-affected persons and communities in the polder areas with
  contact details of the GRM focal points at the local level, the office of the Project Director, and the Bank’s
  grievance redress service. The GRCs received and resolved 269 complaints by December 31, 2023. The
  project also prepared monthly reports on labor influx risks, requirements, and implications for the works
  packages with a checklist for tracking labor influx-related issues. According to the World Bank Task Team,
  the interim government changed several times the district administration of all the districts including Deputy
  Commissioners responsible for land acquisition (LA) payment. The team acknowledged no further
  update since June 2024.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management: The project complied with the World Bank’s financial management guidelines
  and procedures (ICR, paragraph 78). The Project Management Unit (PMU) had prior experience with
  Bank-financed projects and had internal controls and accounting systems in place. The Comptroller &
  Auditor General of Bangladesh, through its Foreign Aided Project Directorate (FAPAD) conducted an
  annual external audit of the project. The PMU submitted audit reports in a timely manner. The PMU had
  adequate staff– (i) an FM specialist; (ii) a dedicated Deputy Director for Accounts; and (iii) two dedicated
  accountants. An independent private auditor conducted performance audits. Some shortcomings were
  reported. The FAPAD Director General is resolving findings related to land acquisition that is beyond the
  project’s control. For the FY2023 external audit report, auditors raised eight findings – seven serious and

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



   one non-serious financial irregularities. The FY2013 to FY2016 internal and external audit reports were
   completed after some delays, but subsequent reports were conducted regularly and on time. The PMU
   showed limited capacity to forecast expenditures based on actual scope. These shortcomings affected
   financial management efficiency and forfeited US$12.69 million in concessional IDA funding as a result.
   The forfeited amount consisted of US$6.24 million from an undocumented designated account and an
   undisbursed balance of US$6.45 million. Funds cancelled in December 2023 could have but did not
   include this US$12.69 million.

   Procurement: The project fully complied with the World Bank’s procurement guidelines and procedures
   (ICR, paragraph 77). The PMU had previous procurement experience with World Bank guidelines and
   procedures. The World Bank team conducted a procurement capacity assessment at appraisal and
   proposed risk mitigation measures that were implemented. The PMU established a Procurement Panel
   with two international and one national consultant; conducted training on World Bank procurement
   procedures, international competitive bidding procurement, and fraud and corruption issues. The PMU
   updated and published procurement plans on time and commenced procurement only after plan approval.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The operation offered eight lessons. Three are presented below with minor adaptation of language:

      Obtaining a better understanding of climate change impacts on coastal polders may
         lead to developing models to address risks from climate variability. In this project,
         comprehensive monitoring, and morphological assessment of the coast, including long-term
         monitoring, research, and analysis of the coastal zone were initiated. However, a gap
         remains in understanding the complex interplay among the natural phenomena, human
         intervention, and climate change forces that the coast experiences. To bridge this knowledge


                                                                                                 Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



         gap, the next phase of coastal investment could include empirical evidence on key coastal
         processes, such as geomorphology, land subsidence, tectonic effects, erosion, sea level
         rise, tidal dynamics, river morphology, shoreline changes, and salinity intrusion. The next
         phase could also focus on the maintenance and further development and application of the
         tools developed under this project to inform the design of new investments in the coastal
         zone. For example, Bangladesh could develop a more detailed storm surge forecasting
         system for the coastal zone and the polders using the hydraulic models developed by this
         project.
        Nature-based solutions may enhance resilience, effectiveness, and community
         ownership of infrastructure interventions in polders. In this project, nature-based
         engineering designs were integrated into the rehabilitation of polders. Such designs were
         meant to strengthen embankments. Afforestation programs on the slopes of embankments
         and foreshore areas formed part of the design to protect against the impacts of climate
         change. This approach enhanced physical infrastructure and made use of the benefits of
         ecological systems for a sustainable, long-term resilience against environmental threats.
         Squatters who benefited from the afforestation program were boosted by the public’s support
         for the program and did return to the embankment slopes because cutting trees to construct
         houses illegally on the slope of the embankment were discouraged.
        Investing in embankment protective works may be an effective means to address
         riverbank erosion in a timely manner. In this project, the more expensive proposition from
         financing embankment protective measures to fortify riverbanks against erosion may prove to
         be more cost effective. The approach would not require land acquisition. Implementation
         would not be delayed by having to acquire new land if the alternative, retiring
         an embankment, were used instead. Communities would be more resilient sooner because
         the lack of having to acquire new land would be sidestepped. Potential severe impacts on
         livelihoods and assets would be avoided because a new embankment would be operational
         sooner.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project. The report followed the guidelines. The report was focused
on results. The evidence was aligned to achieving the PDOs. The narrative supported the TOC that was
created for this report. The TOC helped the reader understand how the ratings were reached based on
available evidence. It is candid, acknowledging the shortcomings in the initial indicators and inability of the
restructurings to fully address implementation challenges. The ICR’s lessons were useful and based on the
project findings. The ICR quality is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating


                                                                                                 Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
BD: Coastal Embankment Improvement Proj (P128276)



Substantial




                                                                                 Page 22 of 22
