     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024169

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P161989                                      UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Uruguay                                      Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87780                                   31-Dec-2021                                        11,833,544.08

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Aug-2017                                  15-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             12,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              12,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          11,913,679.55                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                     ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Gloria Carolina            Miria A. Pigato                 Kandi Magendo                 IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA) dated November 7, 2017 (p. 5) and the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, p. 6), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was:

   To improve the quality of selected e-government services for citizens, businesses and the Borrower’s public
   entities, and facilitate their access.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



   For the purposes of this review, the PDOs have been parsed as follows:

   PDO1: To improve the quality of selected e-government services for citizens and facilitate their access.

        1. PDO2: To improve the quality of selected e-government services for businesses and facilitate their
          access.
        2. PDO3: To improve the quality of selected e-government services for the Borrower’s public entities and
          facilitate their access.

   The PDO remained unchanged over the project lifecycle.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the Delivery of e-Government Services to Citizens (Approved: US$4.0
   million; Actual: US$3.8 million).

   This component aimed to improve the quality of selected e-government services to citizens and to facilitate
   their access. Activities primarily focused on improving delivery systems, provider management and user
   engagement. The participating entities were the Agency for the Development of Electronic Government
   Management and an Information and Knowledge Society (Agencia para el Desarrollo del Gobierno de
   Gestión Electrónica y la Sociedad de la Información y del Conocimiento, AGESIC), and the Digital
   Technology Center for Public Education Innovation (Centro CEIBAL) (PAD, p. 7). There were two
   subcomponents:

        1. Strengthening AGESIC’s e-government service provision.
        2. Strengthening Centro CEIBAL’s Capacity to manage its programs.

   Activities to strengthen AGESIC’s services included: (a) development and implementation of a national
   government data architecture; (b) design of new smart services and a business analytics and intelligence
   platform; (c) development of a framework for citizen participation, transparency and oversight mechanisms,
   including e-participation tools and their impact evaluation; (d) development and piloting of collaboration
   mechanisms between the government’s public entities and citizens; and (e) facilitating access to
   government services and information, particularly in remote areas.

   Activities to strengthen CEIBAL’s services included: (a) improvement of customer service; (b) establishment
   of a computer security incidence response team (CSIRT); (c) strengthening CEIBAL’s management and
   back-office by implementing new modules to their Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system; (d)
   improvement of CEIBAL’s data management; (e) technical assistance (TA) and last-mile connectivity to the
   national broadband infrastructure to provide broadband internet access in rural schools; and (f)
   strengthening CEIBAL’s strategic planning capacity.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



Component 2: Improving the Delivery of e-Government Services to Businesses (Approved: US$3.4
million; Actual: US$2.2 million).

This component aimed to improve the quality of selected e-government services to businesses and to
facilitate their access. The focus was on improving delivery systems (including the scope of services),
provider management, and cross-entity collaboration within key agencies such as the International Trade
Single Window (Ventanilla Única de Comercio Exterior, (VUCE)), the Directorate General of Taxation
(Dirección General Impositiva, DGI), and the National Research and Innovation Agency (Agencia Nacional
de Investigación e Innovación, (ANII)) (PAD, p. 8). There were three subcomponents:

    1. Improving export-related services for businesses.
    2. Implementing e-invoicing for small and medium businesses.
    3. Improving access to specialized information to businesses.

Activities to improve export-related services for businesses included: (a) TA and training to optimize
administrative processes for public entities using VUCE; (b) institutional strengthening of VUCE, including
enhancing its quality management system; (c) implementation of a new interoperability platform for
international information exchange; and (d) expansion of the coverage of VUCE’s integrated platform and
re-engineering administrative process across the value chain for priority exports.

Activities to implement e-invoicing for small and medium businesses included: (a) development and
implementation of an e-invoicing system for small and medium taxpayers that were under the electronic tax
invoicing regime; (b) enhancement of DGI’s fiscal risk management system to enable strategic planning of
taxpayer compliance and the management of audit cases, in line with DGI’s new organizational model; and
(c) operationalization of DGI’s new governance model.

Activities to improve access to specialized information to businesses included: (a) expansion of services
provided through Portal Timbó (a web platform launched in 2009 by ANII which provides free and full
access to the most relevant scientific and technological publications to Uruguay’s citizens); (b) and
development of an online knowledge exchange platform (Trama Portal) for the Trama Project (launched in
2014 by ANII to create opportunities for networking, exchange, and the creation of alliances among its
users) in order to reach a wider audience giving it greater visibility and facilitating communication among
beneficiaries (PAD, p. 32).

Component 3: Improving the Delivery of e-Government Services to Government Entities (Approved:
US$2.1 million; Actual: US$5.3 million).

This component aimed to improve the quality of selected e-government services to public entities and
facilitate their access. The activities focused on improving provider monitoring and payments, provider
management, government delivery systems, and cross-entity collaboration between the General Accounting
Office (Contaduría General de la Nación, (CGN)), the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and other
entities with a direct link to MEF’s priorities (PAD, p. 10). There were two subcomponents:

    1. Enabling the receipt of electronic invoices by state entities.
    2. Strengthening the MEF’s management of information.

Activities to enable the receipt of electronic invoices by state entities included: (a) development of a system
for budget executing units to receive and manage electronic invoices generated by providers; (b) acquisition

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



  of the necessary software and hardware for the Integrated Financial Information System (Sistema Integrado
  de Información Financiera, SIIF); and (c) installation of the SIIF in approximately 243 executing units, along
  with training and the establishment of a help desk.

  Activities to strengthen the MEF’s management of information included: TA for the production, processing,
  analysis and dissemination of information within MEF’s priority areas; strengthening of the national statistics
  system; and support for other entities involved in implementing activities in the MEF’s priority areas.

  Component 4: Strategic Diagnostics, Activities and Knowledge Sharing, and Project Coordination
  (Approved: US$1.6 million; Actual: US$0.8 million).

  This component aimed to strengthen the government’s capacity to support strategic reforms in areas that
  are critical to achieving the PDO (PAD, p. 10). There were no sub-components.

  Activities included: (a) strengthening the government’s monitoring and evaluation capacity; (b)
  disseminating lessons learned on e-government service provision across the borrower’s public entities and
  internationally; (c) TA and training to improve the quality of e-government services for the three groups of
  beneficiaries, and facilitate their access; (d) defining and implementing change management strategies in
  the areas addressed by the project; and (e) supporting overall project coordination and management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$12.0 million (PAD, p. 11). The actual cost was US$11.9
  (ICR, p. 2). The slight difference was due to the timing of disbursements. Some contracts extended beyond
  the loan closing date and payments made after the loan's closure were covered by government resources
  rather than project funds.

  Financing: The actual project financing at closing was US$11.9 million. The project was originally financed
  by an IBRD loan of US$12.0 million approved on November 7, 2017 (FA, p. 4)

  Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Uruguay did not intend to provide counterpart funding. However,
  due to procurement delays, some activities initially intended to be funded by the project were instead
  financed with government resources. The total government contribution was not reported in the ICR.

  Dates: The WBG approved the project on August 3, 2017, and it became effective on December 26, 2017,
  with an original closing date of December 31, 2021. The first restructuring, approved on August 30, 2021,
  extended the closing to June 30, 2023. The second restructuring, approved on May 23, 2023, further
  extended the closing date to December 15, 2023. These extensions were intended to provide additional
  time to complete project activities, achieve the PDO outcomes (PDO Indicators 1.1, 2 and 3), and ensure a
  smooth transition to the follow-up Institution Strengthening for Greater Competitiveness Operation
  (P180638), approved in November 2023. The Project mid-term review (MTR) was finalized on June 1, 2022
  (ICR, p. 2).

  Restructurings: The project underwent two level 2 restructurings. There were no changes to the PDO,
  PDO Indicators, Outcome Targets, or Components. The main changes were as follows:




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



   In addition to extending the project closing date, the first restructuring (level 2) reallocated funds between
   components. For 18 months, some project activities stalled due to the COVID pandemic and the transition
   to a new government elected on March 1, 2020. There were fiscal and operational constraints imposed by
   the pandemic, and a re-prioritization of government resources. The new government was updating the
   National Digital Agenda Uruguay 2030 and needed to appoint a new coordinator for the project coordination
   unit (UCP) which it did not do until January 2021 (RES 47670, p. 3). In addition, the project’s 2021 annual
   work program and the relaunching of procurement processes was not ready until June 2021. Meanwhile,
   AGESIC, VUCE and ANII continued implementing project activities with the government’s own resources,
   identifying priority areas where other funding existed, such as the standardization of government web
   portals for ease of access by users, such as VUCE (ICR, para 16). Thus, funds originally allocated to these
   activities (US$3.9 million) were reallocated to other ongoing activities as follows: US$0.8 million to
   Component 1, US$0.6 million to Component 2, US$2.2 million to Component 3 to expand TA for the use of
   electronic invoices and information management, and US$0.2 million to Component 4. In particular, the
   reallocation was to i) enable the receipt of electronic invoices by State entities; and ii) strengthen MEF’s
   capacity to manage information through the provision of TA for the production, processing, analysis and
   dissemination of information within MEF’s priority areas. As of July 2021, 61.3 percent of the original Project
   funding had been disbursed (RES47670, p. 3).

   A second restructuring (level 2) approved some minor funds reallocations and further extended the
   Project’s closing date by 5.5 months to allow for the following activities to be completed: i) adding
   functionalities to the Electronic Invoice Reception System for vendors (Sistema de Recepción de Factura
   Electrónica, SIRFE); and ii) designing and deploying specific MEF-related electronic services, thus
   expanding the catalog of online services for citizens and firms including about 30 new electronic services.
   Resources (US$0.8 million) were reallocated as follows: US$0.3 million to Component 2, US$0.3 million to
   Component 3, and US$0.25 million to Component 4. As of May 2023, 87.7 percent of the loan amount had
   been disbursed (RES56230, p. 3-4)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: A strong and progressive social compact had been a defining feature of Uruguayan
society and politics, with consistent emphasis placed on protecting vulnerable groups, assuring worker
dignity, and promoting equitable growth. This compact, combined with rapid economic growth since 2003,
contributed to the development of a sizeable middle class, the largest in Latin America at 60.0 percent as
the proportion of the total population, as well as effective institutions, good governance and a high degree
of public trust in government (CPF, para 1).

Sector context: Uruguay had made important advances in connectivity and the provision of e-government
services. In 2016, 87.0 percent of people had internet access at home (71.0 percent on their mobile
phones), nearly all schools had wireless internet, and 96.0 percent of public-school students had access to
a personal laptop provided by the State. Since 2009, the ANII, offered citizens free access to the most
relevant scientific and technological publications through Portal Timbó. Additionally, e-invoicing services for
large taxpayers had been available from DGI since 2010, and in 2013, Uruguay’s Investment, Export and



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



               Country Brand Promotion Agency (Uruguay XXI) implemented VUCE, enabling the processing of selected
               export-related requirements through a single electronic gateway (PAD, p. 3).

               The project supported the Digital Uruguay Agenda and the prioritization of seven agencies (AGESIC, ANII,
               CGN, CEIBAL, DGI, the MEF, and VUCE) with important roles in implementing the Digital Uruguay agenda.
               It sought to address Uruguay’s supply and demand side challenges in the delivery of e-government
               services. On the supply side, only 60.0 percent of the schools covered by Plan CEIBAL had broadband
               internet access and only 400 out of 1,400 administrative processes were able to be completed online (600
               could be started online). On the demand side, 43.0 percent of people preferred to go to a public office for an
               administrative process against 27.0 percent that preferred to do it online (PAD, p. 3-4).

               The Project’s activities were well-aligned with global thinking on how to increase e-government service use
               through supply and demand side interventions. For example, it was planned to have proactive citizen
               services, a mobile citizen access point, and the design of new services targeted at specific needs. In
               addition, the project also contemplated space for activities to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation
               capacity to research the impact of activities which is key for identifying future improvements to effectiveness
               (PAD, p. 4-5).

               Alignment with strategy. The project was aligned with the CPF at appraisal (FY16-21), contributing to
               Pillar 3, which focused on integrating Uruguay’s small economy into the global value chain, and Pillar 2,
               which aimed to strengthen government services for citizens, with an emphasis on education and
               marketable labor skills. The PDO to improve the quality of and access to selected e-government services
               was also aligned with Objective 5 of the FY23-27 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), which aimed to
               improve the capacity of the public administration to implement policies and deliver services.

               Previous Bank experience: In the decade prior to the project, the World Bank (WB) and the Inter-
               American Development Bank (IDB) had supported the country’s efforts in reducing the digital divide and
               improving service delivery using ICT. The WB supported a number of areas for strengthening public
               administration, including monitoring and evaluation, procurement, and social program information
               managements, through the Institutions Building Technical Assistance Loan (IBTAL, P097604). As part of
               these efforts, in 2005 AGESIC was created under IBTAL, a general e-government strategy was defined,
               and the first applications of online administrative processes were launched (PAD, p. 2)

               The project’s objectives were highly relevant to the country and sector context and fully aligned with the
               CPF. The project’s activities fully addressed important development problems and sought to contribute
               solution built on lessons learned from previous interventions.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Improve the quality of selected e-government services for citizens, and facilitate their access.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The original PAD did not include an explicit ToC, but one was added in the ICR
focusing on key project interventions and targeted outcomes at appraisal (ICR, Figure 1). PDO 1 aimed to
improve the quality and facilitate access of selected e-government services for citizens and was to be
measured by two indicators: PDO Indicator 1.1: Improved delivery of distance learning materials to targeted
schools (number); PDO Indicator 1.2: Increased accessibility to online administrative processes, as measured
by the number of citizens’ administrative processes attended to by the Mobile Citizens Access Point (PAC)
(PAD, p. 6).

The project aimed to improve CEIBAL and AGESIC’s delivery systems, provider management, and user
engagement. It enhanced CEIBAL’s capacity for distance learning in rural areas by contracting the National
Telecommunications Company (ANTEL) to boost broadband in 300 schools, with 236 funded by the project.
Additional support included strengthening CEIBAL's management, cybersecurity, customer service (via
WhatsApp and Chatbot), and providing computers to students.

The project enhanced AGESIC's face-to face and non-face-to-face Citizen Access Points (PACs). The unified
government portal (gub.uy) was enhanced with PACs that included online chat, social media (Facebook), and
videocalls, and training provided to manage these channels. Initially, the project aimed to create face-to-face
mobile PACs, but they became less demanded during and after the COVID-19 pandemic as citizens’ uptake
of online services significantly improved. In 2019, almost half of the number of services provided were done
face to face, while in 2020 the face-to-face interactions dropped below 30.0 percent and online channels
started to take the lead in citizen interaction. By 2021, non-face-to-face channels, particularly emails, became
the main interaction mode, while phone channels were the most used at project closing.

By the end of the project, these reforms were expected to deliver broadband capacity to 300 rural schools,
covering 50 percent of the beneficiary population without broadband access before; and attend 150,000
(revised target) citizen’s administrative processes through the Mobile Access Points. In addition, they were to
increase the number of users performing research online before carrying out an administrative process,
increase the number of entities using the government data platform to improve management, increase the
number of entities which had implemented at least one of the components of the e-Participation solution,
increase productivity of customer service provided by CEIBAL, and improve satisfaction with CEIBAL’s
customer service.

The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and some intermediate outcomes were clearly
defined, except for PDO indicator 1.1. This indicator aimed to improve delivery of distance learning materials
to targeted schools, but the target measured connectivity which does not necessarily translate into effective
delivery of learning materials and improved quality of distance education.

The broadband access indicator aligns with the project’s objective, as reliable connectivity is essential for
delivering quality distance learning. By focusing on broadband capacity, it captured both access and service
quality in rural schools, although additional indicators on educational content quality could have been
beneficial. While CEIBAL's survey (IRI 1.5 in the ICRR and IRI 1.2.2 in the ICR) showed high user
satisfaction, it assessed service accessibility and experience, not learning outcomes.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



Outputs

The project delivered the following outputs (ICR, Key Outputs by Component, p. 29-31)

      Provision of broadband internet connections in rural schools.
      Incorporation of additional channels in CEIBAL’s customer service (WhatsApp, Chatbot).
      Strengthening of the Computer Security Incident Response Center and cybersecurity standards
         (management of IT risks, agreements with AGESIC for training, information security audits, and
         vulnerability analysis system).
        Strengthening of CEIBAL’s back-office systems and data center (implementation of Workday Adaptive
         tool for planning, and training in DevOps methodology for collaborative management of software
         products).
        Incorporation of online channels of access to Citizens Access Points (online chat, social media, and
         videocalls)
        Development of an information architecture for standardized web government portals.
        Development of a data analysis framework.

Outcomes

The achievement of the PDO was assessed using the indicators listed below (ICR, Annex 1).

PDO Indicator 1.1. Improved delivery of distance learning materials to targeted schools (number). Baseline:
0 rural schools. Target: 300 rural schools. Actual: 1,027 rural schools. During the project lifespan, a total of
1,027 rural schools were connected to broadband internet, transitioning all rural schools in the country from
narrowband to broadband connectivity. Of these, 236 connections were funded by the project, with the
remainder funded with CEIBAL's own resources. Although the project directly funded broadband internet
connection for only 236 rural schools, its contribution was fundamental, as it facilitated the hiring of ANTEL to
provide broadband connectivity. (PDO Indicator 1.1: Exceeded).

PDO Indicator 1.2. Increased accessibility to online administrative processes, as measured by the number of
citizens’ administrative processes attended to by PAC (cumulative number). Baseline: 0. Target: 150,000
(revised). Actual: 175,771. The project exceeded the end-target. (PDO Indicator 1.2: Exceeded).

Due to the pandemic, AGESIC chose to strengthen the channels not requiring the physical presence of users,
which led to measure this PDO slightly different, by covering all citizen administrative requests processed
online through the existing PACs. At the peak of the pandemic in 2021, 24,241 requests were processed, and
the government set the new target of 150,000 in 2022 (ICR, para 23).

The quality dimension was measured through user satisfaction, which was not tracked by the project, but
improved. IRIs 1.1 and 1.2 below show evidence an increase in the number of users performing research
online before carrying out an administrative process and an increase in the number of public entities using the
government data analysis platform to improve their management. Likewise, a number of entities implemented
at least one of the components of the e-Participation tool Decidim which offered modules that enabled public
entities to conduct a range of consultations.

The ICR noted that although the IRIs were achieved, it is unclear to what extend they demonstrated improved
quality of the targeted services. IEG notes that an increase in the percentage of users performing

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



research online, before carrying out an administrative process, is not sufficiently indicative of the quality of the
services provided. Similarly, an IRI measuring the number of public entities using the government data
analysis platform(s) to improve their management does not indicate how management improved. To measure
quality, AGESIC tracked a user satisfaction indicator which showed that 88 percent of users reported
satisfaction with the use of digital channels to access e-government services in 2022, compared to 85 percent
for the last request conducted face-face, and 80 percent in 2016 (ICR, para 24).

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs)

There were 5 IRIs that informed the achievement of the PDO (ICR, Annex 1). All five were achieved
exceeding their end-targets (IRIs are numbered in the order they are in Annex 1):

IRI 1.1: Increase in users performing research online before carrying out an administrative process
(percentage). Baseline: 27. Target: 50. Actual: 56. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 1.1: Exceeded)

IRI 1.2: Entities using the government data analysis platform to improve management (number). Baseline: 0.
Target: 6. Actual: 12. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 1.2: Exceeded)

The PAD (p. 19) notes there were 243 government executing entities operating within the SIIF which would
reflect that, although IRI 1.2 was exceeded, it was not very ambitious. This also applies to IRI1.3 below.

IRI 1.3: Number of entities which have implemented at least one of the components of the e-Participation
solution (number). Baseline: 0. Target: 6. Actual: 12. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 1.3:
Exceeded)

IRI 1.4: Increase in productivity of customer service provided by CEIBAL (text). Baseline: 60.0 UY pesos cost
per interaction. Target: 37.0 UY pesos. Actual: 21.0 UY pesos. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 1.4:
Exceeded)

IRI 1.5: User satisfaction with CEIBAL’s customer service (text). Baseline: 80.0 percent. Target: 80.0 percent.
Actual: 90.0 percent. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 1.5: Exceeded)



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve the quality of selected e-government services for businesses, and facilitate their access.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The original PAD did not include an explicit ToC, but one was added in the ICR (ICR,
Figure 1). PDO 2 aimed to improve the quality and access of selected e-government services for businesses
and was to be measured by one indicator: PDO 2: Reduced processing time of foreign trade related
administrative requirements by VUCE (PAD, p. 6).


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



These outcomes were to result from improving the delivery systems, scope of services, provider management
and cross-entity collaboration in VUCE, the DGI, and ANII.

To strengthen VUCE, the project implemented activities to reduce the average processing time of foreign
trade related administrative requirements. Key activities included: expanding the coverage of procedures that
can be accessed through VUCE and strengthening capacity in participating organizations by providing the
necessary human and financial resources; and strengthening interoperability with the VUCE equivalent in
other countries to expedite the exchange of documentation; and institutional strengthening. The project also
supported obtaining the ISO certification (9001-2015) for VUCE’s management quality system. The system
focused on incorporating three ministries (Industry, Energy and Mining; Public Health; and Livestock,
Agriculture and Fisheries) to the platform which collectively issued 90 percent of the export and import
certificates needed for trade transactions.

The perceived value added by VUCE was measured by a business survey (IRI 2.1.1 in the ICR) on the
percentage of users satisfied with the quality and effectiveness of the services provided by VUCE (PAD, p.
21; ICR, para 26). The perceived value added by VUCE increased from 89 to 95 percent (compared to the
project's end target of 96 percent), which, according to the ICR, underscored satisfaction with the quality and
effectiveness of the services provided.

To strengthen DGI, the project increased the coverage of electronic tax invoices and strengthened DGI’s
fiscal risk management system for greater efficiency and control. Activities included expanding DGI’s e-
invoicing services from only large taxpayers to all taxpayers subject to the electronic tax invoice
(Comprobante Fiscal Electrónico, CFE) targeting first, small, and medium firms. This was done by hiring of a
firm to first expand e-invoices services to small businesses and providing related training for DGI. The
expansion was underpinned by the project’s activities to strengthen DGI’s capacity to deliver e-government
services to businesses. Activities also included the formulation of a centralized taxation plan and a new
comprehensive risk rating matrix through the development of new functionalities of the Fiscal Intelligence
Integrated Technological Solution (FIS-T). This was to enhance DGI’s fiscal risk management system which
the entity had started deploying it to all its offices.

To strengthen ANII, the project supported greater access to national scientific content relevant to businesses
and entrepreneurs. The project supported ANII’s provision of services through Portal Timbó and helped the
Trama Project reach a wider audience. The Trama Portal facilitated more interactions than the end-of-project
target, but it remained a pilot and later went into standstill due to a lack of funds. In relation to Portal Timbó,
uptake from businesses was low, as the platform continued to be primarily oriented towards academic users
and, by project’s end, most users were from academia. The project also focused on supporting the
development of a national repository system to address concerns that international publications were easier
to access through Portal Timbó than national research.

By the end of the project, these reforms were expected to reduce time to carry-out an administrative process
in VUCE, improve perception of the value added by VUCE, increase the percentage of administrative
processes integrated into VUCE’s single window platform, increase the number of taxpayers incorporated into
the CFE and issuing e-invoices, facilitate interactions through Portal Trama (text), and increase the number of
registered users using Portal Timbó (number).




                                                                                                     Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and intermediate outcomes were clearly defined.
The links to the PDO outcomes were also clearly defined: to improve the quality of selected e-government
services for businesses, and to facilitate their access.

Outputs

The project delivered the following outputs (ICR, Key Outputs by Component, p. 29-31)

        Implementation of a new interoperability platform for exchange of information between VUCE and
           other countries.
          Development of a data exchange platform with three targeted ministries (Industry, Energy and Mining;
           Public Health; and Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries).
          Hiring of technicians to boost the capacity of targeted ministries for the integration.
          Implementation plan and obtention of ISO91 certification for VUCE platform.
          Development of functionalities to expand e-invoices services to small and medium businesses.
          Development of a new comprehensive tax risk rating model and matrix.
          Development of an online portal for the Trama Project. Development of a national repository system of
           scientific literature.

Outcomes

The achievement of the PDO was assessed using the indicators listed below (ICR, Annex 1).

PDO Indicator 2. Reduced processing time of foreign trade related administrative requirements by VUCE
(hours). Baseline: 50.40 hours. Target: 33.00 hours. Actual: 27.37 hours. The project exceeded the end-
target. (PDO Indicator 2: Exceeded)

IRIs

There were 5 IRIs that informed the achievement of the PDO (ICR, Annex 1). Four out of five IRIs were
achieved, three exceeded their end-targets (IRIs are numbered in the order they are in Annex 1):

IRI 2.1: Improved perception of the value added by VUCE (percentage). Baseline: 89.0 percent. Target: 96.0
percent. Actual: 95.0 percent. The project achieved the end-target. (IRI 2.1: Achieved)

IRI 2.2: Increase in the percentage of administrative processes integrated into VUCE’s single window
platform (percentage). Baseline: 36.0 percent. Target: 90.0 percent. Actual: 83.0 percent. The project partially
achieved the end-target. (IRI 2.2: Partially Achieved)

IRI 2.3: Percentage of taxpayers incorporated into the CFE and issuing e-invoices, as a percent of the total
population of taxpayers to be incorporated into the CFE (percentage). Baseline: 50.0 percent. Target: 96.0
percent. Actual: 99.2 percent. The project exceeded the end-target. (IRI 2.3: Exceeded)

IRI 2.4: Number of interactions facilitated through Portal Trama (text). Baseline: No platform. Target: 70.0
percent increase from the first year. Actual: 83.0 percent increase from the first year. Although the end target
was exceeded, the Trama Portal remained in the pilot stage. Furthermore, aside from the needs assessment
study, which was funded by the project, the Government financed the development of the Trama Portal

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



with its own resources due to procurement delays and incompatibilities between the WB and the
Government’s procurement procedures (ICR, p. 13). (IRI 2.4: Exceeded)

IRI 2.5: Increased number of registered users using Portal Timbó (number). Baseline: 40,450 registered
users. Target: 47,782 registered users. Actual: 85,498 registered users. The project exceeded the end-target.
(IRI 2.5: Exceeded)



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve the quality of selected e-government services for public entities, and facilitate their access.

Rationale
Theory of Change. The original PAD did not include an explicit ToC, but one was added in the ICR focusing
on key project interventions and targeted outcomes at appraisal (ICR, Figure 1). PDO 3 aimed to improve the
quality and access of selected e-government services for public entities and was to be measured by one
indicator: PDO 3: Increased number of government’s executing units managing electronic invoices received
from their providers (PAD, p. 6).

These outcomes were to result from implementing a series of activities focused on improving the monitoring
of payments to providers, as well as on provider management and government delivery systems and
supporting cross-entity collaboration between the CGN, the MEF, and other entities with a direct link to MEF’s
priorities.

The project deployed electronic invoicing for government entities, streamlining the payment process and
enhancing its efficiency. Electronic invoicing with businesses started in 2012, with 50.0 percent of tax receipts
being electronic, but not all public entities were able to accept electronic receipts from their business
providers. DGI was responsible for defining the regulatory and technical requirements for electronic invoices.
The CGN was responsible for developing a system to receive electronic invoices for use by the budget
executing units within the Government’s Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) which
is also interoperable with DGI’s system. The project thus financed the development of the SIRFE and its
deployment starting in late 2022, as well as the related training of users framed by change management
activities. CGN set up a change management team that conducted a diagnostic of needs and worked hand-
in-hand with a contracted firm to develop a resulting strategy which relied heavily on in-person communication
and capacity building for the executing units.

By the end of the project, these reforms were expected to increase the number of government executing units
that could accept electronic invoices from their providers.

Outputs

The project delivered the following outputs (ICR, Key Outputs by Component, p. 29-31)


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)




                                    Development and deployment of the SIRFE, training and establishment of a helpdesk.

                            Outcomes

                            The achievement of the PDO was assessed using the indicators listed below (ICR, Annex 1).

                            PDO Indicator 3. Increased number of government executing units managing electronic invoices received
                            from their providers (number). Baseline: 0 units. Target: 243 units (243 represents the total number of
                            government’s executing units operating within the SIIF). Actual: 156 units (64%) and 190 as of April 2024
                            (78%). The project partially achieved the end-target. (PDO Indicator 3: Partially Achieved).

                            By project end, 156 government executing units were able to receive electronic invoices against a target of
                            243. The rollout continued after the project closed through the Institution Strengthening for Greater
                            Competitiveness Operation (P180638) which increased the PDO result to 190 executing units as of April
                            2024. Additionally, CGN was pursuing a more ambitious objective by providing approximately 100 entities
                            with the capability to issue electronic invoices by incorporating an additional module in the SIRFE (ICR, para
                            30). Although the PDO Indicator 3 was only partially achieved at the time of the ICR review, it is likely to be
                            achieved post project.

                            IRIs

                            There were no IRIs that informed the achievement of the PDO (ICR, Annex 1).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved most its development objectives. It exceeded targets for three out of four PDO
                            indicators and eight out of ten IRIs, achieved targets for one IRI, and partially achieved targets for one PDO
                            and one IRI. PDO Indicator 3, increased number of government’s executing units managing electronic
                            invoices received from their providers was partially achieved with 64 percent of its targeted change, but likely
                            to be achieved post-project. IRI 2.2, increase in the percentage of administrative processes integrated into
                            VUCE’s platform was also partially achieved. Nonetheless, it is worth highlighting PDO 1.1, for which the
                            target was very low, and the project only funded 79 percent of the targeted results (236 of the connections),
                            and PDO 1.2, for which the target was surpassed because the approach to measure the indicator changed. In
                            addition, IRI 1.2 and IRI 1.3 had low ambition targets given the total number of government entities. Finally,
                            the Trama Portal facilitated more interactions than the end-of-project target, but remained a pilot and later
                            came to a standstill. Government ownership played a key role in surpassing project targets.




                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: There was an Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA) prepared at the time of appraisal.
On one hand, the EFA focused on future savings from reduced paper needs and time savings in invoicing
resulting from the implementation of electronic invoicing for 25,000 estimated small and medium firms. The NPV
was equivalent to US$546,041 based on an internal rate of return (IRR) of 13 percent. Benefits were both
financial in terms of reduced purchases of paper needed for invoicing as well as economic in terms of time
saved by taxpayers through reduced travel costs. The cost analysis considered prior (pre-project) investments
estimated at US$1.5 million and project costs for the relevant activities (PAD, Annex 4, para 2).

On the other hand, the EFA focused on future savings from reduced time spent traveling, reduced travel costs,
and reduced paper costs resulting from the automation of additional administrative processes online within
VUCE. The NPV was equivalent to US$875,202 based on an IRR of 14 percent. Benefits were both financial in
terms of reduced purchases of paper and transport costs as well as economic in terms of time saved by those
travelling to submit paperwork and are assumed to start accruing one year after project initiation. The cost
analysis considered prior (pre-project) investments estimated at US$2.5 million and project costs for all activities
carried out with VUCE under the project (PAD, Annex 4, para 3).

The ICR replicated the EFA at project closure using conservative assumptions and the numbers achieved during
implementation. The estimated costs and benefits for the introduction of electronic invoicing for small and
medium sized taxpayers yielded a NPV of US$9,084,356 with an IRR of 55 percent. The EFA assumed a much
higher number of taxpayers being incorporated in the CFE (82,600). The calculated benefits are significantly
higher than those estimated at appraisal. On the other hand, the estimated costs and benefits for the automation
of additional administrative processes online within VUCE yielded a NPV of US$1,140,644 with an IRR of 17
percent. The calculated benefits with the overall cost of developing VUCE with co-financing from the
government and other sources are also significantly higher than those estimated at appraisal (ICR, p. 15).

On activities aimed to benefit citizens, CEIBAL estimated savings of between 20 to 30 percent annually for its
operations between 2020 and 2022, given more automation and the introduction of additional digital channels of
access to its customer service (ICR, para 33).

Operational Efficiency: The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic coincided with the transition between
governments and led to the project stalling for 18 months. However, the impact of the lost time was mitigated by
the 23-month extension and the delays did not significantly affect the achievement of the project’s main
objectives. Moreover, the government ensured a substantial amount of co-financing or financing from other
sources, as the activities supported by the project and embedded within the Digital Uruguay Agenda were
complementary to the Government and other development partners’ efforts, but also due to incompatibilities
between the WB and the government’s procurement procedures (ICR p.13).

In their comments on the ICR (Annex 5), the government noted that WB procurement procedures may have
been too rigid for parastatal entities, which, under national procurement rules, benefit from greater flexibility.
These procedures may have contributed to delays, especially in activities involving innovation or exploratory
work. The government recommended adopting procurement procedures similar to those used by public

                                                                                                        Page 14 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



agencies operating outside the government, such as ANII. This approach would allow for a more streamlined
and agile workflow and a more efficient use of project resources.

Nevertheless, additional resources from the government and other development partners enabled the continuity
of select activities deemed high priorities for the government, such as VUCE. Operational efficiency was not
affected by the transition in governments and the pandemic.

The ICR did not report project management costs as percent of the total cost, which would have been helpful to
analyze if costs were deemed reasonable when compared to country and regional averages (ICR, para 34).


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                               .13
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
 ICR Estimate                                            .55
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was of high relevance, and there were only minor shortcomings in the project’s achievement of its
objectives and its efficiency. The overall outcome rating of the project is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is low as the government remains committed to continuing and expanding
e-government services, which are crucial to its digital agenda, and has ensured continued financing for the
implementation of these initiatives despite external shocks, such as the pandemic, or domestic events, such
as government transition periods. E-invoicing is now mandatory and irreversible. A follow-up project is
enhancing the MEF’s capacity in data analytics, climate change governance, and market institutions. Citizen



                                                                                                 Page 15 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



adoption of e-services has increased significantly, driven by a preference for non-face-to-face interactions,
especially during the pandemic.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The original project design benefitted from Uruguay’s strong foundations for effective institutions and
  important previous advances in increasing connectivity and e-government services. The project design
  was also aligned with the country’s Digital Government Plan, incorporating global best practices and
  provisions for successful implementation and complemented the government’s previous reforms with
  other donors such as the IDB. The design benefitted from global thinking on increasing e-government
  service use through both supply-side (e.g., strengthening single window services) and demand-side
  interventions (e.g., multi-channel access and user feedback).

  Financial management and procurement arrangements were deemed adequate at project appraisal, and
  included the use of existing country budgeting, audit and control systems and capacities within the MEF
  handling coordination.

  The main design shortcomings were related to moderate weaknesses in M&E quality, and the missed
  opportunity to formally revise PDO indicator 1.2 to reflect the shift from mobile PACs to online channels
  due to the pandemic. The results framework did not include an indicator for the significant investment in
  standardizing government portals which consumed a significant proportion of the project’s funds and was
  a significant contribution toward achieving the PDO. IEG also notes the project’s design did not identify
  an appropriate indicator to measure PDO 1’s outcome related to improved delivery of distance learning
  materials to targeted schools.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The WBG provided satisfactory supervision and demonstrated flexibility during the project’s
 implementation, conducting regular support missions and adapting to the pandemic by shifting to virtual
 missions. There were 12 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs). The ICR noted ISRs highlighted key
 issues, but they could have offered more detailed narratives on progress and results (ICR, para 50). The
 project benefited from stable leadership, with two Task Team Leaders over six years which helped
 coordination with the government authorities. The WBG showed adaptability by approving project
 extensions and redirecting funds as needed, and it supported the government in preparing a follow-up
 project to ensure continued progress.




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



 However, The MTR was conducted late in the project’s timeline, in January 2022—four years into
 implementation, after the original closing date of December 31, 2021, and only 18 months before the twice-
 extended final closing date of December 15, 2023.

 The results framework was not revised, despite the increased allocation under Component 3 from
 reductions in Components 4 and 2 (ICR, para 16).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design did not provide a ToC at appraisal. Nevertheless, the PDO indicators were generally adequate
 to monitor progress toward improved access to selected e-government services, except for PDO indicator
 1.1 which was not adequate. PDO indicator 1.1 made it difficult to deduce the expected results on quality of
 distance education. Indeed, the ICR noted (ICR, para 43) that the quality dimension was not sufficiently
 captured at the PDO level but through several IRIs, and the relevance of the quality dimension was not
 always clear. This was especially true for the assessment of quality of the administrative e-services
 delivered to citizens (PDO 1). An increase in the number of users performing research online before
 carrying out an administrative process is not necessarily and indication of the quality of the services
 provided. Similarly, an IRI measuring the number of public entities using the government data analysis
 platform(s) to improve their management is not an indication of management improvement. In addition, the
 IRI related to the use of the Portal Timbó was not necessarily reflective of increased access for businesses
 given the platform’s orientation towards academic users.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was rated satisfactory throughout implementation due to proactive and regular data
  collection and reporting throughout project implementation. The PCU was adequately staffed and
  regularly submitted bi-annual progress reports to the WB (ICR, para 45). Implementation also benefited
  from the PCU’s high capacity and experience in managing the WB-financed Institutions Building
  Technical Assistance Loan operation (which closed in 2016) and the agencies’ experience in publicly
  reporting their activities and results on their websites.

  On the shortcomings, the WB lacked proactivity in setting more ambitious targets once project indicators
  were surpassed.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used to inform project management and decision making, but despite several end-
  targets being exceeded, no new targets were set. In the case of VUCE, the government and the WB
  decided to redirect project funds to other activities once the end target of increasing the number of
  administrative processes incorporated was met. More ambitious targets could have been set for the
  project indicators that were quickly surpassed.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental/ Social Safeguards: The project was classified under Category C (no assessment project)
   under the WB safeguard policies at appraisal, as it did not include any activities that involved environmental
   or social risks.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   There were no key fiduciary issues in the implementation of key activities and procurement processes.
   Notwithstanding the delays in planning and implementing project activities during the pandemic,
   procurement steps were properly documented, and implementation progress updated in the WB’s
   Systemic Tracking of Exchanges in procurement (STEP) platform regularly.

   Financial Management (FM) and procurement performance were rated satisfactory throughout the project’s
   lifetime. The PCU had adequate FM arrangements in place and provided timely and reliable financial
   reports to monitor project implementation (ICR, para 48).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   Institutional strengthening: The project significantly enhanced the capacity of individual government
   institutions in Uruguay, contributing to the longer-term development of the country's public sector through a
   comprehensive approach. A key focus was strengthening the ability of institutions like AGESIC to deliver e-
   services, leading to more cost-effective and efficient innovations. The project also advanced the
   standardization of government web portals and supported initiatives like VUCE and e-invoicing, which
   improved efficiency and institutional capacity. Finally, the project broadened the role of institutions like
   ANII, helping them evolve from merely financing to facilitating access to research and innovation (ICR,
   para 37).

   Best practices: AGESIC shared its project experiences at the 2023 WB GovTech Forum and with the
   Chilean government on digital health initiatives. Additionally, a new WB-financed project in the Dominican

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



   Republic focused on public administration modernization (P180302) incorporated key lessons from this
   project, particularly in the use of interoperable systems, cross-institutional data exchange, and
   standardization, to accelerate the rollout of digital services (ICR, para 37).

   Other positive long-term impacts. DGI reported that the expansion of e-invoicing, initially aimed at
   efficiency, was now significantly reducing errors and fraud through cross-verification and early detection,
   with most fraud traced back to paper invoices. E-invoicing data also enabled DGI to monitor the impact of
   the COVID-19 pandemic on businesses and sectors, aiding in the implementation of relief measures. CGN
   highlighted positive outcomes like the development of new functionalities in SIRFE, enabling public entities
   to issue e-invoices. CGN views SIRFE as a powerful tool for improving interoperability with tax and
   procurement platforms, enhancing public expenditure auditing and statistics. Additionally, the reduction in
   paper use from e-invoicing has had a positive environmental impact.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the lessons learned in the ICR, specifically on strategically leveraging
complementary financing from development partners and other co-financing, and on the importance
of change and knowledge management activities for the digital transformation.

IEG proposes an additional lesson: Government commitment is one of the most critical
components for project success. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic and an 18-month standstill,
Uruguay remained dedicated to its core objectives, such as bringing broadband internet to rural
schools. This commitment not only addressed immediate educational needs but also laid the
groundwork for future opportunities, highlighting the importance of continuity in policy and project
implementation. Uruguay's example shows that strong government dedication can overcome
significant challenges and ensure the successful delivery of critical projects.




                                                                                                       Page 19 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UY E-Gov Services for Citizens&Business (P161989)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presented a clear, coherent and well-organized overview of the project. The analysis provides
sufficient evidence for assessing project performance. The report is concise, follows most of the guidelines, and
is focused on results. The ICR lessons are useful and logically flow from the data and analysis provided in the
ICR.

The evidence provided is aligned with the messages outlined in the ICR, although there were some
shortcomings in the completeness and consistency of information, such as missing information on the MTR and
data inconsistencies on the project’s final cost as well as shortcomings in the interpretation of survey results.

The ICR failed to report project management costs as percent of the total cost, which would have been helpful
to analyze if costs were deemed reasonable when compared to country and regional averages (ICR, para 34).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 20
