     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024212

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P133288                                   AR Renewable Energy

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Argentina                                 Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-84840                                31-Oct-2020                                         81,325,335.06

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Apr-2015                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         200,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             91,511,634.31                                             0.00

 Actual                                         91,511,634.31                                             0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan         Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
                            Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Loan Agreement (p.5) dated
   October 9, 2015, the project objective is “to provide and enhance access to modern energy services in the
   Borrower’s selected rural areas,” where the Borrower is defined as the Argentine Republic. In the Project
   Appraisal Document (p.5), the last part of the project objective reads as “…in selected rural areas of
   Argentina.”



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



   The PAD (footnote 5 on p.2) defines modern energy services as “reliable and affordable energy, including
   electricity and additional energy-related services (such as potable water, cooking or heating).”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The Renewable Energy for Rural Areas Project (PERMER II - Proyecto de Energías Renovables en
   Mercados Rurales II) consisted of four components:

   A. Renewable Electricity Service Provision. (Appraisal cost: US$215.61 million; revised cost at the first
   restructuring: US$161.04 million; actual cost: US$141.35 million)

   This component consisted of the following activities: (a) the acquisition and installation of stand-alone solar
   and wind systems, pico-photovoltaic (PV) for isolated households and public facilities; (b) the construction
   and upgrade of mini grids; (c) the acquisition and installation of water pumping systems in isolated
   households, public facilities, and communities; (d) the acquisition and installation of equipment to micro-
   enterprises for productive use of electricity; and (e) the provision of small works and goods as in-kind
   compensation for resettlement.

   B. Solar Thermal Service Provision. (Appraisal cost: US$9.67 million; revised cost at the first
   restructuring: US$5.01 million; dropped at the second restructuring)

   This component was to finance the provision of solar thermal energy services through the acquisition and
   installation of solar water heaters, solar spatial heating systems, cookers, and ovens in public facilities and
   buildings. This component was later cancelled (see Revised Component later in this section).

   C. Project Deployment Support. (Appraisal cost: US$6.71 million; revised cost at the first restructuring:
   US$0.77 million actual cost: US$1.74 million)

   The following activities were to be financed under this component: (a) market studies to determine potential
   energy demand and technologies at both urban and rural areas; (b) monitoring and evaluation activities to
   measure electricity consumption; (c) communication strategies and outreach including studies to support
   Argentina’s renewable energy goals, dissemination of lessons learned, and capacity building for the
   weakest stakeholders; and (d) support for the development of feasibility studies for new technologies, such
   as solar heating systems.

   D. Project Management. (Appraisal cost: US$8.10 million; revised cost at the first restructuring: US$1.84
   million; actual cost: US$2.29 million)


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



  This component was to provide support to project management through the strengthening of the operational
  capacity of the project coordination unit and the participating provinces in Argentina and their respective
  project implementation units; carrying out of audits, training, and financing incremental costs related to
  travel and rental of vehicles for supervision.

  Revised Components

  The project scope narrowed in accordance with the partial cancellations of the IBRD loan amount in the first
  and third project restructurings (see project restructurings in Section e. Comments on Project Cost,
  Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates below).

  The second component was dropped from the project scope at the second restructuring in June 2022
  because the government decided to give priority to electrification through renewable energy service
  provision under the first component within the limited time left until the revised project closing date of June
  30, 2023 (the project closing date was extended by an additional 6 months in the third restructuring to close
  on December 31, 2023).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$240.09 million. The project closed on
  December 31, 2023, with an actual cost of US$145.38 million, but this corresponds to the IBRD financing
  amount and US$4.8 million the provincial government of Salta contributed to Component 1 (ICR, Annex 3).
  The ICR does not report the actual project cost.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IBRD loan amount was estimated at US$200 million. At the first restructuring,
  US$31.3 million was canceled. This was followed by the cancellation of US$23.3 million at the third
  restructuring (see the entries for project restructurings below). These two cancellations decreased the
  estimated IBRD loan amount from US$200 million to US$145.4 million. According to the information in
  Annex 3 of the ICR, the project had disbursed US$140.58 million by project closing. However, the ICR’s
  data sheet reports the disbursed amount at US$91.51 million.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the contribution of the Government of Argentina was estimated at
  US$10.85 million. The provinces were estimated to contribute US$25.74 million. The private sector’s
  contribution was estimated at US$23.50 million. The ICR (Annex 3) reports that the provincial government
  of Salta contributed US$4.8 million to Component 1. The ICR does not report the actual contributions of the
  Government of Argentina and private sector.

  Project Restructurings: The project was restructured three times.

        First Project Restructuring and Additional Financing (October 29, 2020 – Level 2): In this
         restructuring, the project closing date was extended by 20 months from October 31, 2020 to June
         30, 2022 to allow time for the completion of project activities that were delayed because of the slow
         start of the project due to frequent changes in the energy authorities and ministerial reorganizations,
         and the onset of COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. A partial loan amount of US$31.3 million was
         canceled upon the request of the Government of Argentina to use this amount for the containment of
         the COVID-19 pandemic, support social protection program, and support economic recovery.
         Because of the narrowing of the project scope but increased focus on electrification, the targets of

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



       the objective level indicators were revised as the following: (a) the number of direct project
       beneficiaries from 756,000 to 454,000; (b) people provided with access to electricity by household
       connections from 175,000 to 193,991; (c) community electricity connections constructed under the
       project from 1,800 to 2,615; and (d) people that obtain daily and constant electricity service through
       mini-grids from 37,000 to 3,600.
      Second Project Restructuring (June 23, 2022 – Level 2): The project closing date was extended
       by 12 months from June 30, 2022 to June 30, 2023 to allow time for the completion of the ground
       installation and certification of electrification activities that were delayed because of the changes in
       the officials authorized to sign contracts and processing of payments and the impact of the Covid-19
       restrictions on movement of people. In this project restructuring, the second component was
       dropped from the project scope (see Revised Component in section d. Components above). The
       funds for the second component were reallocated to the first component to increase its scope in
       electrifying households. The targets of the objective level indicators were revised again as follows:
       (a) the number of direct project beneficiaries from 454,000 to 509,468; (b) people provided with
       access to electricity by household connections from 193,991 to 348,091; (c) community electricity
       connections constructed under the project from 2,615 to 1,660; and (d) people that obtain daily and
       constant electricity service through mini-grids from 3,600 to 3,872.
      Third Project Restructuring (June 11, 2023 – Level 2): Because of import restrictions that delayed
       project implementation and the possibility that the government might have insufficient funds to
       finance the ongoing project activities after project closing, a 6-month closing date extension was
       approved. A partial loan amount of US$23.38 million was canceled upon the request of the
       Government of Argentina because it was assessed that the time until project closing was insufficient
       to disburse that amount for project activities. As a result, the project scope further narrowed, and the
       targets of all projective objective level indicators were significantly revised down: (a) the number of
       direct project beneficiaries from 509,468 to 229,000; (b) people provided with access to electricity by
       household connections from 348,091 to 139,600; (c) community electricity connections constructed
       under the project from 1,660 to 780; and (d) people that obtain daily and constant electricity service
       through mini-grids from 3,872 to 340.

Dates: The project was approved on April 7, 2015 and became effective more than one year later on May 4,
2016 because of changes in the administration and sector authorities that delayed the fulfillment of
effectiveness conditions. A Mid-Term Review took place in May 2019. The original project closing date was
October 31, 2020, but it was extended by 38 months (please see the project restructurings above for the
reasons of project closing date extensions). The project closed on December 31, 2023.

The reason for undertaking a split assessment of the project’s outcome:

The revisions to the targets at each three project restructurings require a split assessment of the project’s
performance, but a split assessment will be undertaken only for two periods—before and after the third
restructuring. Although each of the three project restructurings requires a split assessment of the project’s
efficacy in achieving the project objective, the targets revised at the first and second restructurings are
assessed together with the original targets, because the project’s achievements at project closing were
significantly lower than the targets resulting in the same efficacy rating for each revision. Therefore, a split
assessment is undertaken only for the periods before and after the third restructuring.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
At appraisal, the project objective was aligned with the World Bank’s strategy as defined in the Country
Partnership Framework for the Argentine Republic for the period FY2015-2018. The project sought to
address the development problem of inadequate access of the remote rural communities including
indigenous people to modern energy services. The project would have also been expected to support
Argentina to get closer to the achievement of universal access to electricity while reducing the number of
people in extreme poverty and increase coordination between the Federal Government and provinces in
this effort. The project was to achieve these objectives by financing the acquisition and installation of
renewable energy sources for electricity, cooking, water boiling, and water pumping while providing
technical assistance for productive uses of electricity and coordination and collaboration between the
Federal Government and provinces in the preparation and implementation of subprojects. The project
objective corresponded to Pillar 2, Increasing access and quality of social infrastructure and services for the
poor and supported the achievement of Objective 4: Increasing access to electricity, safe drinking water,
housing, and sanitation services for the bottom 40 percent in low-income provinces and areas. However,
the project objectives were only partially aligned with the World Bank’s latest strategy as defined in the
Country Partnership Framework for the Argentine Republic for the period FY2019-2022. The project
objective partially falls under the Focus Area 3: Supporting Argentina to implement its Nationally
Determined Contributions (NDC) and partially supported the achievement of the Objective 8: Transitioning
to a cleaner Energy Matrix through the installation of renewable energy sources in remote areas that would
have been expected to replace the use of wood and charcoal for cooking and water heating. Although the
project objective was partially aligned with the World Bank strategy at the time of project closing, this was
mostly because of the shift in the strategy from achieving universal access to electricity in Argentina and
expansion of other modern energy services (because of Argentina’s achievement of universal access in
2022) to the higher objective of transitioning to a cleaner energy matrix through the use of its abundant
renewable energy sources. Overall, the project objective’s alignment with the World Bank strategy was
substantial.

The project objective was highly relevant to the country context. Although the project objective was output-
oriented, its achievement would have been critical to improve the socio-economic welfare of the remote
rural communities where extreme poverty was high. The project objective was appropriately pitched for the
development status and capacity in the country as described in the World Bank strategies. While the project
benefited from the experience gained and lessons learned during the implementation of the PERMER I
between 1999 and 2012, the project objective of the current project was less challenging than its
predecessor, which was “to remove market barriers to application, implementation and dissemination of
renewable energy sources, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by replacing small-diesel electricity
generation and the use of candles, kerosene and gas cylinders and in lighting and other domestic uses with
renewable energy systems.”

Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 21
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  AR Renewable Energy (P133288)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To provide and enhance access to modern energy services in the Borrower’s selected rural areas.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change before the Third Project Restructuring

               The project inputs were to be used for the installation of stand-alone solar and wind systems, solar water
               pumps, and equipment for micro-enterprises for productive uses, construction or upgrading of mini-grids
               powered by hydro or other renewable energy sources, and installation of water heaters spatial heating
               systems, cookers and ovens powered by renewable energy. These project outputs applied in the right mix
               were expected to lead to the project outcome of an increased number of people, micro-enterprises, and public
               facilities with first time or enhanced access to reliable and affordable modern energy services in rural areas of
               Argentina. The long-term impact of the project would have been improved socio-economic welfare and
               reduced absolute poverty. The project was also to finance communication and outreach activities to the
               communities and capacity development activities at the provincial government level to facilitate the smooth
               implementation of the project and sustainability of the project outcomes.

               Overall, the causal links from project inputs and outputs to the expected intermediate outcome of increased or
               enhanced access to modern energy services were direct and valid, and the achievement of the project
               objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention.

               The following outputs were expected to contribute to the achievement of this theory of change:

               Outputs

                     Community electricity connections constructed under the project (schools): The project
                      financed the installation of 263 standalone solar systems at schools. The original target was 1,200
                      schools. It was revised up to 1,820 schools at the first restructuring and revised down to 745 schools
                      at the second restructuring. This was well short of the target.
                     Community electricity connections constructed under the project (other public facilities): The
                      project financed the installation of 75 standalone solar home systems at other public facilities other
                      than schools. The original target was 600 public facilities. It was revised down to 376 public facilities at
                      the first restructuring and revised up to 838 public facilities at the second restructuring. This was well
                      short of the target.
                     Generation capacity of hydropower constructed or rehabilitated under the project: The project
                      was to finance the construction of mini hydroelectric generation plants with a total installed capacity of
                      14 MW. The target was revised down to 0.21 MW and up to 0.30 MW at the first and second
                      restructurings, respectively. The project did not achieve any increase in hydropower generation
                      capacity.



                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  AR Renewable Energy (P133288)




    Generation capacity of renewable energy (other than hydropower) constructed: The project
       financed the installation of solar power systems with a total installed generation capacity of 5 MW. The
       project did not finance the installation of wind power systems. The original target was 10 MW
       consisting of 8 MW solar power and 2 MW of wind power. The total target was revised to 9.66 MW
       (9.48 MW solar and 0.18 MW wind) and 10.34 MW (10.13 MW solar and 0.21 MW wind) at the first
       and second restructurings, respectively.
      Clean energy studies and strategies supported under the project: The project financed the
       preparation of four studies related to the use and scaling up of clean energy against the original target
       of 10. This target was not revised at the first and second restructurings.
      Capacity building, outreach, and training activities implemented under the project: The project
       financed 108 such activities against the target of 70.
      The project was to install solar powered pumps for potable water supply to isolated individual
       households and public facilities. No target was set for this activity. The achievement was zero.
      The project was also to install solar systems for thermal energy for heating, cooking, and water
       heating. No target was set for the installation of these systems. These activities to be implemented
       under the second component were cancelled at the second restructuring.

Outcomes

    Collective micro-enterprises that obtained an electricity service under the project: The project
       was to provide electricity service through the installation of mini grids to 20 collective micro-
       enterprises. This target was significantly increased to 665 collective micro-enterprises and revised
       down to 577 collective micro-enterprises at the first and second restructurings. The achievement was
       zero.
      Individual micro-enterprises that obtained an electricity service under the project: The project
       was to provide electricity service to 4,200 individual micro-enterprises. This target was revised up to
       8,275 individual micro-enterprises and revised down to 7,736 individual micro-enterprises at the first
       and second restructurings. The achievement was 6,870 individual micro-enterprises.
      People that obtained access to an electricity service for water pumping only: The project was to
       provide electricity service for water pumping only to 185,000 people. This target was revised down to
       approximately 124,000 people and 20,000 people at the first and second restructurings. The
       achievement was zero.
      People that obtained access to thermal energy provision (modern spatial heating, cooking, and
       water heating) in public institutions: The project was to provide thermal energy to 205,000 people
       for modern cooking appliances (31,000 people), modern spatial heating systems (10,000 people) and
       modern water heating systems (164,000 people). After the cancellation of the second component, the
       targets for modern cooking appliances and modern spatial heating systems were deleted. The target
       for modern water heating systems was revised down to 28,350 people. The achievement was zero.
      People provided with electricity by household connections through off grid and mini grid (only
       renewable sources): As a result of the installation of standalone solar systems, 136,748 people
       gained access to electricity. The original target was 173,000 people, which was revised up to
       approximately 194,000 people and 348,000 people at the first and second restructurings.
      People provided with electricity by household connections through off grid and mini grid (any
       source except only renewable): As a result of the establishment of mini-grids powered by non-
       renewable sources, 2,000 people were to gain access to electricity. This target was significantly



                                                                                                  Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



         revised down to 360 people and 38 people at the first and second restructurings. The achievement
         was zero.
        People that obtain a daily and constant electricity service with prior access to the service
         (through mini grids) as a result of the project: The project was to provide enhanced electricity
         services to 28,000 people through mini-grids, which was later revised down to 3,240 people and 3,291
         people at the first and second restructurings. The achievement of 288 people was significantly lower
         than the targets.
        People that obtain a daily and constant electricity service and with prior access to the service
         (through mini grids) and without prior access to the service as a result of the project: The
         project was to provide electricity access through mini-grids to 9,000 people, which was later revised
         down to 360 people and up to 581 people at the first and second restructurings, respectively. The
         achievement of 51 people was significantly lower than the targets.
        Direct project beneficiaries that obtained enhanced access (daily hours and quality of service)
         to modern energy services (electricity, water pumping, productive uses, solar thermal
         applications): The project was to enhance 241,000 people’s access to modern energy services
         through project activities. This target was revised down to approximately 119,000 people and 70,000
         people at the first and second restructurings. The achievement was 10,608 people.
        Direct project beneficiaries that obtained access to modern energy services (electricity, water
         pumping, productive uses, solar thermal applications): The target was to provide electricity
         access to 524,000 people. This target was revised down to approximately 335,000 people at the first
         restructuring and up to 440,000 people at the second restructuring. The achievement of approximately
         180,000 people was significantly lower than the targets. This number included approximately 22,000
         people who benefited from the installation of electric fences for livestock, which the ICR (p.33) counts
         as an application for productive uses.
        Micro-enterprises supported under the project that increase their production: The project
         targeted that 65 percent of the micro-enterprises supported under the project would have increased
         their production because of the availability of modern energy services. The target was not revised at
         the first restructuring but up to 77 percent at the second restructuring. The ICR (p.32) 90 percent of
         the micro-enterprises that were supported by the project increased their production.
        People that are satisfied with the benefits arising from obtaining access or an enhanced
         access to electricity through household connections: The expectation at appraisal was that 80
         percent of the people would have been satisfied with benefits of electricity through household
         connections. The target was not revised. The achievement was 88 percent.
        People that are satisfied with the benefits arising from obtaining access or an enhanced
         access to electricity through community connections: The expectation at appraisal was that 80
         percent of the people would have been satisfied with benefits of electricity through community
         connections. The target was not revised. The achievement was 93 percent.

The project significantly underachieved the targets in increasing or enhancing access to modern energy
services in selected rural areas of Argentina. Because of the changing preferences of the government, some
project activities were dropped or not implemented in favor of increasing electricity access in rural areas. The
project did not achieve any results in providing or enhancing energy-related such as potable water, cooking,
or heating. The project objective was not revised when the second component, which was to finance activities
to provide such energy-related services, was dropped. Therefore, the project’s achievement was limited to
increasing access to electricity by household and community connections, which was significantly lower than
the original and revised targets at the first and second restructurings, except the achievements related to
increasing micro-enterprises access to electricity. In addition, the evidence is insufficient to assess the

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



reliability and affordability of modern energy services (in this case only electricity supply service because the
project did not achieve any results in energy-related services). Furthermore, there is no evidence to assess
the sustainability of the solar systems installed under the project in terms of their maintenance and
replacement of batteries. The survey conducted at project closing shows that electricity had a positive impact
on the production of micro-enterprises and people are satisfied with the benefits arising from electricity
through household or community connections, but these results prove the positive impact of electricity on
businesses and individuals that is very well documented in the literature. Such positive impacts are limited to
a small group of people because of the underachievement of the project’s results.

Overall, because of significant underachievement and insufficient evidence, the project’s efficacy in achieving
the project objective in the period before the third project restructuring is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide and enhance access to modern energy services in the Borrower’s selected rural areas (The
project objective did not change but the key indicators were revised).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change after the Third Project Restructuring

Following the cancellation of the second component, the project design did not include any energy-related
service activity, such as provision of thermal heat or electricity for potable water, cooking or heating. This
created a gap in the theory change in achieving the project objective to provide and enhance access to
modern energy services, which consists of access to electricity and other energy-related services. Therefore,
the causal links from project inputs and outputs to the expected intermediate outcome of increased or
enhanced access to electricity were still direct and valid, and the achievement of this part of the project
objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention but the project’s design did not support the
achievement of increased or enhanced access to energy-related services.

Outputs

The targets of two indicators were revised down significantly at the third restructuring in June 2023,
approximately six months before project restructuring. The target for the number of schools connected to
electricity under the project was revised down from 745 to 430, but the achievement was 263. Similarly, the
target for the number of other public facilities connected to electricity under the project was revised down from
838 to 240, but the achievement was only 75. The target of other indicators were revised down to match the
actual achievement at the time of project restructuring such as the target for solar power generation capacity
constructed from 10.13 MW to 5 MW, and the target for the number of clean energy studies supported by the
project from ten studies to four studies.

Outcomes


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 21
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



                              At the third restructuring, targets of most of the indicators were revised to match the results already achieved
                              before the restructuring, but the achievements were mostly below the targets. For example, the target for the
                              number of people provided with electricity by household connections was revised down from approximately
                              348,000 to 139,600, and the achievement was approximately 137,000. Similarly, the target for the number of
                              people who obtained a daily and constant electricity service with prior access through mini grids was revised
                              down from approximately 3,900 to 340; the achievement was 399. The target for the number of direct project
                              beneficiaries was significantly revised down from approximately 510,000 people to 229,000 people. The
                              achievement was 194,302 people.

                              Furthermore, as explained in the revised theory of change in this section above, the project design did not
                              include any activity to provide and enhance energy-related services (other than access to electricity) such as
                              water pumping, cooking, and heating. Therefore, the project’s intervention partially supported the
                              achievement of the project objective, and the achievements were lower than the targets. In addition, as was
                              the case in the assessment of the achievement of the project objective before the third restructuring, the
                              evidence is insufficient to assess the achievement of the provision of modern energy services in a reliable
                              and affordable way.

                              Overall, the project efficacy in achieving the project objective after the third restructuring is rated Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project significantly underachieved its targets for increasing access to modern energy services before the
                            third restructuring. The evidence was also insufficient to assess the reliability and affordability of the electricity
                            services. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated Negligible.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                      Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                   Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            After the cancellation of the second component, the project design had a gap in supporting the achievement
                            of the project objective to provide and enhance energy-related services such as water pumping, heating, and
                            cooking that are included in modern energy services. The project’s achievements were limited to the first time
                            or enhanced provision of electricity access to households, public entities, and micro-enterprises, but these
                            achievements were lower than the targets revised at the third restructuring. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in
                            achieving the project objective after the third restructuring is rated Modest.


                                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Renewable Energy (P133288)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                          Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, a cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the activities to be
implemented under the first and second components for the provision of electricity services and solar thermal
energy in rural areas. The economic benefits included in the analysis were typical for such rural electrification
projects consisting of cost savings to users arising from shifting from traditional energy sources, such as
kerosene, candles, and batteries, to electricity and users’ willingness-to-pay for the electricity and thermal
energy services based on surveys carried out under the predecessor PERMER I. The costs were taken as the
investment cost, and operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. Annex 7 of the PAD provides a detailed
explanation of economic analysis. The assumptions used in the methodology were relevant for the analysis. The
calculations resulted in an economic rate or return (ERR) of 22.8 percent and a net present value (NPV) of
US$76.9 million at a discount rate of 10 percent.

At project closing, a post-project economic analysis was conducted using the same methodology as at
appraisal. The calculations resulted in an ERR of 21.3 percent and an NPV of US$18.2 million at a discount rate
of 10 percent. The ICR (p.14) states that the lower ERR and NPV values were because of higher capital cost
per unit of equipment and the considerable reduction in the investment component’s size. The calculations at
both appraisal and project closing show the economic viability of the project’s intervention; however, it should be
noted that the project was partially successful in achieving the outcomes expected in electrification (modest
compared to the targets revised at the third restructuring and negligible compared to the original and earlier
revies targets) and unsuccessful in achieving the outcomes expected from the use of thermal energy. Thus, the
project fell short of achieving the full scale of economic benefits expected from its intervention.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

There were significant shortcomings in the operational and administrative efficiency of the project. The frequent
changes in the officials and administrative structures of the organizations resulted in delays in project
effectiveness and procurement. The project was not ready for implementation. It was approved in April 2015, but
approximately three years were needed for “preparation, completing institutional arrangements, design of
technical specifications and procurement processes” (ICR, p.16). As discussed in section 10.b Fiduciary
Compliance, procurement issues through to project closing resulted in significant implementation delays
contributing to the project closing date extension of 38 months. Despite this time extension, 34 contracts could
not be completed by project closing and were transferred to Clean Energy for Vulnerable Households and
Communities Project (P178553). The import restrictions imposed by the Central Bank of Argentina also
adversely affected project implementation because these restrictions complicated the importation of solar panel
and batteries to be installed under the project.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Modest.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      71.40
 Appraisal                                                  22.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      76.10
 ICR Estimate                                               21.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

A split assessment of the project’s outcome is undertaken because of the changes in the targets of key
indicators and reduction in the project’s scope. The calculation of the split rating is given in the table below. The
relevance of the project objectives is rated Substantial. The project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective
is rated Modest because of low achievement of the economic benefits expected from the project’s intervention
and significant shortcomings in the project’s administrative and operational efficiency. The efficacy of the project
in achieving the project objective before the third restructuring is rated Negligible. It is rated Modest after the
third restructuring, because of limited achievement of the outcomes related to electrification and no achievement
related to access to energy-related services such water pumping, heating, and cooking. Overall, the split
assessment of the project’s performance resulted in an Unsatisfactory rating.

Table 1

                                      Before the Third             After the Third
　
                                     Restructuring                Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives                                      Substantial
Efficacy                                   Negligible                   Modest
Efficiency                                                       Modest
Outcome Rating                             Unsatisfactory         Moderately Unsatisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)                        2                             3
Amount Disbursed (US$ million)                91.01                         49.57
Disbursement (%) (b)                         64.74%                         35.26%
Weight Value (a)x(b)                         1.2948                         1.0578
Total weights                                           2.3518 (rounds down to 2)
Overall Outcome Rating                                      Unsatisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Unsatisfactory


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      AR Renewable Energy (P133288)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical: The stand-alone solar systems installed under the project are third-generation solar technology
systems. These solar systems are known to have shorter lifetimes, and their operation and maintenance and
the replacement of batteries are not fully incorporated into the post-project institutional arrangements to be
implemented by local provinces (ICR, p.24). Therefore, inadequate maintenance of these systems and
potential issues in the replacement of parts and batteries could adversely affect the sustainability of the
limited outcomes achieved under the project.

Geographical: The project was implemented in remote areas of the country with difficult geographical
conditions. Such conditions pose a substantial risk for the availability of services for the maintenance of the
solar home systems. The follow-on Clean Energy for Vulnerable Households and Communities Project
(P178553) is expected to further support the sustainability of maintenance and replacement services for the
stand-alone solar home systems.

Political: Frequent changes in the policy priorities and administrations pose a high risk for the sustainability
of project outcomes. Because of changes in the government’s policy orientation, government’s support to
rural energy operations decreased. This was already evident during project implementation through the
project scope narrowing and the shifting focus from energy-related services, such as water pumping,
heating, and cooking, to electricity access. The uncertainties around the government’s commitment to rural
energy services can adversely affect the sustainability of the project outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Increasing access to modern energy services in the remote areas of Argentina was of high strategic
  importance for the government at the time of appraisal. The project was the main instrument for the
  government to achieve universal access. While the project benefited from the experience and lessons
  learned during the implementation of PERMER I, the project preparedness at entry was inadequate. The
  subprojects were not identified; hence, most of the safeguard documents were prepared at the framework
  level. The project preparations had to be completed during the first three years of project implementation
  that resulted in significant delays. Fiduciary aspects of the project were designed based on PERMER I,
  but the insufficient procurement capacity was not adequately identified. The technical aspects had
  shortcomings; the introduction of Generation 3 solar panels resulted in a substantial risk to the
  sustainability of development outcomes. The M&E framework included a total of 33 indicators including
  sub-indicators, but the M&E design was insufficient to appropriately test the links in the results chain of
  the project’s theory of chain. The risk levels were inadequately identified (ICR, pp.15-16); hence,
  mitigation measures were ineffective. The economic analysis was detailed, and the assumptions used in
  the analysis were adequate; however, since the subprojects were not identified at appraisal, the
  economic analysis was based on estimations.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



  Overall, for a project, the appraisal of which benefited from the experience and lessons learned during
  the predecessor PERMER I, the quality at entry had significant shortcomings; therefore, the quality at
  entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 From the appraisal stage to project closing, the same Task Team Leader stationed in Buenos Aires led the
 project team—a rare occurrence in World Bank projects. The project team held regular supervision
 missions at least twice in a calendar year. The project team’s focus on the achievement of the development
 impact of the project was insufficient; the project restructurings were mostly about adjusting the indicator
 targets rather than increasing the effectiveness of the project’s implementation in achieving the project
 outcomes. Although the second component, which supported the implementation of thermal solutions was
 deleted, the project objective was not revised to reflect this major change in the project’s theory of change.
 This created a significant gap in the assessment of the project’s outcome. The shortcomings in the M&E
 design were not addressed to adequately capture the project results and test the links in the causal chain.
 As noted in the Quality at Entry section above, because of the shortcomings in the project’s preparedness,
 the first three years of project implementation until 2018 were “spent mostly in preparation, completing
 institutional arrangements, design of technical specifications and procurement processes” (ICR, p.16). This
 significantly contributed to the 38-month extension of the project closing date. The Mid-Term Review was
 conducted according to the plan, and an action plan was agreed on with the government to address the
 issues in project implementation. These had some partial success in improving project implementation but
 shortcomings in procurement resulted in 34 contracts’ being transferred to the Clean Energy for Vulnerable
 Households and Communities Project (P178553) because they could not be completed before the
 extended project closing date. The supervision of safeguard policies had some minor shortcomings; 19
 compensation payments to project-affected people were still pending at project closing under the
 Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy.

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



a. M&E Design
 The project’s theory of change was straightforward establishing direct and valid causal chains between the
 project activities and outputs and expected outcomes, but it was not adequately reflected in the results
 framework. Although the results framework included 33 indicators, they were insufficient to document how
 the key activities and outputs led to outcomes. Most of the indicators were designed to count the
 connections to electricity or energy-related services, falling short of monitoring how those connections were
 achieved.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project coordination unit collected data and reported the project progress in bi-annual reports in
  coordination with the project implementation units at the provincial government levels. The indicators
  included in the results framework were adequately measured, and the World Bank project team regularly
  reported them in the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ICR, p.19). The weaknesses in the
  M&E design in adequately capturing the project outputs and outcomes were not addressed during project
  implementation. The three project restructurings resulted in cancellation of nine intermediate results
  indicator. The frequent changes in the end targets of the indicators complicated the assessment of the
  project’s results. The data is assessed to be reliable and of good quality, but the methodology to be used
  in measuring the indicators could not be defined for a prolonged time (ICR, p.19); the ICR does not report
  the impact of this shortcoming on the measurement of the indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data and findings were used to restructure the project three times and revise the end targets of
  the indicators in accordance with the narrowing scope of the project rather than shifting the
  implementation direction of the project to achieve the project objectives. Despite the cancellation of the
  second component based on the M&E findings, the project objective was not revised to reflect this
  change, which resulted in a gap in the project’s theory of change related to increasing access to energy-
  related services. The M&E data were used to provide evidence for the achievement of the repeatedly
  revised indicator targets, rather than evidence for the achievement of the project outcomes and the
  establishment of attribution between the project’s intervention and the achievement of the objectives.
  The M&E findings are not expected to lead to a subsequent intervention because the last mile electricity
  connections is not a topic high on the agenda of the government.



  Overall, the M&E quality is rated Modest, because of shortcomings in the M&E design to adequately
  capture the project outputs and outcomes and the M&E implementation in providing inadequate data to
  sufficiently assess the achievement of the project objectives and test the links in the results chain as
  defined in the project’s theory of change.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered
   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the
   limited and reversible potential environmental impacts of the project activities such as the construction of
   low-voltage distribution lines and related infrastructure and the mini-hydro systems. Since the exact location
   of the project activities were not identified, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
   was prepared based on an update of the ESMF of PERMER I. Consultations with local communities, local
   governments, and non-governmental organizations were adequately held. The ESMF was disclosed in
   country on August 12, 2014. It was redisclosed in country and on World Bank’s InfoShop on October 29,
   2014. After the identification of subprojects, Environmental Impact Assessments and Environmental
   Management Plans for each subproject were prepared and disclosed prior to implementation. The project
   complied with the requirements of this safeguard policy.

   Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the potential impact
   of the project activities on natural habitats such as the construction of mini-hydro systems and the
   distribution lines. The implementation of this safeguard policy had a moderate shortcoming that resulted in
   the extraction of a cactus under legal protection in the Luracatao project site because of the absence of
   measures to protect the natural habitat.

   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The project triggered this safeguard policy because the targeted
   project areas included the indigenous communities. Since the exact locations of the project activities within
   the indigenous community areas, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared based
   on the experience of PERMER I and desk review. Following the completion of consultations with the
   indigenous communities through the Indigenous Participative Council of the National Indigenous People
   Institute, the IPPF was disclosed in country and the World Bank’s InfoShop on November 14, 2014. All
   project documents and communications related to the implementation of mini grids in the indigenous
   communities’ territories were translated into three indigenous languages and distributed. Some indigenous
   people were adversely affected by the project activities that required compensations. These are handled
   under the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy with some shortcomings.

   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The project triggered this safeguard policy because of the
   possibility of chance finds during the implementation of projects since the exact locations of the subprojects
   were not known at appraisal. During project implementation, the project activities resulted in a major
   damage to a hermitage in Luracatao project site. The hermitage was still under repair when project closed
   in December 2023.

   Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): The project triggered this safeguard policy because the
   construction of mini grid, hydropower and small dam subprojects to be financed under the project were
   expected to require land easements and acquisitions and resettlement of people. At the preparation stage,
   a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared based on the experience gained during the
   implementation of PERMER 1. The RPF was disclosed in country and the World Bank’s InfoShop on
   November 14, 2014. The ICR (p.21) states that the capacity of some local teams to implement the RPF
   procedures related to mini grids was inadequate. One Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared to

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



  process compensations for one involuntary resettlement and 42 economic displacements. The processing
  of the compensations was slow. At project closing, 19 of these settlements were still pending. Their
  processing is monitored under the Clean Energy for Vulnerable Households and Communities Project
  (P178553).

  Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50): The project triggered this safeguard policy because
  some of the mini grid projects were expected to include small hydro run-of-river electricity generation facility
  that could have used water from international waterways or their tributaries such as the La Plata River
  system, which originate in Brazil and flows through Bolivia, Paraguay, Argentina and Uruguay, and the
  Negro, Colorado, Chico, and Deseado Rivers, which Argentina shares with Chile. The World Bank notified
  all five riparian states in September 2014 about the project in accordance with the requirements of this
  safeguard policy. The Oriental Republic of Uruguay, the Republic of Paraguay, and the Republic of Chile
  did not send any responses. The World Bank responded to the additional information requests of from the
  Plurinational State of Bolivia and the Federative Republic of Brazil. The project adequately complied with
  the requirements of this safeguard policy before the start of project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  A fiduciary unit within the Ministry of Finance was responsible for the financial management of the project
  with adequate capacity. The interim financial reports were submitted according to the schedule. External
  audits were conducted as planned and the auditors’ opinions were unqualified. The 2019 audit was
  delayed because of the onset of COVID 19 pandemic but was submitted before the deadline extended by
  the World Bank. The financial management arrangements were in line with World Bank standards (ICR,
  p.22). However, following the merging of the Ministry of Energy with the Ministry of Finance in 2018,
  financial management processes were adversely affected, and project-related payments could not be
  appropriately documented for approximately five months (ICR, p.17). This irregularity was later corrected
  by completing the documentation of the payments. The ICR does not report any issues of corruption or
  misuse of funds associated with the project. The ICR does not report whether all project funds were
  accounted for or not at the time of project evaluation.

  Procurement

  The project followed the procurement policies and guidelines of the World Bank. Under the fourth
  component, the project supported procurement activities. The project coordination unit coordinated
  procurement activities with more than twenty beneficiary provinces, but this complicated the procurement
  process because provinces had different levels of procurement capacity. The ICR (p.22) reports the
  procurement related issues that led to delays in project implementation as follows: (a) insufficient
  procurement planning; (b) delays in evaluation, selection, and awards processes; (c) inadequate
  identification and prevention of bottlenecks in procurement; (d) frequent changes in authorities resulting in
  delays in approvals; and (e) inaccurate cost estimates, temporary shortages of specialized staff, and
  excessive number of members in evaluation committees. The slow evaluation of the bids for the solar
  water pumping facilities resulted in no contract being awarded and cancellation of the solar water pump
  subcomponent worth US$6.4. million. Procurement issues significantly delayed project implementation.
  Although all contracts, except those for cancelled activities, had been awarded during project

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



   implementation, 34 contracts were still ongoing at project closing. These contracts were transferred to the
   Clean Energy for Vulnerable Households and Communities Project (P178553). The ICR (p.23) states that
   the project’s “procurement experience warrants a systematic review that could be particularly useful in
   identifying areas to improve and draw lessons for future operations.”




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 The project significantly
                                                                                 underachieved its targets before
                                                                                 the third restructuring resulting in
                                                                                 a Negligible efficacy rating. After
                                                                                 the third restructuring, the
                                                                                 project’s efficacy in achieving
                                                                                 the project objective was modest
                                                                                 because the project design did
                                                                                 not support the achievement of
                                                                                 the energy-related services. The
                                Moderately                                       relevance of objectives is rated
Outcome                                              Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                   Substantial. The project’s
                                                                                 efficiency in achieving the
                                                                                 project objective is rated Modest
                                                                                 because of lower achievement
                                                                                 of economic benefits and
                                                                                 significant shortcomings in the
                                                                                 administrative and operational
                                                                                 efficiency if the project. The split
                                                                                 assessment of the project’s
                                                                                 outcome resulted in an
                                                                                 Unsatisfactory rating.
                                                                                 The quality at entry and quality
                                                     Moderately                  of supervision were rated
Bank Performance                Satisfactory
                                                     Unsatisfactory              Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 because of shortcomings in


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



                                                                                project’s preparedness and
                                                                                results framework, insufficient
                                                                                risk identification, focus on
                                                                                development impact, and
                                                                                supervision of safeguard
                                                                                policies.
                                                                                The M&E design and
                                                                                implementation had significant
                                                                                shortcomings in capturing the
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Modest
                                                                                project outputs and outcomes
                                                                                and testing the links in the
                                                                                results chain.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Inadequate preparation at the appraisal stage when a project is to be implemented by
numerous provincial governments can result in significant implementation delays. The project
was to be implemented in 20 provinces. This required the signing of 20 agreements between the
Federal Government and provincial governments. The project was not ready for implementation
when it was approved because institutional arrangements, design of technical specifications, and
procurement process were not completed (ICR, p.16). The completion of these aspects of the
project took approximately three years. The project was approved in 2015, but full implementation
could only start in 2018. Given that the project had a predecessor that was implemented between
1999 and 2012 (i.e., PERMER I), the project under this review would have been expected to have
had a higher level of preparedness at the start of its implementation.

If the changes in the project scope are not adequately reflected in the project objective
formulation through revisions, this can result in gaps in the project’s theory of change and
underachievement of the project objectives. The project was restructured three times because of
the narrowing of the project scope and cancellation of the project funds. These changes resulted in
the cancellation of the project activities under the second component such as acquisition and
installation of solar water heaters, solar heating systems, cookers and ovens. The implementation of
these activities were expected to provide energy-related services to rural households, which is a part
of modern energy services together with access to electricity. The cancellation of these activities
made it impossible to achieve the energy-related services objective of the project. Since the
formulation of the project objective was not revised in accordance with the narrowing of the project’s
scope, this created a gap in the project’s theory of change. Therefore, the assessment of the
project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective is assessed to be modest resulting in an
unsatisfactory outcome rating.

Insufficient procurement capacity and complex procurement arrangements can adversely
affect the operational and administrative efficiency of a project. The project implementation
suffered from procurement issues through to project closing. The complex procurement
arrangements involving 20 provinces, each of which had different capacity level, resulted in

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       AR Renewable Energy (P133288)



significant implementation delays, one of the main reasons for project closing date extensions. Only
for the first component, 90 contracts were signed. There were delays in evaluation, selection, and
award processes. Frequent changes in the authorities or in the organization of the sector also
caused delays in approving the procurement steps. Despite the project’s support to procurement, 34
contracts were still pending at project closing, which were later transferred to the Clean Energy for
Vulnerable Households and Communities Project (P178553). The ICR (p.23) states that “PERMER’s
procurement experience warrants a systematic review that could be particularly useful in identifying
areas to improve and draw lessons for future operations.”



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is concise and provides a comprehensive overview of the project. The narrative mostly follows the
Bank guidance. The Table 4, Factors that Affected Project Implementation and Annex 4, Project Timeline
provide important information in a concise way to understand the project implementation timeline and related
issues. However, the narrative is mostly descriptive rather than evaluative. It also lacks internal consistency.
The ICR assesses the achievement of the project objective as moderately unsatisfactory, but the narratives in
the other sections of the ICR assesses the preparation and implementation of the project as successful, such
as the sections on Bank performance, quality of M&E, and lessons and recommendations. The discussion of
efficacy is restricted to the achievement of the frequently revised end targets of the indicators. The discussion is
inadequate in explaining how project activities resulted in project outputs that were expected to lead to the
achievement of the project outcomes. The results orientation of the report is weak. The interrogation of
evidence, explanation of salient points, and linking of evidence to findings is insufficient. The entries in section
V. Lessons and Recommendations of the ICR respond to the specific experiences of the project, but they are in
the form of findings rather than lessons or recommendations.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
AR Renewable Energy (P133288)




                                                                  Page 21 of 21
