     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024170

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P131263                                 RERED II

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Bangladesh                              Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51580,IDA-55140,IDA-62020,TF-       31-Dec-2018                                        289,034,236.96
 15034,TF-15077,TF-B4774,TF-A3639

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Sep-2012                             18-Dec-2023

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       155,000,000.00                                    37,070,000.00

 Revised Commitment                        155,000,000.00                                    37,070,000.00

 Actual                                    274,466,455.35                                    31,873,842.07




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ihsan Kaler Hurcan       Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P119547_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P119547                                 GPOBA W3: Bangladesh Renewable Mini-grid ( P119547 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                               15049581.31

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                               Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)



 13-May-2010

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                    0.00                                    1,100,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                     0.00                                    1,099,581.31

 Actual                                                 0.00                                    1,099,581.31



 P119549_TBL
 Project ID                                Project Name
 P119549                                   BD: GPOBA W3: Bangladesh Solar Home Syst ( P119549 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                 15049581.31

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 26-Mar-2010

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                    0.00                                   13,950,000.00

 Revised Commitment                                     0.00                                   13,950,000.00

 Actual                                                 0.00                                   13,950,000.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.6) dated October 23,
   2012, and the Project Appraisal Document (p.6), the project objective was “to increase access to clean energy
   in rural areas through renewable energy and to promote more efficient energy consumption.”

   At the time of first additional financing and project restructuring in June 2014, the project objective was
   revised to read as only “to increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy.” The
   project objective “to promote more efficient energy consumption” was dropped because of the deletion of the




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RERED II (P131263)



  third component titled Compact Fluorescent Lamp (see Revised Components in section 2.d. Components
  below).

  This review will undertake a split assessment of the project outcome because of the revision in the project
  objective. The project objectives are parsed as the following for the split assessment:

  Before the June 2014 project restructuring:

  Objective 1: To increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy.

  Objective 2: To promote more efficient energy consumption.

  After the June 2014 project restructuring, when the second objective was deleted:

  Objective 1: To increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy.

  Because of the expanded project scope through two additional financings, the project’s efficacy in achieving
  Objective 1 before and after the June 2014 will be assessed based on the revised targets. The targets were
  mostly revised up in line with the expanded project scope, but a few of them were revised down because of
  technical reasons and the government’s expansion of the grid to unserved areas restricting the construction of
  mini-grids and biogas power plants for captive use. Such changes in the indicators’ targets do not require a
  split assessment of Objective 1, which will be same before and after the project restructuring. Therefore, this
  review will only take the deletion of Objective 2 into account when undertaking a split assessment of the
  project’s outcome.

  Note on Two Global Partnership for Output-Based Aid (GPOBA) Projects

  The GPOBA Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy (Mini Grid) Project (P119547) and the GPOBA Rural
  Electrification and Renewable Energy (Solar Home Systems) Project (P119549) were approved in May 2010
  with the objectives of expanding access to electricity to the poor population in the rural areas of Bangladesh
  through mini grids and solar homes systems, respectively. These projects were linked to the Rural
  Electrification and Renewable Energy Development 1 (RERED I) Project (P071794) to provide a matching
  grant support to the construction of mini grids and installation of solar home systems. Following the closure of
  RERED I in December 2012, the two active GPOBA projects were linked to the Renewable Electrification and
  Renewable Energy Development 2 (RERED II) Project (P131263), which was approved in September 2012,
  to continue supporting the mini grids and solar home systems through matching grants.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  12-Jun-2014



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)



c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   According to the IDA Financing Agreement (pp.6-8), the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
   Development Project II (RERED II) had four components:

   A. Access to Electricity. (Appraisal cost: US$309.2 million; revised cost at the first additional financing:
   US$374.0 million; revised cost at the second additional financing: US$433.6 million; actual cost: US$340.19
   million)

   This component was to finance the acquisition and installation of solar home systems, mini-grids and
   captive power plants (based on biogas), and solar irrigation pumps by extending sub-loans through partner
   organizations (i.e., micro-finance institutions, non-governmental organizations, and private enterprises) for
   the provision of electricity to households, businesses, and farmers in rural areas.

   B. Household Energy. (Appraisal cost: US$46.3 million; revised cost at first additional financing: US$46.1
   million; revised cost at second additional financing: US$94.7 million; actual cost: US$85.41 million)

   This component was to finance the provision of clean cooking solutions to rural households through sub-
   grants to partner organizations for the supply of improved cookstoves and domestic biogas digesters, the
   implementation of awareness-raising and social mobilization activities regarding clean cooking solutions,
   the research and development activities to enhance product quality, performance, safety, and durability,
   and the development of performance standards, labels, and testing facilities.

   C. Compact Fluorescent Lamp. (Appraisal cost: US$19.0 million; actual cost: US$0.00 million)

   This component was to finance the acquisition and distribution of 7.25 million compact fluorescent lamps
   (CFLs) to reduce the peak energy demand through the replacement of highly inefficient incandescent light
   bulbs. This component was canceled at the time of the first additional financing in June 2014.

   D. Technical Assistance to Power Cell. (Appraisal cost: US6.5 million; revised cost at first additional
   financing: US$10.0 million; actual cost: US$13.50 million)

   This component was to provide technical assistance to Power Cell—a technical arm of the Power Division
   of the Ministry of Power, Energy and Mineral Resources established in 1996—in the implementation of
   power sector reforms and implementation of capacity building activities. These were to include support for
   the establishment and operation of Sustainable Renewable Energy Development Authority (SREDA),
   support to Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission to improve its capacity to regulate the power sector
   and develop tariff methodologies, implementation of a power sector reform roadmap, development of
   national guidelines for safe disposal of CFLs, transaction advisory support for private sector participation in
   the power and gas sectors, preparation of feasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments,
   and project preparation support for power sector projects, preparation of feasibility studies for liquefied
   natural gas import, and preparation of bidding documents to employ consultants. This component was also
   to finance trainings, road shows, workshops, seminars, study tours, and awareness campaigns. This
   component was a continuation of the activities implemented under the Power Sector Development
   Technical Assistance Project, which closed in 2012.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RERED II (P131263)



  Revised Components

  At the time of the first additional financing and project restructuring in June 2014, the second component
  Compact Fluorescent Lamp was cancelled because the demonstration of CFLs under the predecessor
  RERED I had a significant impact in increasing awareness about CFLs and the number of CFL
  manufacturers had already increased from 2 companies to 19 companies. The M&E findings also showed
  that there had already been an uptake in the FCL market without the need to further support its
  development through IDA concessional credit. Therefore, it was decided to cancel this component and
  reallocate the US$17 million of funds to other components.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: At project approval in September 2012, the project cost was estimated at US$386.0 million
  including US$5.0 million for contingencies. The revised project cost at the first additional financing in June
  2014 was US$435.1 million including US$5.0 million for contingencies. The project cost increased to
  US$543.4 including US$5.1 million for contingencies at the second additional financing in March 2018. The
  project closed in December 2023 with an actual cost of US$439.1 million.

  Financing: At appraisal, the IDA credit amount was estimated at US$155.0 million. After the approval of the
  first additional financing of US$78.4 million in June 2014, the total estimated IDA financing amount
  increased to US$233.4 million. A second additional financing of US$55 million was approved in April 2018
  increasing the total IDA funding amount to US$288.4 million. At the sixth project restructuring in December
  2023, US$29.6 million of IDA credit was canceled. By project closing, the project had disbursed US$242.59
  million.

  The total GPOBA matching grant amount under two GPOBA projects, which were transferred from RERED
  I to RERED II in 2012, was estimated at US$16.1 million under three separate trust fund agreements. The
  GPOBA matching grant was fully disbursed at project closing.

  At appraisal, the US Agency for International Development (USAID) Trust Fund financing was estimated at
  US$7.6 million, and the Bangladesh Climate Change Resilience Fund financing (BCCRF) at US$24.5
  million. These funds were fully disbursed at project closing.

  Germany Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (KfW) financing was estimated at US$12.9 million, local
  beneficiaries’ funding at US$53.4 million, and non-government organizations funding at US$90.2 million.
  The actual disbursed amounts of these funds were unknown at the time of project evaluation.

  In February 2018, the Board of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) approved US$20 million grant for the
  financing of improved cookstoves component. By project closing, the Fund had disbursed US$15.5 million.

  Borrower’s contribution: At appraisal, the borrower’s contribution through the Infrastructure Development
  Company Limited (IDCOL) was estimated at US$38.8 million. The actual contribution of IDCOL was
  unknown at the time of project evaluation.

  Project Restructurings: The project was restructured six times including an additional financing.




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  RERED II (P131263)



     First Project Restructuring and First Additional Financing (May 23, 2014 – Level 1): An
        additional financing of US$78.4 million as credit was approved to expand the scope of the solar
        home system program by 480,000 units in addition to the original target of 550,000. The third
        component Compact Fluorescent Lamp was cancelled, and its funds were reallocated to the solar
        home system program and sector technical assistance. This resulted in the revision of the project
        objective (see section 2.a Objectives above). Solar photovoltaic (PV) micro grids were included in
        the eligible technologies to be considered for financing under the project. Because of the slower
        uptake, the target for mini grids was revised down from 42 to 30 and irrigation pumps from 1,500 to
        1,250. The target of biogas digesters for cooking was revised up from 20,000 to 33,000. The
        additional financing triggered the Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10) safeguard policy because the
        expanded scope of the project activities were expected to reach the areas where tribal people lived.
       Second Project Restructuring (June 16, 2016 – Level 2): The closing date of the USAID Trust
        Fund funding was extended by two months from June 30, 2016 to August 31, 2016 as an interim
        measure to allow time for the revision of the Trust Fund Administration Agreement with the USAID,
        which was expected to take a longer time, so that the closing date of the trust fund could be
        extended to December 31, 2018 to match the IDA Financing Agreement closing date.
       Third Project Restructuring (August 25, 2016 – Level 2): The closing that of the USAID Trust
        Fund funding was extended by 28 months from August 31, 2016 to December 31, 2018 to match the
        closing date of the IDA Financing Agreement. The GPOBA grant agreement was revised to allow
        advances as a disbursement method for output-based sub-grant categories. The target for the
        biogas digesters for cooking was revised down from 33,000 to 16,000 to accommodate the higher
        subsidy requirements for the pre-fabricated digesters.
       Fourth Project Restructuring and Second Additional Financing (April 10, 2018 – Level 1): An
        additional financing amounting of US$55.0 million as credit was approved to support the installation
        of irrigation pumps and solar mini grids, and the distribution of an additional 4 million improved
        cookstoves in rural areas. The project had applied for an additional grant of US$20 million from
        Green Climate Fund (GCF) for the improved cookstoves component, and GCF Board approved it in
        February 2018. The project closing date was extended by three years from December 31, 2018 to
        December 31, 2021 to allow time for the completion of activities added to the project scope.
       Fifth Project Restructuring (May 21, 2021 – Level 2): The project closing date was extended by
        approximately two years from December 31, 2021 to December 18, 2023 to allow time for the
        utilization of the GCF grant and the implementation of project activities that were delayed because of
        the onset of COVID-19 in March 2020. The target for the solar irrigation pumps was revised down
        from 2,170 to 1,987 because of a new government rule that required 800 meters between two
        boreholes, which resulted in the installation of fewer solar irrigation pumps. The target for the
        number of connections made through mini grid systems and captive power plants was revised down
        from 28,100 to 26,881 because of the government’s decision to electrify isolated off-grid pockets
        through grid connections.
       Sixth Project Restructuring (December 12, 2023 – Level 2): Upon the request of the Government
        of Bangladesh, a total of approximately US$29.66 million of undisbursed IDA credit was canceled, of
        which approximately US$25.21 million was from the second additional financing of US$55 million
        because of the delays in the implementation of the improved cookstove activities during the COVID-
        19 pandemic.

Dates: The project was approved on September 20, 2012 and became effective on February 20, 2013. A
Mid-Term Review was conducted in August and September 2015. The original project closing date was



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 23
                                        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                        RERED II (P131263)



                                      December 31, 2018, but it was extended by approximately five years (please see the project restructurings
                                      above for the reasons of project closing date extensions). The project closed on December 18, 2023.




   3. Relevance of Objectives

               Rationale
               The project was substantially aligned with the World Bank strategy as defined in the Bangladesh Country
               partnership Framework (CPF) for FY 2023-2027. The project sought to address the rural population’s lack
               of access to efficient and clean energy sources including access to electricity and clean cooking. The
               project was to achieve this objective by financing the installation of solar home systems and the
               construction of solar mini grids and biogas plants for captive power use for access to electricity and
               improved cook stoves for cooking while replacing inefficient incandescent bulbs with CFL lights and
               increasing awareness about these efficient and clean energy solutions. The project objective did not fully
               correspond to the higher level objectives of the current CPF, mostly because the World Bank strategy
               evolved from focusing on increasing access to clean energy sources as Bangladesh is posed to achieve the
               clean energy outcomes in the medium-term. For example, electrification rate in the country increased from
               32 percent in 2000 to 99.4 percent in 2022 according to the World Bank data. Therefore, the project
               objective partially corresponded to the CPF’s third higher level objective of “Enhanced climate and
               environment resilience” and supported the achievement of “Objective 8: Enhanced sustainability and
               productivity in the use of natural capital for green growth and energy transition” (CPF, pp.46-48). The
               project’s intervention in scaling up renewable energy sources for lighting (through solar home systems,
               solar mini grids, and biogas power plants) and improving energy efficiency through the distribution of
               cookstoves and CFLs would have been expected to contribute to the achievement of the CPF’s Objective 8.

               The project was a repeater project of RERED I, which was successfully implemented between 2002 and
               2012. While the project objective was output-oriented, it was appropriately pitched for the development
               status and capacity in the country as defined in the World Bank strategy. The project objective was aligned
               with the context in the country. It supported the high-level development priorities defined in the country’s
               Eighth Five-Year Plan for FY2020-25 such as exploitation of solar energy and improvement of energy
               efficiency and conservation through demand-side management.

               Overall, the relevance of the objectives is rated Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RERED II (P131263)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
To increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy.

Rationale
Theory of Change for Objective 1

The project activities were expected to result in the project outputs of new solar home systems and solar
irrigation pumps installed and new solar mini grids and biogas and biomass gasification captive power plants
constructed through financial intermediation of project funds by partner organizations. The project was also to
finance technical assistance activities. The outputs expected from technical assistance activities were clean
cooking awareness activities completed, performance standards and labeling system established, and testing
facilities formed for improved cookstoves, and partner organizations supported to create demand for
cookstoves. These outputs would have been expected to lead to the outcomes of increased access to
electricity and the usage of more efficient and clean energy appliances for cooking because of increased
awareness and demand creation. The long-term impacts of the project would have been improved
socioeconomic conditions in rural areas including health and education, reduced greenhouse gas emissions,
and increased inclusion. The project’s theory of change was structured on the key assumptions of households
willing to pay improved energy services and partner organizations having sufficient local presence and
credibility to facilitate the delivery of project’s results in the rural areas. It was also assumed that the grid
would not have expanded in the project areas fast.

Overall, as a repeater project following the successful implementation of RERED I, the causal chains in the
theory of change of the project were direct and valid, and the achievement of the project’s objective could be
attributed to the project’s intervention. However, as formulated, the project objective was output-oriented, and
the project’s objective and theory of change did not adequately capture the outcomes expected from the
project’s support to the development of a solar services market in Bangladesh because of the use of the
project funds through partner organizations and the technical activities.

Outputs

      Number of solar home systems installed: The project supported the installation of slightly more
       than 1.2 million solar home systems by providing financing through partner organizations to
       households. The original and revised targets were 550,000 and 1.2 million solar home systems. The
       installation of solar home systems was stopped in 2017 because of the expansion of grid electricity
       into the project areas.
      Number of connections made through mini-grid systems and captive plants: This indicator
       measured the number of connections from solar mini grids and captive plants based on biomass
       gasification, biogas and other technologies. The project financed 9,082 such connections. The original
       target was 6,750 connections. It was revised up to 26,881 connections. The lower achievement was
       because of the extension of the grid in project areas and reduced need for electricity supply from mini
       grids or captive power, and the higher capital costs of mini grids.
      Number of solar irrigation pumps installed: The project installed 1,303 solar irrigation pumps. The
       original and revised targets were 1,500 and 1,987 solar irrigation pumps, respectively. The
       achievement was lower than the targets because of a change in the intervention’s design that resulted
       in the installation of fewer solar pumps with higher capacity to irrigate a larger amount of agricultural
       area.

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RERED II (P131263)




      Number of higher efficiency cook stoves disseminated: The project financed the distribution of
       approximately 4.06 million higher efficiency cook stoves against the original and revised targets of 1
       million and 5 million cook stoves.
      Number of biogas plants installed: The project financed the distribution of 10,907 biogas plants of
       different capacity for cooking. The original target was 20,000 biogas plants. The target was revised
       down to 8,300 biogas plants to accommodate the higher subsidy requirements for the pre-fabricated
       digesters used in biogas production at the household level.
      Generation capacity of renewable energy (other than hydropower) constructed: This indicator
       measured the megawatt (MW) capacity created because of the installation of solar home systems and
       the construction of mini grids and captive power plants. The project supported the installation of 85
       MW renewable energy (mainly solar) generation capacity against the original and revised targets of 61
       MW and 88 MW, respectively. This amount corresponds to approximately one fifth of the installed
       solar PV capacity of 459 MW in Bangladesh (ICR, footnote 22 on p.28).
      Enabling policy for renewable energy development: The project provided financing for the
       establishment of SREDA. The agency did not exist before the project. At project closing, SREDA was
       established and operational as planned.

The project delivered the following outputs that were not captured by the results framework:

      Under the technical assistance component, the project provided consultancy services or technical
       inputs for the production of 54 knowledge products ranging from a technical audit study for old power
       plants in Bangladesh to the updating of the safeguard documents. Annex 6.1 of the ICR provides an
       exhaustive list of the studies prepared under the project.
      The project also supported the establishment of an improved cookstoves testing facility at the
       Department of Chemical Engineering of Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology.
      The ICR (p.25) states that the project implemented awareness campaigns for financing of cookstoves
       under the project.

Outcomes

      Number of households, farmers, and businesses having access to clean energy services: As a
       result of the installation of solar home systems, mini grids, captive power plants, and solar irrigation
       pumps, and the distribution of biogas plant and efficient cook stoves for cooking, a total of
       approximately 5.3 million households gained access to clean energy services. The original target was
       approximately 1.6 million. The revised target was approximately 6.1 million households.
      People provided with access to electricity under the project by household connections: The
       project resulted in 5.4 million people gaining access to electricity through solar home systems. The
       original target was 4.3 million people. The revised target was 5.5. million people.
      People who gained access to more energy-efficient cooking and/or heating facilities: The
       project’s intervention resulted in 4.1 million gaining access to energy-efficient cooking. The original
       target was 4.3 million people, which was later revised up to 5.5 million. The achievement was lower
       than the revised target because of the distribution of fewer efficient cookstoves than the estimated
       amount. This also resulted in a lower achievement for the first indicator in this section.
      Direct project beneficiaries: A total of approximately 9.6 million people benefited from the project
       results. The original target was 10.4 million people. It was revised down to 9.8 million people because



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RERED II (P131263)



       of the cancellation of third component (see Objective 2 below) and the construction of fewer solar mini
       grids than the target.

The ICR provides additional explanations on how project activities led to project outputs and expected
outcomes. Direct grant subsidies to customers and financial incentives to partner organizations were effective
in creating demand for clean energy solutions because of reduced initial investment and financing costs. The
increased demand for solar home systems and other clean energy solutions offered under the project led to
the processing of two additional financings. The survey conducted at the time of project evaluation shows that
the awareness campaigns conducted, and product quality improvements achieved under the project
contributed to the increase in demand for modern cooking energy solutions. The technical assistance
activities and the operationalization of SREDA created an enabling environment for the development of clean
energy services in rural areas of the country. The project was successful in addressing the barriers to market
creation in clean energy services in rural areas that manifested itself in connecting a substantial number of
people to clean energy services including electricity supply through solar home systems, solar irrigation
pumps, biogas power plants, and improved cook stoves. However, as noted in the outputs section, the fast
expansion of the grid in project areas and the high capital costs adversely affected the implementation of
solar mini grids resulting in fewer people gaining access to electricity than the target. Similarly, because of the
reasons explained under the outputs section above, fewer solar irrigation pumps and cookstoves were
distributed contributing to the decrease in the number of project beneficiaries.

Overall, despite a slow implementation start and some technical and economic issues related to
dissemination of clean energy solutions, the project was substantially successful in achieving the project
results and increasing the number of people with access to clean energy solutions. The project efficacy in
achieving the project objective to access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy is rated
Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy.

Revised Rationale
For the project’s efficacy in achieving the project objective to increase access to clean energy in rural areas
through renewable energy, please see the assessment of Objective 1 in the previous section. The efficacy of
the project in achieving the project objective in the period following the revision of the project objectives is
rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RERED II (P131263)




OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote more efficient energy consumption.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project was to finance the distribution of 7.25 million CFLs to replace inefficient incandescent bulbs. The
project output of CFLs installed would have been expected to result in efficient energy consumption because
CFLs use less electricity than incandescent light bulbs. The project was designed to achieve the second
objective through the replacement of inefficient incandescent bulbs with CFLs. Therefore, when the CFL
activity was cancelled at the June 2014 restructuring, the second objective was also canceled. However, the
use of improved cookstoves and domestic biogas digesters that were to be distributed under the project
would have been expected to contribute to the promotion of more efficient energy consumption, because
these appliances replace the use of wood fuel and promotes the use of biomass for biogas production
increasing efficient use of energy sources and decreasing greenhouse gas emissions.

Overall, the causal chain between the project activities of increased use of CFLs, improved cookstoves, and
domestic biogas digesters and the achievement of project outcome of efficient energy consumption was valid
and direct, and the achievement of the second objective could be attributed to the project’s intervention.

Outputs

      Number of energy efficient lamps distributed: The project did not distribute any CFLs because the
       M&E findings showed that the uptake of CFLs was already in effect without any concessional
       financing. The funds allocated to this activity were reallocated to the solar home systems component.
       The target was 7.25 CFLs to be distributed under the project.
      Number of higher efficiency cook stoves disseminated: The project financed the distribution of
       approximately 4.06 million higher efficiency cook stoves against the original and revised targets of 1
       million and 5 million cook stoves.
      Number of biogas plants installed: The project financed the installation of 10,907 biogas plants of
       different capacity for cooking. The original target was 20,000 biogas plants. The target was revised
       down to 8,300 biogas plants to accommodate the higher subsidy requirements for the pre-fabricated
       digesters used in biogas production at the household level.

Outcomes

      More efficient energy consumption through introduction of energy-efficient lighting: Because
       the project did not distribute any CFLs, the achievement under this indicator was zero. The target was
       energy saved annually equal to 160 MW installed generation capacity.
      People who gained access to more energy-efficient cooking and/or heating facilities: The
       project’s intervention resulted in 4.1 million gaining access to energy-efficient cooking. The original
       target was 4.3 million people, which was later revised up to 5.5 million. The achievement was lower
       than the revised target because of the distribution of fewer efficient cookstoves than the estimated
       amount. This also resulted in a lower achievement for the first indicator in this section.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 23
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                RERED II (P131263)



                            Because of the change in the project’ scope after the cancellation of the CFL component, there was no
                            energy efficiency achievement in lighting. However, the project was successful in distributing biogas plants
                            and higher efficiency cookstoves albeit some high capital cost problems that adversely affected the number of
                            cookstoves distributed. The project provided energy efficient cooking solutions to 4.1 million people against
                            the revised target of 5.5 million. Overall, although the project did not achieve any outcomes in increasing
                            energy efficiency in lighting, it was substantially successful in promoting energy efficient consumption through
                            the dissemination of higher efficiency cookstoves and biogas plants. The project’s efficacy in achieving the
                            second project objective to promote more efficient energy consumption is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
                            Revised Objective
                            To promote more efficient energy consumption.

                            Revised Rationale
                            The second objective was deleted at the first additional financing in June 2014. Therefore, the project's
                            efficacy in achieving the second objective is not rated for the period after the first additional financing.



                            Revised Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was substantially successful in the installation of solar home systems, higher efficiency
                            cookstoves, solar irrigation pumps, and domestic biogas plants by providing financing through partner
                            organizations while addressing the barriers to the development of clean energy services in rural areas of
                            Bangladesh. The achievements were mostly substantial except in solar mini-grids because of high capital
                            cost and fast expansion of the grid electricity. The efficacy of the project in achieving the first objective to
                            increase access to clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy is rated Substantial. The project did
                            not finance the installation of CFLs to replace inefficient incandescent bulbs because the CFLs uptake was
                            already in effect without the use of concessional financing. Therefore, this activity was cancelled. Although
                            the project did not finance any lighting activity that would have promoted efficient energy consumption, the
                            successful distribution of higher efficiency cookstoves and biogas plants resulted in the use of energy efficient
                            appliances in rural areas of Bangladesh. Therefore, the project’s efficacy in achieving the second objective to
                            promote efficient energy consumption is rated Modest. Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the project




                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 23
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              RERED II (P131263)



         objectives before the project restructuring in June 2014 is rated Modest because of no energy efficiency gains
         in lighting.



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
         Modest                                                     Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         At the project restructuring in June 2014, the second objective was cancelled. As explained in the previous
         Overall Efficacy section, the project efficacy in achieving the project’s first objective to increase access to
         clean energy in rural areas through renewable energy is rated Substantial. Therefore, the project’s overall
         efficacy after the project restructuring in June 2014 is rated Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic Analysis

At appraisal, an economic analysis was conducted for each technology used in increasing access to clean
energy and promoting efficient energy consumption.

              The benefits from the use of solar home systems were identified as displacement of kerosene and
               disposable or rechargeable batteries for lighting resulting in monetary savings. The costs were taken as
               the subsidized cost of the installation of the solar home systems, the replacement cost of batteries used
               with solar home systems, and other operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. The calculations resulted
               in an economic rate or return (ERR) of 43 percent and a net present value (NPV) of 16.5 billion
               Bangladeshi Taka (BDT) at a discount rate of 10 percent.
              The benefits expected from the replacement of incandescent bulbs with CFLs were avoided electricity
               consumption, reduction of peak load, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, reduction in electricity
               expenses and the frequent replacement cost of incandescent bulbs. The only cost included in the
               analysis was the cost of CFLs. The calculations resulted in an ERR of 211 percent and an NPV of 3.5
               billion BDT at a discount rate of 10 percent.
              The benefits of improved cookstove use were improved energy efficiency, reduced greenhouse gas
               emissions, and health cost savings for households. The costs were taken as the cost of the improved
               cookstoves and their maintenance costs. The calculations resulted in an ERR of 36.4 per cent and an
               NPV of 419 million BDT.
              The benefits expected from the biogas plants with biogas stoves were fuel savings, domestic labor
               savings, reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, and health cost savings for households. The costs were



                                                                                                             Page 13 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RERED II (P131263)



       taken as the cost of the initial investment and maintenance costs. The calculations resulted in an ERR of
       27.3 percent and an NPV of 356 million BDT.
      For solar mini-grid, solar irrigation pumps and gasifier power for captive use, an economic analysis was
       not conducted because it was concluded at appraisal that the levels of service from solar and other
       renewable energy solutions were identical to the level of service form diesel-based energy; hence, the
       benefits were identical (PAD, p.19). Instead, a cost effectiveness analysis was conducted for these
       applications. The calculations showed that solar mini-grids were approximately 21 percent less costly
       than diesel alternative, solar irrigation pumps were approximately 29 percent less costly, and gasifier
       power for captive use was approximately 68 percent less costly. The assumptions used in the economic
       analyses were realistic and appropriate to assess the economic viability of project interventions through
       different technologies (PAD, footnote 15, p.18).

At project closing, the same methodology with actual project benefits and costs was used to conduct a post-
project economic analysis for each technological intervention. The calculations resulted in an ERR of 49 percent
and an NPV of 43 million BDT for solar home systems, an ERR of higher than 1,000 percent and an NPV of
24.4 billion BDT for improved cookstoves (significantly higher than the appraisal estimates because of
underestimation of rural biomass expenses at appraisal and different lifespans used at appraisal and project
evaluation—seven years and 15 years, respectively), and an ERR of 27 percent and an NPV of 1.01 billion BDT
for biogas plants with biogas stoves. These calculations show the economic viability of these interventions.
However, cost effectiveness analyses conducted for solar mini-grids and gasifiers for captive power use resulted
in significantly lower cost effectiveness for these technologies compared to the diesel alternative. Because of
considerably higher initial capital costs than those estimated at appraisal, the solar mini grids were
approximately five times more costly than the diesel alternative (at appraisal solar mini grids were estimated to
be 21 percent less costly than diesel alternatives) and the gasifiers for captive power use were almost as costly
as the diesel alternative (they were estimated to be 68 percent less costly than the diesel alternative at
appraisal). On the other hand, solar irrigation pumps were calculated to be 63 percent less costly than the diesel
alternative at project evaluation because of the use of fewer large capacity solar irrigation pumps covering the
same agricultural areas. At appraisal it was estimated that the solar irrigation pumps would have been 29
percent less costly than the diesel alternative.

Although the cost effectiveness of solar mini-girds and gasifiers for captive power use was significantly lower
than the appraisal estimates, the project financed the construction of only 12 solar mini grids and three gasifiers
for captive power use. All other technologies implemented in increasing access to clean energy and promoting
efficiency energy consumption have high ERRs or cost effectiveness. Overall, the project’s efficiency in
achieving the project objectives through the use of different technologies was substantial.

Operational and Administrative Efficiency

Because of the processing of two additional financings, the project closing date was extended by a total of
approximately five years. These additional financings were approved to increase the project’s scope and
development impact. Through to project closing, the project’s actual disbursement amounts were higher than the
amounts estimated at appraisal. Based on the M&E findings, the project was restructured early in project
implementation to cancel the CFL component because the uptake of CFLs through market mechanisms was
already happening, and there was no need to use concessional funds for this activity. This was a positive
strategy shift to increase the development of the project through other renewable energy technologies although
this could have been avoided if CFL market assessment had been conducted adequately at appraisal. The




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RERED II (P131263)



project did not face any major financial management or procurement issues. The implementation of safeguards
policies were compliant with the provisions of the relevant World Bank policies.

Overall, the project’s efficiency in achieving the project objective is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                    43.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                 49.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

While the project objectives do not directly support the achievement of the objectives in the World Bank strategy
because the strategy now focuses on energy transition and other higher objectives rather than rural
electrification (the country has almost achieved universal access to electricity), sustainability of electricity
services and scaling up of clean energy services for irrigation and clean cooking are still highly relevant to the
country context. Therefore, the relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The project’s efficacy in achieving
the project objectives before the June 2014 restructuring is rated Modest because of no achievement in energy
efficiency in lighting, but the project efficacy in achieving the project objective after the restructuring is rated
Substantial. The project’s efficiency in achieving the project objectives is also rated Substantial. Since the
project objective was revised because of the deletion of the second objective at the June 2014 restructuring, a
split assessment of the project’s performance was undertaken using the ration of disbursed amounts before and
after the project restructuring to the total amount disbursed. The calculation resulted in a Moderately
Satisfactory rating for the project’s outcome.

Table 1

　                                                      Before June 2014            After June 2014
Relevance of Objectives                                                   Substantial
Efficacy                                                   Modest                     Substantial
Efficiency                                                                Substantial
Outcome Rating                                     Moderately Unsatisfactory          Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value (a)                                      3                            5
Amount Disbursed (US$ million) (b)                         73.63                       200.84

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RERED II (P131263)



Total Disbursed Amount (US$ million) (c)                                          274.47
Disbursement (%) (d) = (b/c)                                26.83%                         73.17%
Weight Value (a)x(d)                                        0.8049                         3.6585
Total weights                                                            4.4633 (rounds down to 4)
Overall Outcome Rating                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: The default of the customers in paying back microloans they used for the purchase of solar home
systems poses a substantial risk for the sustainability of the market mechanisms established under the
project. The project design did not include a strong collateralization or security mechanism to back the
repayments of microloans in case of a default. When customers’ willingness to pay back microloans
decreased, the partner organizations’ collection rate dropped down to 7 percent adversely affecting their
financial viability. The project implemented local collection campaigns, and the IDCOL issued partial waivers
of microloan obligations on some customers (ICR, p.40). These measures contributed to an increase in the
collection rate of microloans, but the customers’ default risk still stands as a substantial risk for the financial
viability of the partner organizations and sustainability of solar home system services.

Technical: The maintenance of solar power solutions introduced under the project and the replacement of
the used batteries stand as a moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcomes. Although
Bangladesh has a sizable solar energy market, technical support for the repair and maintenance of solar
technologies are not at the desired level. The delays in dispatching maintenance technicians are common in
the country. The quality of such services has been improving but there is still room for improvement.

Informal market: The project activities are adversely affected by the emergence of an informal market for
the sale of solar products. The insufficient enforcement of the rules and regulations resulted in similar
services and goods provided at a lower quality and cost. Such services could adversely affect the
development and sustainability of solar products market the project supported. A continuous sectoral
dialogue with the government could help address these market distortions and solidify a well-functioning
solar products and services market.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At appraisal, achieving universal access to electricity and promotion of clean energy for irrigation and
  cooking were of high strategic importance for the Government of Bangladesh. As a repeater project, the
  approach of the project was relevant for the achievement of the project objectives. The implementation
  arrangements were adequately defined. IDCOL was responsible for the implementation of the first and
  second components, and Rural Electrification Board and Power Cell for the third and fourth components,
  respectively. The technical aspects of the project were mostly adequate. However, the uptake in the FCL

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)



  market was not adequately identified, which led to the cancellation of the third component only two years
  after the approval of the project. The economic analysis was detailed and based on reasonable
  assumptions. Because of the limited and reversible impact of the project activities, the triggering of the
  Environmental Assessment safeguard policy only was sufficient. The M&E arrangements were sufficient
  to capture the project outputs and intermediate outcomes that would have been expected to lead to the
  achievement of the project objectives. However, the formulation of the project objective and the results
  framework did not capture the project’s impact on the development of a sustainable solar services market
  although the project’s design clearly indicates that this was one of the expected outcomes of the project’s
  intervention. The ICR (p.37) provides a highly evaluative assessment of this shortcoming in the project
  objectives’ formulation and results framework. The financial management and procurement arrangements
  were in place and adequate for the implementation of the project. The risks and measures to mitigate
  them were adequately identified.

  Overall, the World Bank’s identification, facilitation of the preparation, and appraisal of the project was
  adequate to achieve the results identified in the project’s objectives, but there were moderate
  shortcomings in the formulation of the project’s objective and the results framework that did not
  sufficiently capture all outcomes expected from the project’s intervention and in identifying the market
  dynamics related to the implementation of CFL component. Therefore, the quality at entry is rated
  Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team held supervision missions twice a year and additional technical missions. The
 project team’s focus on the development impact of the project in a changing policy environment and market
 dynamics was adequate. The cancellation of the CFL component and reallocation of the funds to other
 activities early in the project implementation was appropriate in addressing a project preparation
 shortcoming and use of concessional funds for other renewable energy solutions. Because of continuous
 policy dialogue with the authorities, the project team was able to take proactive action to discontinue with
 the installation of solar home systems as grid electricity was expanding in the project areas. The project
 team’s supervision of financial management and procurement was adequate. The project did not
 experience any major issues in these aspects. However, there were some shortcomings in the quality of
 performance reporting in the project documents. As the ICR (p.37) reports the detailed reporting focused
 on the installation of solar home systems and solar irrigation pumps, while the documentation of mini grids
 and biogas plants for captive power was insufficient. The project restructurings were not adequately
 recorded in the Operations Portal (ICR, pp 21 and 38). The project did not have any major issues related to
 safeguard policy implementation but the detailed reporting of grievances in project documents started only
 in 2021. This review identified that six project restructurings including two additional financings, but the
 shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing all outcomes expected from the project’s intervention were
 not addressed (see section 9. M&E Implementation).

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                      Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 How the key activities and outputs would have resulted in the expected project outcomes was adequately
 documented in the project appraisal document, but the results framework did not adequately capture all the
 outcomes expected from the project’s intervention such as the development of a commercially viable solar
 services market and improved enabling environment for renewable energy development. The indicators
 were broadly adequate to capture the achievement of project results in increasing access to clean energy
 services and promoting efficient energy consumption, but quality and sustainability of such services were
 not captured by the results framework. This was partly because of the output-oriented formulation of the
 project objective. Most of the indicators were relevant, measurable, achievable, and time bound in relation
 to the achievement of the output-oriented project objectives. However, because of insufficient CFL market
 analysis, the indicator measuring the number of CFLs installed replacing incandescent bulbs was not
 achievable. The M&E design and arrangements were well embedded institutionally including the
 government agencies responsible for the implementation of the project, partner organization, and third
 party monitoring agent.



b. M&E Implementation
  The indicators in the results framework were adequately measured and reported by the project
  implementation units. Under each component, representative sample subprojects were randomly
  inspected to gather M&E data through decentralized M&E units (ICR, p.34). A management information
  system software was used to encode all the data for the activities IDCOL conducted, except data related
  to solar irrigation pumps and solar mini grids, which required manual encoding because of the nature of
  the subprojects. The ICR (P.34) reports that “No data errors or significant quality monitoring issues were
  reported during project implementation, a conclusion corroborated by the Mid-Term Review of the project
  and the ICR survey.” The data were found to be adequately reliable, good quality because of sound
  methodology, independence of analysts, and quality control. In addition to the measurement of the
  indicators in the results framework, the project conducted several impact evaluations to assess the
  impact of the project’s intervention on socioeconomic welfare of the beneficiaries in accordance with the
  multi-tier framework criteria for access developed by the Energy Sector Management Assistance
  Program. However, although the project was restructured numerous times and two new indicators were
  introduced to measure the number of people provided with access to electricity and more energy-efficient
  cooking and heating facilities, the shortcomings in the M&E design in capturing the project outcomes
  related to solar services market development were not addressed. The measurement of the indicators
  were reported in the Implementation Status and Results Reports, but the reporting of the implementation



                                                                                                  Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)



  of mini-grids and biogas plants for captive power use was not as detailed as the reporting of the
  implementation of the solar home systems and solar irrigation pumps (ICR, p.37).



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly reported to stakeholders in quarterly reports. Based on the M&E
  findings and data, the project team restructured the project early in its implementation to cancel the CFL
  component and reallocated the funds for scaling up other project activities and processed two additional
  financings to scale the project activities and increase its development plan. Based on M&E data, “a
  performance-based mechanism was introduced to encourage the deployment of energy solutions that
  were effectively used and well-functioning” under the first and second components (ICR, p.35). The ICR
  used the M&E data gathered through the measurement of the indicators and the implementation of
  impact evaluations to adequately provide evidence of achievement of project outcomes, rather than only
  providing evidence of application of inputs or achievement of outputs.

  Overall, while there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E system’s design and implementation
  related to the measurement of all outcomes expected from the project’s intervention, the data collected
  through the M&E system and impact evaluation surveys were sufficient to assess the achievement of the
  project objectives as formulated and test the links in the results chain. Therefore, the M&E quality is
  rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B under Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and triggered the
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) safeguard policy at the second additional financing.

   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): The project was classified as Category B because of the risk
   of lead contamination from improper disposal or recycling of lead-acid batteries used in SHS and the risk of
   mercury contamination from improper disposal of CFL lights. An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) was prepared by updating the one used for RERED I. The ESMF was disclosed on
   IDCOL website in Bangla and English on July 18, 2012, and in the World Bank’s InfoShop on July 20, 2012.
   Under the predecessor RERED I project, IDCOL had already taken measures to strengthen battery
   recycling through refinancing for battery replacement and incentives for partner organizations and
   manufacturers for the collection of used batteries (PAD, p.25). Majority of the battery suppliers had already
   acquired the relevant ISO certificate. Annual environment audits undertaken by independent third parties
   confirmed the proper recycling of used batteries. National guidelines were to be developed for the proper
   disposal of CFLs, but this activity was cancelled after the cancellation of CFL component of the project. The
   bid documents included required environmental management provisions. An Environment and Social




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RERED II (P131263)



  Safeguards Management Unit was established at IDCOL with full-time staff. The project was compliant with
  the requirements of Environmental Assessment safeguard policy.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10): The project triggered this safeguard policy at the time of second
  additional financing because of the expected expansion of the project activities into the areas where tribal
  communities lived. A Tribal People’s Development Framework (TPDF) was developed and added to the
  updated (ESMF). The project activities were expected to have no negative impacts on tribal people, and
  none materialized. The project was in compliance with the requirements of this safeguard policy.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The interim financial reports were submitted according to schedule. Financial management benefited from
  IDCOL’s advanced automated accounting system. Power Cell’s financial management was Excel-based
  but this was deemed sufficient by the World Bank. In addition to the regular project audits by the Foreign
  Aided Project Audit Directorate of the government. Internal audits were sufficient. The opinions in the
  independent project audit reports were unqualified. The ICR (p.37) reports that “Financial management
  was rated in the Satisfactory range throughout almost the project's duration, reflecting sound financial
  management practices by both implementing agencies.” At the time of project closing, all project funds
  were accounted for. The ICR does not report any corruption or misuse of funds related to the project.

  Procurement

  The procurement followed the World Bank procurement guidelines and policies. Because of the project
  design, the majority of the funds flowed from IDCOL to partner organizations as financial intermediaries;
  therefore, IDCOL was not involved in major procurement processes. The risk of Power Cell’s insufficient
  procurement capacity because of a shortage of staff trained in procurement matters was adequately
  mitigated by project’s support through trainings and hiring of a procurement consultant. Third parties
  regularly audited the partner organizations’ procurement practices. The only procurement-related issue
  reported in the ICR (p.36) was the shortcoming in IDCOL and Power Cell’s maintaining updated
  procurement plans and information on the World Bank Systematic Tracking Exchanges in Procurement
  portal. Overall, the procurement rating of the project remained Satisfactory through to project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None.



d. Other
  None.



                                                                                                  Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RERED II (P131263)




11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               The difference is because of the
                                                                               incorrect calculation of
                                                                               disbursement weights in the ICR
                                                                               where the disbursed amount
                                                                               was taken as US$48.69 million
                                                                               as of end of first quarter of 2014.
                                                                               However, the disbursed amount
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                               at the time of project
                                                                               restructuring in June 2014 was
                                                                               US$73.63 according to the
                                                                               information in the data sheet of
                                                                               the Project Paper Report No:
                                                                               RES88000-BD dated May 23,
                                                                               2014 (p. v).
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               While there were moderate
                                                                               shortcomings in the M&E design
                                                                               and implementation, the M&E
                                                                               system and the data collected
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial               through the impact evaluations
                                                                               were sufficient to text the links in
                                                                               the results chain and assess the
                                                                               achievement of the project
                                                                               objective.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

This review has drawn three lessons based on the information in the ICR.

Adequately conducted market analysis at the appraisal stage can help increase the project’s
effectiveness and avoid the revision of project objectives. The project was designed to
implement 7.25 million CFLs to promote efficient energy consumption, which was the second
objective of the project. However, early in project implementation, the M&E findings showed that
there was an uptake of CFLs in the market without any subsidy using the concessional funds. This
led to project restructuring and a deletion of the second project objective without any CFL activity
having been implemented. A detailed market analysis conducted at appraisal could have identified
the uptake in the market and the CFL component could have been excluded from the project scope.

Shortcomings in the formulation of project objectives and the theory of change can critically
affect the adequate assessment of the project’s achievements. The project objectives were to

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RERED II (P131263)



increase access to clean energy and promote efficient energy consumption, but the project activities
were also expected to lead to development of a solar services market. These activities did not
directly support the achievement of the output-oriented project objectives within the project’s theory
of change, nor were the market development related outcomes captured by the project’s formulation.
This also resulted in adoption of inadequate measures to ensure the sustainability of the
achievements in market development by preventing market distortion and financial viability of the
sector.

Continuous policy dialogue with the authorities can be critical in changing a project’s
implementation direction and preventing the use of concessional funds for redundant
activities. The project was to install solar home systems and construct solar mini-grids and gas
plants for captive power use in areas where grid was not expected to expand in the medium term.
However, the Government of Bangladesh accelerated the expansion of the electricity grid into
project areas. The expansion of the grid was supported by the World Bank under a continuous policy
dialogue. This resulted in the early cessation of installation of solar home systems and construction
of min-grids, the implementation of which had already been slow because of higher than estimated
initial capital costs.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and tightly written. It provides a complete critique of the project. The report is highly
evaluative in its assessment of the project’s performance, the achievement of the project objectives, the Bank
performance, and the M&E quality. While the ICR points out the shortcomings in the M&E design and
implementation, it appropriately references and adequately presents the evidence to support the achievement
of the project objectives. The interrogation of evidence is sufficient using additional data from surveys in
triangulating the findings. The narrative is highly results-oriented highlighting how activities and outputs led to
the outcomes and what the project’s shortcomings were. The internal consistency of the report is high, which is
manifested throughout out the report by logical linking and integration of report’s sections. The figures
presented in the report are highly useful in understanding how various clean energy solutions were
implemented under the project. The lessons are based on evidence and analysis and respond to the specific
experiences and findings of the project.

However, the report had minor shortcomings in following the Bank guidance in undertaking a split assessment
of the project’s outcome. First, the ICR does not report the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples safeguard
policy, which was triggered at the time of second additional financing. Second, the disbursement weights were
inaccurately calculated. As the project team later explained in an email on November 18, 2024, the ICR took
the actual disbursement at end of the first quarter of calendar year 2014 in the calculation of the disbursement
rate before the project restructuring in June 2014. However, the calculation should have taken the actual
disbursement reported in the project restructuring paper. The difference between these two disbursement
amounts was approximately US$30 million. A higher disbursement rate before the June 2014 project
restructuring results in a Moderately Satisfactory outcome rating. Third, the ICR assesses the project’s efficacy

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RERED II (P131263)



in achieving the project objectives before the project restructuring in June 2014 based on the actual
achievements at the time of the restructuring. However, according to the Bank guidance (p.40), “It is important
to note that, when objectives are revised, the project is rated against both sets of objectives separately, for the
entire duration of the project (not just the period for which each of the objectives was in effect). Achievement of
each individual objective (efficacy), both original and revised, is assessed across the project’s entire lifetime.”
Therefore, when assessing the project’s efficacy prior to the project restructuring in June 2014, the project’s
achievements at project closing should have been taken into consideration, rather than the achievements at the
time of project restructuring.

Overall, despite the mistakes in the implementation of the split rating methodology and a minor shortcoming in
reporting the implementation of safeguard policies, the report was detailed, highly evaluative, results-oriented,
and a complete critique of the project in every aspect. Therefore, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 23
