     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024114

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P176447                                     India Responsive Social Protection

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 India                                       Social Protection & Jobs



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-92800,IDA-69550,IDA-69560              31-Dec-2022                                       499,879,904.00

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2021                                 31-Dec-2022

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           500,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            500,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        499,879,904.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal       Judyth L. Twigg               Susan Ann Caceres             IEGHC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The Program Development Objective (PDO) was “to strengthen the capability of the state and national
governments in India to respond to the needs of informal workers through a resilient and coordinated social
protection system” (Program Document, p. 2).



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



For the purposes of this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed to include three objectives, although only the first two
are explicitly referred to in the PDO.

    1. Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system. This objective includes both Pillar
       1 measures to support institutional coordination of the social protection system and Pillar 3 efforts to
       strengthen delivery systems.
    2. Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond to the
       needs of informal workers, which corresponds to Pillar 2 measures.
    3. Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the adaptation
       and mitigation of the most vulnerable, which corresponds to Pillar 4 measures. According to the
       Program Document (p .9), while not all PAs addressing this goal "have direct links with social
       protection efforts, these are important to build environmental resilience and reflect a new World Bank
       approach in India to include climate-sensitive actions in all national level DPOs."


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
Pillar 1: Institutional Coordination. The pillar was to initiate a reform path to ensure improved coordination of
funds and tiers of government for context-specific and climate-responsive social protection in Indian states.

Pillar 2: Expanding the Net for Urban Informal Workers. This pillar aimed to enhance the responsiveness of
India’s social protection system to urban informal workers, gig workers, and migrants.

Pillar 3: Strengthening Delivery Systems. This pillar was to support delivery system reforms to tighten
targeting methodologies and payment chains for maximal digital and portable inclusion.

Pillar 4: Climate Action. This pillar was to support climate action reforms to increase the adaptation and
mitigation capacities of the most vulnerable.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing: Program financing included two International Development Association credits
for a total of US$112.5 million (US$112.4 million actual) and an International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development credit amounting to US$387.5 million (fully disbursed), for a total of US$500 million
(US$499.9 million actual). According to the ICR (p. 1), the difference between the approved amount and
disbursed amount was due to the exchange rate differences between the SDR and USD.

Program Dates: The program was approved June 29, 2021, became effective September 2, 2021, and closed
December 31, 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 The DPF supported the Government of India's (GoI’s) efforts to strengthen and expand its social
 protection system through a series of reforms to address rapid urbanization, structural

                                                                                                        Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



transformations in the labor market, and climate change. The operation supported the GoI’s goal of
creating dynamic and responsive social protection. India needed a more adaptive social protection system to
address the needs of a more urban, mobile, and diverse population and foster greater support to sub-national
governments to tackle the pandemic, future disasters, and ecological risks. The Bank had conducted
significant analytical work that substantiated the need for reforms, and the onset of the pandemic escalated
their urgency. The reform package was designed to improve efficiency of delivery and address structural
challenges that emerged due to a centralized one-size-fits-all social protection approach, proliferation of
national schemes, lack of benefits portability, and limited for support migrants and urban informal workers. The
Bank had substantial experience in the priority areas and was well positioned to help the country address the
severe economic challenges (ICR, p. 2).

The program objectives were aligned with the most recent World Bank India Country Partnership
Framework (CPF, FY18-22). Specifically, the objectives aligned with Pillar 3 of the CPF: Investing in Human
Capital and with CPF objective 3.5: Improve coverage and coordination of social protection systems. In
particular, Pillar 2 of the program aligned with the CPF Objective 3.5 aim of expanding social security
coverage of informal workers. In addition, one of the prior actions that made up the “Institutional Coordination”
pillar was included in measures suggested in the CPF, with another being in line with the Systematic Country
Diagnosis’s finding (p. 67) that “bolstering program performance and coherence of the social protection
architecture requires a new relationship between the national government and the states. The diversity across
states requires an enabling policy and financing regime whereby state governments have greater flexibility in
shaping their social protection systems, while the national government focuses on monitoring and coordinating
interventions and facilitating cross-state learning.” Finally, the DPF's fourth pillar of action aligned with the
CPF's cross-cutting objective of supporting "the GoI’s climate mitigation and adaptation efforts across the
portfolio" (CPF, p. 29).

The operation was consistent with the Bank's India COVID-19 strategy to "build back better." The India
CPF was adjusted to respond to the COVID-19 crisis. The Bank, in consultation with the GoI, developed a
COVID-19 response strategy aimed at providing social protection to those displaced by the economic shock,
with a focus on mitigating the crisis on the poor and vulnerable (ICR, p. 2). During the rollout of this strategy,
the need became apparent for additional Bank support to improve coverage and responsiveness of the Indian
social protection system towards informal workers, with an emphasis on accelerating portable benefits and
fostering greater support to sub-national governments to tackle the ongoing pandemic and future disaster and
ecological risks (ICR, p. 3).

The PDO were clearly stated and all terms well defined, but the PDO as formulated did not fully
reflect the actual project goals. The Program Document (p. 19) elaborates on the PDO, bringing a higher
degree of specificity:

      Strengthening capability: “implies organizational guidelines, systems and institutional/legal
       mechanisms which allow government agencies to respond to demands for social protection to ensure
       strong coverage of the vulnerable.”
      Coordinated social protection system: “fostering an integrated institutional framework to implement a
       whole-of-society and whole-of-government approach for social protection and resilience, whereby pre-
       existing programs and platforms are leveraged by engaging all tiers of government including
       community groups."
      Responsive social protection: “government fund-flows and systems for safety nets should respond to
       the diversity in risk profiles across states, and that government programs should address new needs


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



        and risks faced by the workforce due to increasing urbanization, extreme weather events, macro-
        economic transformations, and the pandemic."

The fourth pillar on climate action was not explicitly part of the PDO statement, but it was described in the
Program Document as "climate action reforms to build adaptation and mitigation capacities for the most
vulnerable." Moreover, as noted in Section 2a, while the PDO as phrased had only a single objective of
strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond to the needs of informal
workers, only one of the four pillars supported activities specifically geared to addressing the needs of informal
workers, with two others focusing on the broader goal of a “resilient and coordinated social protection system,”
and the last only partially related in its scope and aims to social protection.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

 Objective 1: Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system
 Prior Action 1: The Ministry of Finance has increased devolution to state governments and direct grants to
 local governments, with an increase in central grants to states for disaster management (and 40 percent of
 State Disaster Response Funds earmarked for response and relief activities, including livelihood support and
 cash transfers, among other for disaster relief).
 Prior Action 2: The Ministry of Finance has incorporated the food subsidy into the Budget 2021/22 as part of
 the Department of Food and Public Distribution demand for grants.
 Prior Action 3: The Ministry of Finance has initiated a detailed exercise to rationalize and reduce the
 number of centrally sponsored schemes.
 Prior Action 6: The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has formulated a draft scheme with
 incentives to boost digital transactions in India.
 Prior Action 7: The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution has launched a mobile-based
 application for migrants to locate the nearest fair price shop to receive food grains.
 Objective 2: Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond
 to the needs of informal workers
 Prior Action 4: The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has launched the National Urban Digital Mission,
 which will upgrade data infrastructure and create data exchange platforms for urban municipalities.
 Prior Action 5: The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has launched a new credit/loan program for urban
 street vendors.
 Objective 3: Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the
 adaptation and mitigation capacities of the most vulnerable
 Prior Action 8: The Ministry of Finance has enhanced weightage given to forest and ecology, climate
 vulnerabilities, and disaster risk of each state in allocating central government grants to state governments
 for disaster management.
 Prior Action 9: The Ministry of Finance has developed central challenge grants for cities with populations
 above one million based on achievement of air quality parameters.
 Prior Action 10: The Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Climate Change has created a multi-sectoral
 committee to monitor progress of India’s implementation of the Paris Agreement.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



Prior Action 11: The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change has created a portal that
captures key adaptation and mitigation actions taken by various ministries and helps disseminate amongst
citizens information on key climate change matters in India

PDO1: Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system. This PDO was to be achieved by a
portmanteau of policy actions aimed at: (i) streamlining schemes and fund-flows for social protection, fiscal
devolution for local governments, and enhanced allocations for cash transfers in ecologically precarious and
disaster-prone zones; (ii) tightening targeting methodologies and payment chains for maximal digital and
portable inclusion; and (iii) supporting climate action reforms.

PA1 intended to ensure that state governments had more access to flexible financing for social protection to
respond to future shocks. According to the Program Document (p. 7), India’s rapid but uneven economic growth
deepened differences between states in terms of their social protection needs and risk profiles, highlighting a
need for a social protection system that accommodated heterogeneity and context-specificity. This fiscal reform
built on the lessons learned in the “Second Accelerating India’s COVID-19 Social Protection Response” DPF
and supported the implementation of the Fifteenth Finance Commission (FFC) recommendations for broader
use of State Disaster Relief Fund grants. This gave states more flexibility in responding to the pandemic and
made possible a localized approach to dealing with challenges (ICR, p. 6). Rating: Highly Satisfactory

PA2 was aligned with FFC recommendations aimed at heightened transparency, accountability, and
governance of allocated funds. Food Corporation India (FCI) manages the national food distribution system,
covering 800 million Indians. Prior to the reform, a large portion of its funding came from the National Small
Savings Fund as five-year loans, constituting an off-balance sheet expenditure to the government, that were
repaid in installments. This expenditure transparency measure brought off-budget borrowings on budget,
and thus increased the predictability of subsidy funds for the food distribution system. It also indicated long-term
government commitment to prioritizing access to food (ICR, p. 7). According to the Program Document (p. 21),
this was an important step to benchmark social safety net spending. Rating: Highly Satisfactory

PA3 supported the government’s decentralization agenda. At the outset of COVID-19, there were 403 centrally
sponsored social protection schemes, most requiring states to finance a share of expenditures. This measure
taken by the Ministry of Finance was in congruence with PA1 and aligned with the recommendations of the FFC
to further decentralize safety net programs. The prior action involved a national review of all centrally sponsored
schemes to benchmark duplication and rationalize based on recommendations of the FFC fiscal path.
According to the Program Document (p. 22), the goal was to make the schemes more impactful and outcome-
oriented by: (i) consolidating schemes to provide a holistic implementation, (ii) enhancing expenditure efficiency
by eliminating infructuous schemes, (iii) removing incongruence, and (iv) transparently determining the funding
share to improve predictability. The Prior Action, however, did not specify what “initiating” the exercise entailed.
Rating: Satisfactory.

PA6 aimed to make digital banking more accessible as a means to make social protection payments more
efficient. Digital payments were believed to be key to tighten the payments chain for social protection programs,
and to enable easy and portable pan-national access to cash transfers and social insurance contributions in
India (PD, p. 25). While most of the country had seen a boom in digital connectivity, pockets of the population,
including rural populations, urban informal workers, and interstate migrants, were unable to access digital
platforms. This one-year government program lowered barriers for the poor and vulnerable to access the
RuPay debit card, which the Federal Reserve Bank had initiated nearly a decade earlier. The card included
added benefits such as free personal accidental death and permanent total disability insurance coverage. The


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



application of fintech to the least digitalized segment of the population removed banking barriers and enhanced
speed, accuracy, and efficiency of social protection benefits payments (ICR, p. 8). Rating: Highly Satisfactory

PA7 introduced a mobile-based application to address interstate migrant needs and to allow flexibility in
procuring food grains. This app was built on the lessons learned in the prior development policy
financing “Second Accelerating India’s COVID-19 Social Protection Response," specifically on portability of
social protection benefits in the new Indian economy. In theory, the One Nation One Ration Card (ONORC)
Initiative allowed beneficiaries to purchase rations at Fair Price Shops (FPS) nationwide. In practice, survey
data showed that the majority of card holders were not aware of the portability option. This PA launched the
“Mera Ration App” through the Unified Mobile Application for New-Age Governance (UNMANG), enabling card
holders to locate a fair price shop anywhere in India. This was to help enhance awareness of and access to the
portability options for the migrant workforce (ICR, p. 8). Rating: Satisfactory

PDO2: Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond to the
needs of informal workers

PA4 aimed to increase access to safety nets and social insurance for urban informal workers through
development of tailored digital tools and platforms for inclusion of urban populations into social protection
systems. The National Urban Digital Mission (NUDM) is a government program whose purpose is to upgrade
data infrastructure and create data exchange platforms for urban municipalities to improve the governance and
efficiency of service delivery. Digital registries were developed to capture and compile detailed information on
citizens, such as ownership of assets or presence of females in the household, that would feed data platforms
as a single source and identify beneficiaries and informal workers requiring support. Availability of data was
viewed as a mechanism to inform program design and allow for a tailored response (ICR, p. 7). Rating: Highly
satisfactory

PA5 expanded social protection coverage to urban street vendors. In India, urban street vendors represent a
majority share of employment in large cities, constituting about 10 million informal, self-employed, micro-
enterprise owners. The onset of COVID-19 exposed their vulnerability, inflicting significant suffering and income
loss. Building on Prior Action 4, this reform introduced a new credit/loan scheme, Pradhan Mantri Street Vendor
Atmanirbhar Nidhi (SVANIDHI), to redress urban street vendors’ reversals in a timely manner and to help
municipal governments deliver services to their workforce (ICR, p. 7). Rating: Highly satisfactory

PDO3: Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the adaptation
and mitigation of the most vulnerable

PA8 supported implementation of key fiscal reform recommendations made by the FFC for the period 2021-
2026 by providing states funds for livelihood and social assistance, recovery and reconstruction, and
preparedness and capacity building in ecologically vulnerable regions of the country (PD, p. 26). Recognizing
the spike in disasters and ecological risks across the country, this reform increased the weighting from 7 to 10
percent, for forest cover and ecological zones such as mangroves, in the disaster-risk index used for the
allocations of grants to state governments for disaster management in PA1. The new methodology (replacing
an expenditure-based approach) increased pre-positioned financing earmarked for supporting vulnerable
households affected by climate shocks. States with high forest cover and ecologically and climatically
vulnerable zones would receive more funds. In addition, increased weighting for disaster risk meant that
disaster-prone states would now receive additional grants to rapidly respond to shocks, including climate-




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



 related disasters. This fiscal reform was reflected in the Union budget legislatively approved by the Indian
 Parliament (ICR, p. 8). Rating: Highly satisfactory.

 PA9 established central challenge grants for cities with populations exceeding one million based on
 achievement of air quality parameters. In India, respiratory illnesses represent one the top five causes of
 morbidity and disproportionally affect the poor. Ambient air pollution exacerbates this phenomenon. The
 introduction of ambient air pollution parameters into challenge grants incentivized states to adopt the necessary
 measures for reducing air pollution and nudged positive behaviors and activities to manage environmental
 risks (ICR, p. 9). Rating: Highly satisfactory

 PA10 aimed to strengthen the monitoring framework of the country’s climate action plan and ensure a
 coordinated and efficient response to climate change. In the medium term, it aimed to enhance the ability of the
 GoI to prepare, respond, and adapt to climate shocks through collaborative efforts between various
 departments, allowing for more effective adaptation and mitigation to climate change and natural disasters on
 vulnerable communities (ICR, p. 9). Rating: Satisfactory

 PA11 introduced the India Climate Knowledge Portal to disseminate information on climate change and
 government mitigation initiatives, thus increasing transparency and providing the foundation of a
 comprehensive database with linkages to disaster risk management and early warning systems, social
 protection data, and household vulnerability (ICR, p. 9). According to the Program Document, the portal was
 meant to be a “single point Information resource that provides information on the different climate initiatives
 taken by various line ministries, enabling users to access updated status on these initiatives." The knowledge
 portal was to include information on: (i) India’s climate profile, (ii) the national policy framework and India’s
 Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement, (iii) adaptation and mitigation actions, (iv)
 bilateral and multilateral cooperation, and (v) international climate negotiations. It aims to help in disseminating
 knowledge among citizens about all the major steps the government is taking at both national and international
 levels to address climate change issues (Program Document, p. 29). Rating: Satisfactory



Rating

Highly Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

                                                                                              Actual
                                                 RI
                                                                                              as % of RI Achieve-
 Description                                 PAs Relevance Baseline Target          Actual
                                                                                              targeted ment Rating
                                                                                              change
 Objective 1: Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system
 RI1: Percentage share of States who     1
 have received direct grant from central       HS        0          100% 100%                 100%     High
 gov’t following recommendations of FCC


                                                                                                       Page 7 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



                                                                    220,843
RI2: Size of Central FFC Grants made to
                                                                              220,843
States for annual budget period (in INR 1          HS   149,924                         100%   High
crore)
RI3: Amount of NSSF loan assistance to
                                       2           S    84,636      0         0         100%   High
Food Corporation of India (INR Crore)
                                                                                               High (due to
RI4: National government has                                                                   additional
rationalized centrally sponsored           3       MS   No          Yes       Yes       100%   evidence
schemes.                                                                                       provided in
                                                                                               the ICR)
                                                                                               Modest
                                                        43,383.28                              (downgraded
                                                                    47,000           More
RI8: Digital payments volumes (in                                                              from High
                                           6       MU                         91,920 than
million).                                                                                      due to lower
                                                                                     100%
                                                                                               relevance of
                                                                                               the RI)
RI9: Number of informal workers
receiving benefits per month from the                                                   More
ONORC initiative (in million).             7       S    13          20        35        than   High
                                                                                        100%

Objective 2: Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond to
the needs of informal workers
                                                                                            Modest
                                                                                            (downgraded
                                                                                   More
RI5: Percentage of urban municipalities                                                     from High
                                           4  MU         0         33     58.54 than
receiving benefits through NUDM.                                                            due to lower
                                                                                   100%
                                                                                            relevance of
                                                                                            the RI)
                                                                                   More
RI6: Percentage of street vendors
                                           5  HS         40        55     113      than     High
receiving benefits from SVANIDHI.
                                                                                   100%
RI7: Gender-sensitive program coverage
measured by proportion of female
                                           5  HS         40        50     44.4     44.4% Modest
informal workers in total beneficiary pool
of SVANIDHI.
Objective 3: Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the
adaptation and mitigation capacities of the most vulnerable
RI10: Share of States receiving transfer
from Central Government based on                                                   More
forest, ecology, and disaster risk index. 8   S          0         33     100      than     High
                                                                                   100%




                                                                                               Page 8 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



                                                                                          More
RI11: Percentage of million plus cities
                                           9       HS        0          10       34.6     than     High
that have received funds in 2022-2023
                                                                                          100%
                                                                                                   Modest
                                                                                                   (downgraded
RI12: Responsibilities of concerned
                                           10,                                                     from High
ministry for implementing Paris                    MU        No         Yes      Yes      100%
                                           11                                                      due to lower
agreement have been defined.
                                                                                                   relevance of
                                                                                                   the RI)




The DPO used 13 results indicators (RIs) to track the outcomes of the 11 PAs. The RIs were, for the most
part, highly relevant to the proposed actions, but in some cases could have been refined to better capture
the contribution of the PA to achievement of the PDO.

Objective 1: Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system

RI1 and RI2: Both indicators tracked the success of the prior action at supporting devolution of social
protection funds to the state level by measuring both the percentage of states and the grant size, giving a
complete picture of how the PA affected devolution of social protection funds. Rating: Highly Satisfactory

RI3: This indicator was associated with PA2, whose aim was to increase the transparency of Public
Distribution System funding by replacing the portion of funding provided by loans with budgetary
allocations. The RI tracked the percentage of loan financing but not the impact of this measure on
budgetary allocations. Rating: Satisfactory

RI4: The indicator was partly adequate to measure the impact of the PA. However, the indicator does not
define what is meant by “the national government has rationalized centrally sponsored schemes.” A more
useful indicator would have been a numerical or percentage target for reduction in the number of
schemes, and in fact, the ICR reported such data. Rating: Moderately Satisfactory

RI8 measured total increase in digital transactions as a measure of achievement of a PA by which a draft
scheme was to be formulated with incentives to boost digital transactions among the poor and
vulnerable in India. However, it is unclear how much of this increase was attributable to the PA, as the
RI did not measure the extent to which there was an increase in digital transactions specifically among the
target population. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI9: The purpose of the PA associated with this RI was to help any migrant identify a local fair price shop
(FPS) where he/she could access food grains through an app designed for this purpose. This was to
address lack of awareness as, according to survey data, only 34 percent of households with ration cards
were aware of the initiative, and only 11 percent of ration card-holding households had tried to use an
alternative FPS to procure food grains (Program Document, p. 26). In addition, according to the project
team, Bank analytics identified lack of information as a key constraint that was preventing uptake. The



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



indicator measured the rise in portable transactions, which plausibly could have been because of ease of
locating participating shops. Rating: Unsatisfactory

Objective 2: Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to
respond to the needs of informal workers

RI5 was intended to track the success of the new National Urban Digital Mission (NUDM) through the
share of municipalities "availing of the digital infrastructure upgradation made possible through NUDM"
(PD, p. 24). However, the wording of the RI, "percentage of urban municipalities receiving benefits
through NUDM," was vague. It is unclear what is meant in this context by "benefits," which, the project
team clarified for IEG, is not related to monetary benefits, as money is not transferred through
NUDM. The Program Document (p. 24) describes a "shared digital infrastructure" to be developed as a
"public good." including "state-of-the-art digital urban platforms to manage the core digital urban data,"
with the ultimate aim of using these platforms to develop a range of systems for each of 4400 Indian
towns and cities. Neither the Program Document nor the ICR, however, specify what phase of
development and/or utilization of these platforms is necessary to list a municipality as "receiving benefits,"
or which of the several intended platforms and systems are necessary in order to define a municipality as
receiving benefits through NUDM. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory

RI6 directly tracked the outcomes of PA5, which initiated a new credit program for street vendors in urban
areas. The RI target was based on an estimate by the Ministry of Housing Affairs of the total population of
street vendors in India, and receipt of benefits was tracked using data generated by the SVANIDHI
program. Rating: Highly satisfactory

RI7 directly tracked the gender balance of the new credit/loan program. A gender RI for PA5 was highly
relevant, as data showed that women in the informal urban sector were engaged in sectors such as
domestic work, street vending, and home-based work, which were not covered by pre-existing social
security measures. The Program Document explains that, over the long run, the reforms were expected to
increase social protection coverage in urban areas, "particularly for women who are an important share of
the self-employed street vending workforce in Indian cities" (PD, p. 24). Rating: Highly Satisfactory

Objective 3: Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the
adaptation and mitigation capacities of the most vulnerable

RI10 directly measured successful implementation of PA8 by tracking the share of states that received
funds for forest and disaster risk and ecological concerns. However, as the indicator did not track the
amounts received, it is difficult to know whether the PA achieved its goal of "enhancing" central grants to
states for forest and disaster risk and ecological concerns to make significant resources available for
cities (PD, p. 28). Rating: Satisfactory

RI11 tracked successful implementation of challenge grants by the receipt of funds by
municipalities under PA9. Challenge grants were to be awarded to urban local bodies based on
achievements of measurable results, a combination of process-based indicators and improvement in air
quality, and thus RI11, taken from program data on receipt of grants, was indicative of actual
accomplishments in reducing air pollution. Rating: Highly Satisfactory

RI12: This indicator partly measures the outcome of one of the two prior actions associated with it (PA10),
verifying the accomplishment of one of the responsibilities assigned to the multi-sector
committee. According to paragraph 61 of the program document , the Apex Committee for

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



               Implementation of Paris Agreement (AIPA)'s mandate incudes: (i) defining responsibilities of concerned
               ministries for achieving India’s NDC goals, (ii) developing policies and programmes to make India’s
               domestic climate actions compliant with its international obligations, (iii) developing Monitoring, Reporting
               and Verification (MRV) protocol for National Inventory Management System (NIMS) under Paris
               Agreement, (iv) coordinating communication of NDCs, National Communications, Biennial Update
               Reports and Biennial Transparency Reports to UNFCCC, (v) regulating carbon markets in India post-2020
               period and issuing guidelines on carbon pricing, market mechanism, and similar other instruments that
               have a bearing on climate change and NDCs, and (vi) enhancing private sector’s contributions for
               combating climate change and providing guidance to help align their actions with domestic priorities. The
               RI uses the most basic function of the Committee as an indicator of outcomes of PA10, and does not
               provide any measure of PA11. Rating: Moderately Unsatisfactory



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                Fostering a resilient and coordinated social protection system

                Rationale
                The major PDO-related achievements all related to the devolution of federal budgets to the state level.
                Specifically, 100 percent of states received a direct grant from the GoI from a baseline of 0 percent (RI1), with
                the total value of grants at 100 percent of target (RI2). As per RI3, the government fully repaid Food
                Distribution India loans by the end of fiscal year 2021, after which there were no further loans, as the funds
                flow moved to the central government budget. According to the ICR (p. 11), “this reform built predictability and
                central government commitment into a more cost-effective and dynamic safety net system.” The government
                initiated an exercise that led to rationalization of centrally sponsored social protection schemes (RI4), leading
                to a reduction in the number of schemes from 460 to 310. According to the ICR (p. 16), “rationalization of the
                460 centrally sponsored schemes to 313 schemes, combined with the fiscal devolution to states, contributed
                to streamlining fund flows for social protection, thus giving states an increased ability to respond to disasters
                and provide social assistance.”

                and provide social assistance.”

                This objective had six results indicators, all of which were fully achieved. Of these, four of the results
                indicators had a relevance rating of Highly Satisfactory of Satisfactory. One RI (RI4) had a relevance rating of
                Moderately Satisfactory, but additional quantitative information was provided in the ICR making it clear that
                the PA had substantially contributed to the PDO, for which reason IEG decided to rate this RI as fully
                achieved, despite the insufficient clarity of the RI as phrased. One additional RI was given a Moderately
                Unsatisfactory rating as it measured changes in the general population and not specifically in the target




                                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



population, although it is plausible that the PA contributed to at least some of the change.. Consequently,
achievement of this RIs was downgraded to Negligible.

With achievement of five RIs rated High and one rated Modest, achievement of the objective is rated
Satisfactory.




Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening the capability of the state and national governments in India to respond to the needs of
informal workers

Rationale
Achievement of this objective was based on two prior actions whose aim was to expand access to social
protection for informal workers. Of the three results indicators, two were fully achieved. 58.54 percent (against
a target of 33 percent) of urban municipalities received benefits through the National Urban Digital Mission,
which improved the digital infrastructure of urban municipalities. However, the relevance of this indicator (RI5)
was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to the lack of clarity with regard to what the RI was measuring. The
SVANIDHI social protection scheme was expanded, with 113 percent of street vendors (from a population
originally defined as an estimated 5 million) receiving benefits from the scheme, surpassing the target of 54
percent (RI6). However, the target of 50 percent of SVANIDHI beneficiaries being female (RI7) was only
partially achieved, at 44.4 percent against a baseline of 40 percent.

With achievement of one RI rated High and two rated Modest, achievement of the objective is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.




Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 18
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



                      Strengthening climate action and environmental resilience reforms to increase the adaptation and mitigation
                      of the most vulnerable

                      Rationale
                      Of the three RIs under this objective, two were highly relevant and were surpassed, resulting in transfers of
                      funds to states both based on forest, ecology, and disaster risk index and for successful bids for air pollution
                      reduction challenge grants. However, RI12 did not adequately measure the contribution of the PAs
                      associated with it (PAs 10 and 11) and thus was rated of Moderately Unsatisfactory relevance. In
                      consequence, according to IEG guidelines, achievement of RI12 was rated Modest.

                      With achievement of two RIs High and one rated Modest, achievement of the objective is Satisfactory.




                      Rating

                      Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Efficacy is rated satisfactory, with two objectives rated Satisfactory and one rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The operation was rated as having highly relevant prior actions,and satisfactory efficacy, leading to an Outcome
      rating of Satisfactory.


      a. Rating

      Satisfactory

      7. Risk to Development Outcome

      Program outcomes are likely to be sustained. According to the ICR (p. 17), GoI leadership has consistently
      shown strong commitment to prioritizing social protection to improve efficiency of delivery, coverage, and

                                                                                                                         Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



access. This has been reflected through ongoing efforts to continuously expand India’s safety
net architecture to become more dynamic and inclusive by catering to a diversity of needs across states and
vulnerable groups. The reforms introduced by the DPF were based on prior DPFs and strong analytical work
and were aligned with GoI priorities, which ensured government commitment and ownership. Reforms under
Pillar 1 are direct reflections of India’s Fifth Finance Commission’s recommendations, which are part of the
constitutional mandate. Achieved results are likely to be sustained in the medium term. Moreover, since the
DPF leveraged pre-existing systems, and social protection benefits are funded through the government
budget without donor assistance, program outcomes should be sustained beyond the operation.


8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


The operation's design was grounded in detailed analysis. According to the ICR (p. 17), prior actions
were thoroughly grounded in recent analytical work led by the highly technical and well-grounded
India social protection team in collaboration with various academicians and experts. The DPF design
incorporated surveys and rapid reviews by two national think-tanks for the Bank. This analytical work
contributed to increased Bank credibility and helped the Bank team engage in meaningful dialogue with
GoI counterparts around the reforms and fast-track the preparation. The operation also built on the Bank’s
deep engagement with various ministries and institutions as well as with state authorities on social
protection reforms, including with the FFC on the fiscal reforms. Moreover, the Bank team consulted with
development partners and worked closely with ministries and state governments/agencies in the design of
coordinated actions and planned outcomes. Donor engagement was facilitated by the depth and
extensiveness of the analytic work on social protection undertaken by the Bank, which culminated in the
multi-stakeholder workshop on “Schemes to Systems” in Delhi in December 2019. In addition, the
operation's design incorporated lessons from the previous DPF series and supported key reforms that
were designed to address challenges in implementation of Bank support for adequate coverage of
vulnerable populations, coordination of institutions, efficiency of delivery, and benefits portability.

Project design recognized and provided for mitigation of substantial macroeconomic and
institutional capacity risks through technical assistance during implementation complemented with
monitoring and evaluation during implementation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework
leveraged knowledge partnerships to track impacts and results. The World Bank built on earlier
collaboration with knowledge partners such as Jameel Poverty Action Lab, Evidence for Policy Design,
Infrastructure Development Finance Committee, and Center for Policy Research on taking stock of India’s
social protection programs through ongoing Advisory Services and Analytics. The Bank team also relied on
Center for Monitoring the Indian Economy (CMIE) panel surveys; administrative data on program releases
and bank account transactions maintained by DBT Mission (the government's nodal point for the
management of direct benefit transfer programs) and the National Disaster Management Authority to
triangulate results; administrative data on coverage under the One Nation One Ration initiative by the
Public Distribution System line agency; and administrative data from the Ministry of Economy and
Finance to leverage information for the Climate Action Pillar (ICR, p.18).



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



Some of the RIs were not adequate indicators of the associated PA's contributions toward
achievement of the PDOs. Once third of RIs were not sufficiently attributable to PAs and/or did not
adequately demonstrate progress towards achievement of the PDOs.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

According to the ICR (p. 18), the Bank team closely monitored implementation. The Bank maintained
frequent bilateral contact with the ministries to monitor program results, despite the pandemic and lockdowns.
Nonetheless, results indicators were not all tracked consistently, as administrative data from ministries were not
always available. However, in the one RI where data were not available at program close, an adequate proxy
measure was found. Monitoring responsibilities were mapped and shared with development partners; for
example, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) tracked the ONORC Initiative, and the Bank focused on survey
data collection through CMIE by including a specific social protection module. Regular donor discussions were
organized and facilitated by a Secretariat financed under ADB-financed technical assistance.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Bank Performance was satisfactory, based on the Quality at Entry and on the Bank’s important role both in the
preparation of the DPF itself and in closely coordinating with the government in defining reform priorities and
with partners to coordinate a comprehensive program of technical assistance. The Bank team designed an
operation that was appropriately selective rather than overly ambitious in pursuing key initiatives. The general
strategy to preserve previous gains and achieve improvements while pushing the reform agenda was
appropriate to the development context and pivotal to the success of the operation. However, some of the
observed results (as measured by the results indicators) were not adequately attributable to the PAs, and at
times RIs did not adequately trace causal chains from PA to outcomes.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Overall, this operation helped alleviate and prevent further social and economic distress from COVID-19
and future shocks among the most vulnerable groups. The focus on the urban poor (informal workers, gig
workers, and interstate migrants) and supported reforms directly improved: (a) access to subsidized food for 35
million informal workers and interstate migrants (PA7); (b) income support for 2.9 million urban street vendors
(out of 5 million) through increased access to credit/loans (PA5); and (c) access to banking services and use of
digital payments for informal workers (PA6). Among the most vulnerable groups, tribal communities who have
the highest rate of poverty in India also benefited from this operation and the benefits generated through
portability, in turn alleviating the burden of poverty (ICR, p. 15).



b. Environmental

The program generated resources that should positively impact ecologies and natural resources. Under
Pillar 4, reforms contributed to climate adaptation measures and should have positive environmental impact. With
Prior Action 8, states received more direct grants for disaster response, and with an increasing share of transfers
to states earmarked for ecology, climate vulnerabilities, and disaster risk. This reform should encourage states to
preserve their forests and ecological zones. Prior Action 9 provided challenge grants for large cities (over 1 million
population) to tackle air pollution and improve health outcomes. Finally, Prior Actions 10 and 11 strengthened the
institutional framework for a more coordinated response on climate change through the multisectoral committee
monitoring the NDCs and the climate knowledge portal; both reforms are expected to contribute to positive
environmental outcomes and support the climate agenda (ICR, p. 16).



c. Gender

While not achieving the one gender-disaggregated results indicator target (RI7), the operation made
progress in achieving gender parity for the SVANIDHI Initiative as well as supporting women through its
other social protection schemes. Under PA5, 2.513 million women benefited from a scheme for street vendors.
Direct transfer of benefits to women through the Public Distribution System and SVANIDHI measures were aimed
at redressing gender-based vulnerabilities. Enhanced grants to states and local governments for climate-
responsive safety nets, disaster relief, and response to the second wave of the COVID-19 crisis were designed to
benefit women, as most states targeted female-headed households as key beneficiary groups. Similarly, the Mera
Ration mobile app (PA7) eased the burden on women in charge of everyday household food. The National Urban
Digital Mission (PA4) registries captured gender-disaggregated women workers and women-headed households,
who are prioritized for future benefit delivery. The National Social Assistance program has leveraged support for
widows and elderly females, targeting households living below the poverty line. Finally, most social assistance
programs providing cash transfer or food support use additional targeting weights for women-headed households
in their eligibility criteria, as women-headed households tend to be poorer than male headed households (ICR,
p.16).



                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)




d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was clear, candid, and results oriented. For the most part, it presented robust evidence to establish
program outcomes, as well as well-thought out, generalizable lessons learned. At times, the ICR could have
been more introspective about the extent to which results indicators provided adequate evidence of progress
towards outcomes.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Results framework design
                                                                                 included indicators that did not
                                                                                 adequately reflect the
 Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                 contribution of the prior actions
                                                                                 toward achievement of the
                                                                                 PDOs.
 Relevance of Results
                                 ---                   Satisfactory
 Indicators
 Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR (p. 19):

DPFs can be used to respond to emergency situations when there is strong evidence behind the prior
actions. India had a social protection system in place that was fragmented and lacked coordination. Even prior
to COVID-19, the Bank team was already engaged in ongoing dialogue with GoI counterparts around the
necessary reforms to address structural challenges. When the crisis hit, the GOI was able to ramp up the
necessary social spending, capitalizing on existing systems. The COVID-19 crisis highlighted the urgency for
developing a harmonized system. Strong analytical work and ensuing credibility with the GoI enabled the Bank

                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India Responsive Social Protection (P176447)



team to swiftly prepare and roll out an emergency DPF and, more importantly, to gain the GoI’s ownership of the
prior actions.

The use of different Bank instruments (DPF and PforR) can help strengthen state engagement. The
prior social protection DPF series and this standalone DPF drew from the extensive knowledge gained from
Bank operations and analytical work. In turn, the emergency DPFs were complemented with state-level
operations (PforRs) that leveraged the reforms that were implemented through these DPFs, such as devolution
of funds to state level. Most follow-up operations were designed to increase coverage and strengthen state
capacity for implementing social protection delivery systems. This also contributed to enhancing the Bank’s
engagement with the GoI in the related thematic areas.

Maintaining coordination and collaboration are cornerstones to scaling up social protection
interventions. Collaboration across sectors supported a coherent reform program. This operation supported 12
reforms in social protection, public financial management (PFM), governance, and climate action. It was
challenging to link PFM and climate action reforms to social protection reforms; however, since the DPF was
addressing structural challenges to increase resilience, a multi-sectoral approach was necessary. A coherent
program design was achieved largely due to a grounded analytical work, a strong technical Bank team, and
strong country leadership. These factors facilitated policy dialogue across sectors and prompted a shared
vision.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
