     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024227

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P174014                                    COVID-19 Emergency Income Support

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Maldives                                   Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-66930,IDA-D6650,IDA-D7660              30-Jun-2022                                          34,013,812.20

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jun-2020                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            12,800,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             33,839,985.71                                                0.00

 Actual                                         34,013,812.20                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Sarveshwari Singh           Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The development objective of the project was to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis on
   workers and their families, and to increase the capacity of social protection programs to respond to future
   emergencies, as stated in the Financing Agreement for IDA Grant D665-MV and Credit 6693-MV, the
   Financing Agreement for Additional Financing Grant, and Project Appraisal Document (PAD). (Financing
   Agreement for Grant and Credit, June 13, 2020, p. 4).



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



   Targets for PDO indicators 1 and 2 were revised upward. With the Additional Financing, two new PDO
   indicators were added to reflect the increased scope of the project. The target for PDO indicator 6 was
   marginally revised downward and was exceeded, while the original target was essentially achieved. The PDO
   remained the same through the duration of the project. Therefore, this ICRR does not apply a split rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Temporary assistance to workers affected by the COVID-19 pandemic (Appraisal:
   US$12 million; Actual: US$33.95 million)

   This component provided financing for the temporary Income Support Allowance (ISA) program for
   individuals who lost a job or income because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It supported data collection and
   storage in the National Social Protection Agency’s (NSPA) Social Protection Information System (SPIS).
   Media outreach was conducted to inform the public about the program and how to apply for income
   support.

   Component 2: Strengthening social protection delivery systems and institutions (Appraisal: US$0.8
   million; Actual: US$0.45 million)

   This component aimed to strengthen the Government’s social protection system to better respond to future
   crises and disasters by:

        a. Strengthening NSPA’s Delivery and Targeting Systems by expanding and improving the SPIS,
             reviewing the Government’s social protection programs and eligibility criteria, and testing and rolling
             out new systems in major population centers in each atoll.
        b.   Developing a Fiscally Sustainable Unemployment Insurance Program financed in part with
             employer/employee contributions and covering both formal and informal sector workers.
        c.   Improving Retirement Pension Programs by developing a plan to improve fiscal sustainability,
             coverage, and benefits of government-financed pension schemes and other social pension
             programs.
        d.   Developing a National Social Protection Framework including a gender gap analysis to ensure that
             adequate actions are taken to strengthen gender-sensitive programming.
        e.   Project Implementation, management and reporting. This subcomponent aimed to finance
             incremental operating costs, project implementation staff and consultants, monitoring and
             evaluation, communication and relevant trainings.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Costs and Financing: The total project cost at appraisal was US$12.8 million consisting of an IDA Credit of
  US$6.4 million and an IDA Grant of US$6.4 million. An Additional Financing (AF) Grant of US$21.6 million
  was provided. The revised commitment was US$33.8 million consisting of a revised IDA Credit of US$6.2
  million, a revised IDA Grant of US$6.0 million, and the AF grant amount of US$21.6 million. Actual project
  cost was US$34.0 million as noted in the ICR and the ICR (Annex 3).

  Dates: The project was approved June 9, 2020 and became effective June 26, 2020. A Mid-Term Review
  was conducted on February 1, 2022. The original credit and grant closed on June 30, 2022 as planned. The
  Additional Financing Grant was approved in January 2021. The AF closing date was extended twice. During
  the second restructuring it was extended by six months to December 31, 2022, and in the third restructuring
  it was extended by one year to December 31, 2023.

  Restructuring: The project was adjusted four times with three restructurings and Additional Financing.

  Restructuring 1, December 5, 2020: This restructuring extended payments for the Income Support
  Allowance program for an additional three months from July 2020 through September 2020. The extension
  would allow more Maldivians to apply as the employment situation was deteriorating and COVID-19 cases
  were rising. An estimated US$6 million of the funding for the ISA program had not been spent and the PAD
  noted that any surplus funds could finance an extension of the program if needed. (Restructuring Paper,
  RES44042).

  Additional Financing Grant, January 25, 2021: An AF grant of US$21.6 million extended support
  payments to Income Support Allowance beneficiaries through December 2020. The target for PDO 1
  increased from 10,000 to 15,000 beneficiaries of the social safety net program. For PDO 2, the target
  increased from 3,000 to 4,500 female beneficiaries. Also, two new PDO indicators were added to capture
  the number of female self-employed beneficiaries (PDO 5) and the number of person-months of support
  provided (PDO 6).

  Restructuring 2, December 13, 2021: This restructuring added three subcomponents to Component 1 to
  enable workers to generate sustainable income at the end of the crisis. The subcomponents were: (a) a
  short vocational training program for upskilling of job seekers in priority trades; (b) an apprenticeship
  program to create a pathway for permanent job opportunities; and (c) an entrepreneurship program to
  support self-employed workers. To allow sufficient time for the subcomponents to be implemented, the AF
  closing date was extended by six months to December 31, 2022. (Restructuring Paper, RES47642).
  Changes were made to the Results Framework:

  The targets for PDO indicator 1, number of beneficiaries of safety net programs, increased from 15,000 to
  24,000; and the target for female beneficiaries for PDO indicator 2 increased from 4,500 to 9,400.

  The target for PDO indicator 5, number of beneficiaries of safety net programs, self-employed female, was
  revised from 1,100 to 6,500.

  The targets for PDO indicator 6, number of cash transfers paid to eligible beneficiaries during the pandemic
  (person months), were increased from 80,000 to 100,000 beneficiaries, and female beneficiary targets were
  increased from 24,000 to 33,000.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 14
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



                       Restructuring 3, December 12, 2022: This restructuring extended the closing date for the AF by 12
                       months to December 31, 2023 to allow additional time for completion of the skills development
                       entrepreneurship programs, and to allow the PMU to conduct a feedback survey and program evaluation
                       including tracer surveys of beneficiaries. (Restructuring Paper, RES53848). The target for PDO indicator 6,
                       cash transfers paid to eligible beneficiaries during the pandemic (person months), was revised downward
                       from 100,000 to 95,000 persons as fewer beneficiaries would receive the cash transfers associated with the
                       training and apprenticeship programs.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Government projected that 15,000 to 20,000 people would lose their jobs and incomes due to the
COVID-19 pandemic and many Maldivians would struggle to meet their daily needs without financial
support, posing a threat to human capital and social stability. The aim of the project was to provide
temporary emergency income support to people most affected by income loss due to the pandemic, and to
strengthen social protection delivery systems and institutions to respond better in future emergencies.

The project was well-aligned with the emergency needs in the country and the Bank’s COVID-19 crisis
response program. The operation was aligned with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF)
for Maldives for FY2016-FY2019 (Report No.103724-MV) and its objectives to enhance employability and
economic opportunities.

The AF scaled up the temporary income support program to increase the number of beneficiaries and to
improve the employability of workers after the pandemic emergency. The project complemented the
Maldives COVID-19 Emergency Response and Health System Preparedness Project (P173801) that aimed
to prevent further spread of the disease.

The PDO continued to be fully aligned with the country’s needs and the World Bank’s assistance priorities
as described in the CPF for the Republic of Maldives for the Period FY2023-2027 (Report no. 177788-MV),
specifically the Higher-Level Objective (HLO) 3, Improved Human Capital Outcomes. The CPF addressed
the need to better target pensions and social safety nets, and address unemployment insurance programs
and limited vocational training. The AF and restructuring strengthened relevance with the focus on
vocational training and linkages with the labor market. The PDO remained relevant as a follow-on project,
Sustainable and Integrated Labor Services Project (SAILS, P177240), is ongoing and aims to establish an
unemployment insurance scheme and an employment services scheme.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)



                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis on workers and their families.

               Rationale
               A theory of change (TOC) and results chain were included in the PAD. The ICR updated the TOC with the
               Additional Financing. By providing temporary income support to eligible Maldivians and offering
               apprenticeships, vocational training, and support to entrepreneurs to enhance the employability of workers
               after the pandemic, the project aimed to mitigate the economic effects of the pandemic.

               Outputs and intermediate results

               The time to receive the first payment after application for financial support was 4 weeks, achieving the target
               of 4 weeks. (IRI 1) Financial support was available to eligible individuals who had either lost a job since the
               beginning of the pandemic or had a total loss of income because of the crisis. The National Social Protection
               Agency provided assistance to individuals in preparing their application.

               All grievances (100 percent) under the ISA program were addressed within two weeks, surpassing the target
               of 80 percent. (IRI 2) A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was established and 45,728 grievances were
               received, of which 45,698 were resolved within a two-week period. Sixty-five percent of the grievances were
               related to requests for guidance on the application process. The GRM was extended to the skills development
               and entrepreneurship activities. The ICR notes that all the inquiries were resolved.

               All beneficiary records (100 percent) were stored and accessible in the Social Protection Information System
               (IRI 3), exceeding the target of 90 percent. The information system securely collected and maintained
               applicants’ information, served as a management information system, and was used to determine eligibility.

               Ninety-two percent of beneficiaries reported being satisfied with the COVID-19 Support Allowance enrollment
               and payment processes (IRI 4), surpassing the target of 75 percent.

               The total number of beneficiaries enrolled in apprenticeships (IRI 9) was 153, which met the revised target of
               150 beneficiaries. The original target was 400 beneficiaries. Income Support Assistance beneficiaries were
               selected competitively for apprenticeships in local firms and state-owned enterprises for six months and
               received on-the-job training. Ninety-seven applicants successfully completed the program and 25 percent
               were female.

               The total number of beneficiaries enrolled and trained in the vocational program (IRI 10) was 3,508,
               exceeding the target of 2,000 beneficiaries. The vocational training program provided upskilling for job
               seekers in priority trades including diving, accounting, ICT, and tourism. Eighty six percent of enrolled
               beneficiaries completed the training programs and received industry designated certifications. A tracer study
               found that 49 percent of beneficiaries were employed six months after completing the training, and others
               pursued further studies and were looking for more flexible job opportunities.

               Outcomes



                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



There were 27,104 beneficiaries of social safety net programs, exceeding the revised target of 24,000 and
original target of 10,000. (PDO 1) Of these beneficiaries 10,742 were female, exceeding the original and
revised targets of 3,000 and 9,400, respectively. (PDO 2)

There were 8,064 self-employed female beneficiaries of social safety net programs, surpassing the original
and revised targets of 1,100 and 6,500, respectively. (PDO 5).

The number of cash transfers paid to eligible beneficiaries during the pandemic (person months) was 97,344
exceeding the final revised target (2022) of 95,000 and original target of 80,000, falling slightly short of the
second revised target (2021) of 100,000 cash transfers (person months). Of these, 35,180 cash transfers
were paid to eligible female beneficiaries during the pandemic (person months), surpassing the revised target
of 33,000. The indicator aimed to measure the scale of support to eligible beneficiaries.

The PDO indicators were largely output-oriented, given the emergency setting. The evidence demonstrated
substantial attainment of the objective. In addition, the expanded eligibility and relaxed criteria for financial
support diverted from the stated objective that was directly linked to the impact of COVID-19.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the capacity of social protection programs to respond to future emergencies.

Rationale
Objective 2 aimed to strengthen the Government’s social protection system to better respond to future crises.
By strengthening the National Social Protection Agency’s (NSPA) delivery and targeting systems, developing
a fiscally sustainable unemployment insurance program, improving retirement pension programs, and
developing a national social protection framework, the capacity of social protection programs to respond to
future emergencies would be increased.

Outputs and intermediate results

A proposal for reforms for the retirement pension programs was drafted and presented to the competent
authorities (IRI 7) and the target was met. The aim was to increase coverage and benefits of the Maldives
Retirement Pension Scheme and other government-financed pension schemes and social pension programs.
The plan included strategies for improving compliance with the Maldives Retirement Pension Scheme and
maximizing retirement savings and worker coverage.

Improvements to the Social Protection Information System (SPIS) of Maldives were completed and tested (IRI
8) and the target was met. The aim was to improve the SPIS to address the NSPA’s needs to expand the
scope and coverage of its programs, thereby strengthening the capacity of its social protection system to
respond to future shocks.



                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



                            Outcomes

                            Eighty-five percent of island councils received access to NSPA’s information system to view and update
                            beneficiary records (PDO 3), exceeding the target of 50 percent. The aim was to improve connectivity with
                            island councils and enable them to submit applications online rather than mailing them to the National Social
                            Protection Secretariat (NSPS) headquarters to be manually entered. Island councils assisted vulnerable
                            groups in the application process. The engagement of island councils increased knowledge of local needs as
                            well as coordination with the NSPA, thereby contributing to strengthening the ability to manage future
                            emergencies.

                            The National Social Protection Framework was prepared and presented to the competent authorities and the
                            target was met (IRI 5). The unemployment insurance program was designed and presented to the competent
                            authorities (IRI 6) and the target was met. It included an assessment of options for an unemployment
                            insurance program and contributed to the design of the new World Bank supported Sustainable and
                            Integrated Labor Services (SAILS) Project which is supporting an unemployment insurance program. The
                            framework was officially adopted by the NSPA and Ministry of Gender, Family and Social Services in January
                            2023. The Framework included a detailed assessment of the sector’s structure, current programs, their
                            financing and impact, and laying out a multi-stakeholder action plan for the sector’s future direction. (ICR, p.
                            9). The ICR did not report if, and how, the framework was used to improve social protection.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1, to mitigate the economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis on workers and their families, was
                            substantially achieved by increasing the number of beneficiaries in social protection and employability
                            programs. Objective 2, to increase the capacity of social protection programs to respond to future
                            emergencies, was also achieved with the strengthened role of island councils, the design of an
                            unemployment insurance program, and the development of a framework for social protection. The aggregate
                            achievement is indicative of a Substantial rating for overall Efficacy.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal to quantify the benefit of the project and compare it with the
   program cost of US$12.8 million at approval. The analysis examined the impact of temporary income support on

                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



lifetime earnings, and the net benefit was calculated by comparing it with projected earnings if no income
support was provided. The analysis added a multiplier of 1.2 on lifetime earnings to account for externalities
from income support such as improving nutrition, health, and education. The net gain in lifetime earnings per
person, and the economy-wide gain in earnings, assumed that at least 20,000 persons would benefit. The
savings on administration of social protection programs that would accrue to future costs of the social protection
programs were calculated. The analysis assumed that the project would save 3.5 percent of total annual
spending discounted for 10 years. In sum, the analysis concluded a cost-benefit ratio of 3.4 which is indicative of
high cost-effectiveness.

While the ICR noted that the cost-benefit calculation at appraisal likely underestimated the economic effect, it
did not conduct its own analysis or repeat the calculations of the appraisal estimates based on information
available at the time of closing. It noted that children of parents who received income support likely benefited
from protection of their nutritional status and well-being, thereby protecting human capital. Also, AF-funded
activities for vocational training, apprenticeships, and support to entrepreneurs likely yielded increased
employability and annual earnings of beneficiaries.

With regard to implementation efficiency, at appraisal the PMU was fully established. The second restructuring
in December 2021 added three new subcomponents for the vocational training, apprenticeships, and the
entrepreneurship programs for an expected 2,400 beneficiaries. An 18-month total extension was reasonable to
design and implement these programs and conduct evaluation activities including a beneficiary survey and
tracer study.

There were some shortcomings in implementation aspects and financial management which moderately
reduced project efficiency. The initial high volume of applications caused backlogs that were ultimately
addressed and processing time improved. (ISR No.1, September 2020). The relaxation of eligibility that was
initially associated with the impact of COVID-19 resulted in benefits extending beyond the intended purpose of
Objective 1 to mitigate the impact of COVID-19. The roll out of training and apprenticeship activities in support of
unemployed workers was delayed. The 2022 restructuring allowed additional time for training and for more
outreach to promote the participation of applicants from atolls outside of Male. On balance, overall efficiency is
assessed as Substantial as it reflected what would be expected in the operation’s sector.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)




6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High as they were responsive to the economic impact of the pandemic on
workers and their families and laid the foundation for improving the social protection system. Efficacy is rated
Substantial as the project substantially achieved its objectives. Efficiency is rated Substantial. The overall
Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s activities to design an unemployment insurance program provided the foundation for continued
focus on social protection. A follow-on World Bank-supported project, Sustainable and Integrated Labor
Services (SAILS), will enable the provision of unemployment benefits and insurance, and employment
services with job search assistance and training. These activities aim to formalize the protection of workers in
future emergencies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was highly relevant and appropriately focused on responding to immediate needs by
  providing temporary income support to workers and families while strengthening the social protection
  system to respond to future emergencies. Project design drew on existing National Social Protection
  Agency delivery systems which had been used for the successful provision of prior social assistance
  programs. The project was well-designed to enable the likelihood of achievement of its development
  outcomes.

  The Ministry of Economic Development established the Project Management Unit and all positions were
  filled at the time of appraisal. Implementation arrangements for monitoring and evaluation were in place.
  The results framework was straightforward and the indicators were output-oriented due to the short
  implementation timeframe for an emergency project. Institutional capacity risk was rated Substantial
  given the expected steep learning curve for the PMU. MoED did not have prior experience in managing
  World Bank-financed projects and some positions in the PMU were jointly supporting other projects.
  (PAD, para 33). To mitigate potential challenges as much as possible, Bank staff aimed to provide close
  implementation support.




                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team prepared seven Implementation Status and Results Reports that were candid and
 documented progress, challenges, and action plans. The Bank team was timely and responsive in the
 context of an emergency financing project. The team was proactive in responding to the Government’s
 request for AF and working to support the additional activities to improve workers’ employability. The team
 coordinated with the World Bank-financed Enhancing Employability and Resilience of Youth Project
 (P163818) to ensure activities were complementary and not duplicative.

 The project team provided support when project restructuring added additional components. The Bank
 team was responsive to fiduciary compliance issues including delays in the submission of financial reports
 and accuracy issues, and delays in the submission of audit reports. These issues were addressed by
 staffing the PMU with qualified and dedicated full-time experts.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was reflected in the results framework. The indicators captured the contribution of
 activities toward achievement of the project’s objectives. Indicators measured the number of beneficiaries
 who received temporary income support, timeliness of payments and grievances addressed, while also
 measuring achievement of milestones for the country’s social protection system including the design and
 drafting of an employment insurance program. The causal link between all the indicators and their
 respective objectives was clear, although the subsequent loosening of eligibility for financial support
 diminished the direct linkage with the impact of COVID-10 as was intended by the stated objective. The
 outcome indicators were mostly outputs or intermediate results indicators given the project’s emergency
 nature and two-year implementation period.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PMU collected and maintained data and prepared quarterly reports on progress on achieving results.
  Beneficiary surveys were conducted to assess satisfaction with enrollment and payment processes
  following each of three phases: April to June 2020, July to September 2020, and October to December
  2020. The initial surveys revealed the need to expedite application processing. For the vocational training
  program, a satisfaction survey of beneficiaries in the training program found that a majority were satisfied

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



  with the program, the GRM, and financial support. For individuals who received a self-employment
  support grant, a phone survey tracked individuals and found that more young women than men applied to
  the program, and young women preferred to be self-employed and in control of their own time.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used to improve implementation for the Income Support Assistance Program. Findings
  from the satisfaction surveys on the application process for the income support assistance program were
  used to expedite the process. Applicants needed to provide documentation electronically to MoED
  including a national identity card and documents to support employment or income loss. Many claims
  required clarification and follow-up with applicants. The PMU made system improvements and increased
  staffing. By July 2020, application processing time was reduced from 41 days to 27 days. In October
  2020, an additional 30 claims processing staff were hired to accommodate a surge in applications from
  July through September 2020.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the environmental and social risk was moderate. The project did not finance construction of
   civil works or procurement of materials that would have adverse environmental impacts, and environmental
   risks were considered low. Social risks were considered moderate due to factors including: (a) potential
   beneficiaries especially vulnerable groups lacking access to information about applying for the Income
   Support Allowance and other benefits; (b) the lack of adequate consultations with relevant stakeholders
   during preparation of the National Social Protection Framework and plans for pension reforms and an
   unemployment insurance program; and (c) occupational and community health and safety risks due to the
   spread of COVID-19.

   Because the project was prepared under emergency procedures, it was not subject to full safeguards and
   environmental policies. A Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), a Labor Management Procedure, and an
   Environmental Social Management Framework were prepared, along with Occupational Health and Safety
   standards for workers to prevent the spread of infection and a hotline for support when submitting
   applications and registering grievances.

   According to the ICR, Environmental and Social (E&S) compliance was Satisfactory. The PMU was staffed
   with appropriate focal persons. A media campaign was undertaken to raise awareness of the Income
   Support Allowance. The Project’s GRM functioned well and all inquiries were resolved in a timely manner.




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                               Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



   Financial management was revised downward from Satisfactory to Moderately Satisfactory in April 2021
   due to the delay in appointing an internal auditor, issues in accuracy in financial reports, and delays in
   submitting financial reports and audit reports. It was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in October
   2021 due to persistent delays in submission of financial reports, issues in the accuracy of the reports,
   delays in the audit process and submission of audit reports, delays in the internal audit process, and
   weaknesses in FM staffing capacity. With the recruitment of a dedicated full-time FM expert and no
   overdue audits or IUFRs, performance improved to Moderately Satisfactory in June 2022 and then to
   Satisfactory in November 2022 which remained so until project closing.

   Procurement performance was rated Satisfactory in September 2020 and revised to Moderately
   Satisfactory in April 2021 and December 2021 due to contracting delays owing to staffing changes (ISR #2,
   April 2021 and ISR#3, December 15, 2021). Performance was upgraded to Satisfactory in June 2022 when
   the PMU confirmed that the staffing arrangement was in place and this rating remained the same through
   project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                Minor shortcomings in Efficacy
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory
                                                                                and Efficiency.
Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                M&E was generally sufficient to
                                                                                assess the achievement of the
                                                                                objectives, but there was
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial
                                                                                moderate weaknesses that did
                                                                                not allow full demonstration of
                                                                                efficacy.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 16-17) offered lessons, including the following:


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)



Simple project design and use of existing social protection delivery systems enable timely
and effective emergency support. Project design with straightforward outputs and intermediate
results that are tailored to the country and emergency context are a key factor for effective
implementation. Using existing social protection delivery systems that have demonstrated prior
success, albeit on a smaller scale, coupled with support to increase delivery system capacity,
contributes to the strengthening and growth of the social protection system. Also, investments at the
local level in supporting registration and supporting applicants contribute to building capacity that is
conducive to scale up in a future emergency.

Strengthening workforce skills in addition to providing temporary income support enables
workers to be better prepared to join the labor market when a crisis subsides. By offering skills
training, certifications, apprenticeships, and support for entrepreneurs in occupations with high
employment potential, workers will be better equipped to generate a sustainable income when they
re-enter the labor market. Also, this can enhance the prospects and pace of economic recovery.

A crisis period can create the opportunity to strengthen the social protection system for the
longer-term. During a crisis when attention is focused on meeting immediate income support
needs, the importance of a social protection system becomes more visible and paramount. This
period may open up the opportunity for dialogue and action to identify gaps in social protection and
actions steps to fill those gaps. More broadly, the timing may create the will to rethink the existing
social protection system at a higher level and how it can be improved.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a concise description of the project and was internally consistent. The theory of change was
well-articulated. The report included detailed information on the restructurings, AF, adjustments to the results
framework, and the Grievance Redress Mechanism which was well-utilized. The project was output-oriented
due to the emergency nature of the operation and the short implementation period.

The ICR provided evidence that project activities contributed to mitigation of the economic impact of the
pandemic on workers and families and strengthened social protection for future emergencies. Valuable lessons
were drawn from project experience. In addition to reporting that the National Social Protection Framework was
approved, it would have been welcome for the ICR to note if, and how, the framework was used to improve
social protection and prepare for future emergencies.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
COVID-19 Emergency Income Support (P174014)




                                                                           Page 14 of 14
