     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024226

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P144489                                    EC Quito Metro Line One

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Ecuador                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-82850,IBRD-88890                      31-Dec-2018                                        431,966,061.92

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 25-Jul-2013                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          205,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           435,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                       432,201,785.75                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Natalya Stankevich         Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as in the PAD (p. 4) is to improve urban mobility in the city of
   Quito, serving the growing demand for public transport. The Loan Agreement (LA, Schedule 1, p. 6) defines
   the PDO as follows "to improve urban mobility in the Borrower's territorial jurisdiction serving the
   growing demand for public transport". Both the PAD and LA further expand on how the PDO would be
   achieved in the project: "The Project will reduce travel time, decrease operational costs of the transport



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



   service, improve connectivity, security and comfort of the current system and reduce emissions of pollutants
   and greenhouse gases."

   The PDO was not revised.

   The ICRR applies the PDO formulation from the LA for the purpose of this assessment.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  22-Jun-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Construction of two Metro Stations of the Quito Metro Line One. (Cost at appraisal: US$ 83.91
   million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00 million; cost at the Additional Financing (AF)/First
   Restructuring in 2018: US$ 124 million; actual cost: US$124 million and IBRD Loan: US$0.00 million). This
   component was to construct the metro stations of La Magdalena and El Labrador.

   2. Infrastructure and Equipment Investment for the Quito Metro Line One. (Cost at appraisal: US$
   1,355.18 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 200.00 million; cost at the Additional Financing (AF)/First
   Restructuring in 2018: US$ 1,650.2 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 425.00 million; actual cost:
   US$1,651.2 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 425.00 million). This component was to:

            Construct 23 km of tunnel linking the Quitumbe and El Labrador metro stations,
            Construct 13 metro stations,
            Construct a yard and maintenance shops at the Quitumbe metro station, and
            Provide and install metro system-wide facilities (including the permanent way, fare collection and
             ticketing system, and other systems and equipment) for the operation of Quito Metro Line One.

   3. Provision of Train Sets to Operate in the Quito Metro Line One. (Cost at appraisal: US$ 192.82
   million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00 million; cost at the Additional Financing (AF)/First
   Restructuring in 2018: US$ 183.59 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00 million; actual cost: US$
   183.59 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00 million). The component was to:

          Provide at least 18 6-car train sets with 4 automotive cars per train,
          Provide auxiliary vehicles for track maintenance and yard work, and
          Provide workshop equipment.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



  4. Project Management. (Cost at appraisal: US$ 47.25 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00
  million; cost at the Additional Financing (AF)/First Restructuring in 2018: US$ 47.03 million, of which the
  IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00 million; actual cost: US$ 46.06 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 0.00
  million). This component was to provide technical assistance (TA) for the management oversight and
  supervision of the Project.

  5. Technical Studies to Support Project Implementation. (Cost at appraisal: US$ 5.00 million, of which
  the IBRD Loan was US$ 5.00 million; cost at the Additional Financing (AF)/First Restructuring in 2018: US$
  10.00 million, of which the IBRD Loan was US$ 10.00 million; actual cost: US$ 7.2 million, of which the
  IBRD Loan was US$ 7.2 million). This Component was to initially finance demand-driven technical studies
  to support the implementation of the Project, including a financial management and cost recovery study of
  the Integrated Mass Transit System (Sistema Integrado de Transporte de Pasajeros, SITP) and a study to
  design a fare collection system for the SITP to be compatible with the fare collection system for the
  metro. During the AF in 2018, different categories of technical studies were included in this component such
  as (i) TA studies to support project management; (ii) TA studies to support the implementation of SITP; and
  (iii) implementation of social and environmental (ESS) measures and TA.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total cost at appraisal was US$ 1,684.16 million. During the AF and first restructuring in
  June 2018, the project cost was revised and increased to US$2,014.87 million. The actual total project cost
  at the closing was US$ 2,128.61 million. Out of the original project cost of US$ 1,684.16 million, the World
  Bank (WB) committed to finance Components 2 and 5 through an IBRD loan in the amount of US$ 205.00
  million. During the approval of the AF and first restructuring in 2018, the WB’s commitment increased to
  US$ 435 million, along with the revision of the contributions from other financiers, due to the increase of the
  project cost. At the closing, the IBRD loan was disbursed in the amount of US$ 432.2 million.

  Financing. This project was co-financed by four multilateral development banks (MDBs) who co-signed the
  Principles of Collaboration, dated December 6, 2013, and confirmed their commitment to finance certain
  activities as per their respective financing agreements either signed or to be signed with the Republic of
  Ecuador and the Municipality of Quito. Those co-financiers included the Interamerican Development Bank
  (IDB), the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the European Investment Bank
  (EIB), and the Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF). The below table (ICR, Annex
  3) summarizes the original, revised and final contributions of all the institutions that provided co-financing for
  this project.

                                                                        Actual
                                 Cost at                  Revised
                                              AF in                     cost in
                                 appraisal in             Cost in
   Source of financing                        2018, US                  2023,
                                 2013, US$                2018, US$
                                              million                   US$
                                 million                  million
                                                                        million
   Government of Ecuador
                                 40.69         0          40.69         40.69
   (GoE)
   Municipio del Distrito
   Metropolitano de Quito        536.37        -336.46    199.91        316.98
   (MDMQ)

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 24
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



Spanish Fund for Corporate
Internationalization (Fondo
                             192.82        -9.23     183.59        183.59
para la Internationalización
de la Empresa, FIEM)
European Investment Bank
                              259.28       44.20     303.48        303.15
(EIB)
Interamerican Development
                          200.00           250.00    450.00        449.80
Bank (IDB)
Development Bank of Latin
America and the Caribbean 250.00           152.20    402.20        402.20
(CAF)
World Bank (WB)               205          230       435           432.2
Total                         1,684.16     330.71    2,014.87      2,128.61

Borrower Contribution. The GoE’s original commitment was US$40.69, which was actually realized by the
end of the project. According to the Bank team’s clarification of October 25, 2024, the Municipality of the
Metropolitan District of Quito's (MMDQ) original commitment was US$120 million from its resources, and
the Municipality’s actual contribution was US$ 316.98 million (excluding loans). The MMDQ’s commitment
in the table above includes several commercial loans and revenue securitization from Quito Airport, which
eventually did not materialize. (There is discrepancy with regards to these figures in the ICR datasheet and
Annex 3.)

Dates. The project was approved on July 25, 2013; became effective more than two years later - on
September 25, 2015; carried out its mid-term review (MTR) on October 9, 2017; had an AF approved on
June 22, 2018, and closed on December 31, 2023 as opposed to its original closing date of December 31,
2018. The project was thus extended for a total of 5 years.

Restructurings. The project underwent 4 restructurings, including AF during the first restructuring in
2018. The Project closing date was extended four times for a total of five years (60 months) under the
following restructurings: (1) in June 2018 with AF by two years (from December 31, 2018 to December 31,
2020); (2) in December 2020 by 12 months (from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021); (3) in
October 2021 by 12 months (from December 31, 2021 to December 31, 2022); and (4) in December 2022
by 12 months (from December 31, 2022 to December 31, 2023).

The multiple extensions of the closing date were made to ensure a capable operator was in place and
respond to implementation delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed civil works and
affected the manufacturing, shipping, and supply of equipment for crucial systems, and caused by social
unrest as well as high turnover of authorities and managers of the metro (ICR, para 24).

First Restructuring and AF in June 2018 (disbursement at 98% of the original loan of US$205
million). The project received an AF of US$230 million to partially cover a financing gap of the investment
components and scale up of the project's TA in response to implementation issues. The gap was due to a
combination of higher-than-estimated project costs and non-materialization of contribution from the two
financing sources who had initially committed at appraisal (Project Paper, PP, para 2, ICR, para 19). This


                                                                                                Page 4 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



   AF also implemented a Level-II restructuring, which introduced several changes, and was approved by the
   Board on June 22, 2018. The following changes were made:

         Triggering of new safeguard policies - Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP
            4.10), which also led to change in legal covenants;
           Extension of the closing date by 24 months till December 31, 2020;
           Scale up of component 5 (Refer to Section d. above);
           Update of the costs of the components (Refer to Section d. above);
           Improvement of the description and methodology of the PDO outcome indicators (ICR, Table 2 and
            Annex 6);
           Decreasing the end target of the PDO outcome indicator related to daily ridership from 369,000 to
            295,999 passengers per day in PLMQ;
           Decreasing the end target of the PDO outcome indicator related to reduced operating costs of
            Quito’s vehicle fleet from US$60,000,000 to US$59,400,000;
           Increasing the end target of PDO outcome indicator related to reduction in GHG emission from
            47,000 m tons per year to 58,170 m tons per year;
           Introduction of two new PDO outcome sub-indicators – percentage of users satisfied with overall
            metro service, its security and comfort for females and low-income users, respectively;
           Adding a new PDO outcome indicator – percentage of jobs accessible in 60 minutes of travel time;
           Update of the procurement and implementation schedules.

   Second Restructuring in December 2020. This restructuring supported the loan extension closing
   date which would allow to complete the execution of the civil works (with physical progress at 96%), and
   provide the technical and financial support required for the definition and implementation of the operation
   and maintenance (O&M) business model. The restructuring also updated the implementation schedule and
   end dates for project indicators in the RF.

   Third Restructuring in October 2021. This restructuring extended the closing date till December 31, 2022,
   updated the implementation schedule and end dates for project indicators in the RF.

   Forth Restructuring in December 2022. This restructuring only extended the loan closing date till
   December 31, 2023.

   Split Rating. This validation applies a split rating of the PDO because the project reduced the end targets
   of the two PDO outcome indicators during the 2018 Additional Financing (AF) and associated project
   restructuring, when the project cost increased. The split rating will therefore consider the project’s end
   achievements against: (a) the original targets, and (b) the 2018 revised targets of the PDO indicators.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal. Ecuador experienced a period of political stability and
significant investment in infrastructure and social services which resulted in a substantial poverty reduction


                                                                                                     Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



between 2006 and 2012. However, challenges remained, particularly in improving the quality of services,
including public transportation, which was crucial to the poor to access social services and economic
opportunities. Despite the construction and expansion of the Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) network since the
1990s, Quito, the country capital, still faced a major public transportation challenge because of the growing
population and suburbanization. In 2010, households with the lowest living conditions in the city lived far
from the city center which concentrated economic opportunities and social services. Households with the
lowest living conditions had access to almost half the economic and social opportunities within 30-minute
travel compared to households with the highest living conditions. The city’s BRT had reached its capacity,
while the city center as a UNESCO World Heritage Site could not be reconstructed to accommodate wider
streets for a new BRT line. The Municipality of Quito enacted a city law in 2012 to create an integrated
mass transit system to expand the coverage and improve coordination among transport services in the city,
including the construction of an underground Metro.

Alignment with Government Strategies. The Quito Metro Line One (PLMQ in Spanish) project was fully
aligned with the Government priorities at appraisal and at closing. At the time of appraisal, the 2012 City
Law created Quito’s Integrated Mass Transit System (SITP), which also included the construction of Quito
Metro to improve public transportation quality and reduce travel time, particularly for low-income users to
enhance access to jobs and services. During the country’s political crisis in 2023, the project remained
aligned to national priorities about providing public transportation, particularly mass transportation. As per
Article 394 of The Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador, “The State shall guarantee freedom of
transportation by land, air, sea and river within the national territory, without privileges of any kind. The
promotion of mass public transport and the adoption of a policy of differentiated transport fares will be a
priority.” The GoE’s Development Plan for the New Ecuador for 2024-2025 re-emphasizes this through its
objective 8 “Promote connectivity as a source of economic and sustainable development and growth”.

Alignment with Bank Strategies. This PDO was fully aligned with all three main areas of the WB’s Interim
Strategy Note (ISN) for Ecuador for FY14-15 (para 5): “(i) sustainable and inclusive growth; (ii) access to
social protection and quality basic services for all; and (iii) strengthening public sector capacity to provide
access to quality services". The ISN identified transport and access to basic services at the subnational
level as key priorities for further reduction of poverty and an opportunity for the WBG’s strategic re-
engagement with the country. This project was a strategic opportunity for the World Bank Group (WBG) to
re-engage with the Government of Ecuador (GoE) through partnership with other MDBs, since the
cancellation of all World Bank ongoing lending operations in the country by the new government and
expelling the World Bank representative from the country in 2007. The PDO was fully aligned with the WB’s
Ecuador Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for 2018, as this project directly contributed to the SCD
Pillar 3 “Expanding Economic Opportunities” by providing more inclusive and sustainable access to jobs
and social services. This PDO remained fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY19-
23, which was extended to 2025 with the completion of a Performance and Learning Review (PLR). This
project directly contributed to the CPF’s three main objectives of (i) supporting the foundations for inclusive
growth, (ii) boosting human capital development and protecting vulnerable populations, and (iii) enhancing
institutional and environmental sustainability. It further contributed to the PLR’s Objectives: (i) Objective 1
“Improve Revenue Mobilization and Quality of Spending” by financing the construction and launch of the
Metro operation which is cheaper to operate and maintain than bus services and could reduce the burden
of road expansion and maintenance in the city, and (ii) Objective 7 “Increase Climate Change Adaptation
and Mitigation” by reducing the GHG emissions associated with urban transport.

Previous Sector Experience. At the time of appraisal, the WB did not have any programs or projects
under implementation since all WB loans had been cancelled by the GoE in 2007. This project was built on

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 24
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



               the dialogue between the WB and GoE at the subnational level on urban infrastructure and disaster risk
               management during FY2011-13. Following a good-practice exchange on urban transportation financing
               organized by the WB, the GoE requested municipal transportation assistance, which resulted in a series of
               workshops and a report highlighting regional financing plans for municipal transportation. As a result, WB
               support at the municipal level to the Quito Metro Line One Project became a key entry point for the WB’s
               lending reengagement.

               The relevance of the Objective is rated as High. The PDO "to improve urban mobility in the city of Quito"
               addresses accessibility gap to jobs and services for Quito's poor. This PDO was and is in full alignment with
               the country and WB strategies. The PDO is outcome-oriented, clearly formulated to demonstrate a
               meaningful contribution to the development problem identified in the city during the project preparation and
               at the closure. The PDO was pitched at an outcome level to address a development problem of limited
               urban mobility in the city of Quito, with an emphasis on reduction of travel time and operating costs,
               improved security, safety, comfort and reduced emissions of air pollutants. This is an appropriate level for
               the context of the country and the city of Quito.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve urban mobility in the Borrower's territorial jurisdiction.

                             Rationale
                             The project did not present a theory of change (ToC) at appraisal because none was required at the time. The
                             results framework (RF) provided the causal logic that linked the original inputs to outputs and outcomes. The
                             ICR created a TOC retrospectively, based on the PAD.

                             The project was to use the project’s inputs, i.e., MDB’s loans with a sovereign guarantee and Municipality of
                             Quito’s resources, to finance such activities as (i) construction of metro stations , (ii) construction of a tunnel
                             linking metro stations, (iii) construction of a yard and maintenance shops , (iv) provision and installation of
                             metro system-wide facilities for the operation of a Metro Line, (v) provision of train sets, auxiliary vehicles for
                             track maintenance and yard work, and workshop equipment; (vi) restructuring of bus routes to feed into the
                             metro line; (vii) implementation of unified fare collection system for the metro and feeder buses; (viii) provision
                             of technical assistance for the management oversight and supervision of the project. As a result, these
                             activities would lead to such outputs as (i) completed metro stations, (ii) completed tunnel connecting metro
                             stations, (iii) completed yard and maintenance shops, (iv) availability of metro system-wide facilities for the
                             operation of a metro line, (v) availability of train sets, auxiliary vehicles for track maintenance and yard work,
                             and workshop equipment; (vii) completed restructuring of bus routes feeding into the metro line; (viii)
                             functioning unified fare collection system for the metro and feeder buses; (ix) completed technical assistance

                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



for the management oversight and supervision of the project. In terms of outcomes, these were to result into
improved urban mobility measured through (i) certain number of passengers transported per day, (ii) reduced
travel time for public transportation users, (iii) reduced operating costs of vehicle fleet, (iv) reduced air
pollutant and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from transport, (v) comfortable level of metro passenger
occupancy, (vi) certain percentage of users satisfied with metro service, security, comfort, differentiated by
gender and income; (vii) percentage of metro feeder routes in operation, and (viii) percentage of bus fleet
under unified fare collection system.

The causal links between most of project activities, outputs and intermediate outcomes were logical, clear
and convincing and do not have any logical gaps. There is a logical gap between the project activities and two
outputs - percentage of metro feeder routes in operation, and percentage of bus fleet under unified fare
collection system. Activities to deliver these two outputs were not included in this project’s scope but were to
be implemented by the Quito Municipality with its own resources outside this project’s scope. The other
indicators identified for the outputs and outcomes are measurable and logical. The main assumptions were
that the underground metro infrastructure would be constructed with good quality and completed on time, the
rolling stock with adequate capacity and necessary equipment would be procured and placed in operation on
time, and integration activities such as restructuring of metro feeder bus routes and implementation of a
unified fare collection system for metro and buses would be timely completed by the Municipality before the
launch of the Metro Line One operation.

Outputs

The following outputs were delivered by the project under the original targets

      99.98 percent of physical work progress in civil works other than stations was achieved. This refers to
         the completed construction of the 23-km tunnel linking the Quitumbe and El Labrador stations and the
         at-grade segment to the yards. The target of 100 percent was almost achieved.
        100 percent of physical work progress in stations and universal access achieved. Construction of 15
         stations – 2 under Component 1 and 13 under component 2 - was completed. The target of 100
         percent was achieved.
        100 percent of physical work progress in rail yard achieved. The target was achieved.
        99.35 percent of progress in installation of power supply, auxiliary, signaling and telecom systems
         achieved. The target of 100 percent was almost achieved.
        100 percent of rolling stock completed and available to operate in the Quito Metro Line One. The
         target was achieved.
        100 percent of fare-collection system installed. The target was achieved.
        100 percent of progress in installation of permanent way achieved. The target was achieved.

The following outputs were not produced at the end of the project as no relevant activities were included in
the project scope because they were to be implemented by the Municipality of Quito with its resources
outside this project's scope:

    o None of the metro feeder routes were restructured and placed in operation. The original target of 90
         percent was not achieved, and
    o None of MDMQ bus fleet were placed under unified fare collection system. The original target of 90
         percent was not achieved.


                                                                                                  Page 8 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



Outcomes

The outputs discussed above were expected to result in the improved mobility in the Borrower’s territorial
jurisdiction serving the growing demand for public transport. The following outcomes were achieved:

      152,610 passengers were transported per day in PLMQ, which is 41 percent of the original target of
         369,000. The original target was not achieved.
      There was a 23-minute reduction in travel time for public transportation users. The original target of
         23 minutes was achieved.
      A US$58.50 reduction in operating costs of Quito’s vehicle fleet was achieved. The original target of
         US$ 60.00 was almost achieved.
        64,056 metric ton reduction of GHG emissions per year from transport in DMQ was achieved. This
         indicator measured the achievement of emission reduction of pollutants, in addition to reduction of
         GHG emissions. The original target of 47,000 metric tons per year was exceeded.
        Adequate passenger capacity (i.e., equal or less than 6 passengers per square meter) was achieved
         by PLMQ. Morning peak (6:00-9:00 am) occupancy was measured at 4.48 passengers/m2 and
         evening peak (4:00-7:00 pm) occupancy was measured at 4.82 passengers/m2 (footnote 17, p. 14).
         This indicator assessed the achievement of comfort of the new metro system. The original target of
         equal or less than 6 passengers per square meter was achieved.
        97.80 percent of users satisfied with overall metro service, its security and comfort. The original
         target of 65 percent was exceeded.
        97.9 percent of users were very satisfied or satisfied with metro security and 95.4 with safety (zero
         harassment), that included 97.5 percent of female users being very satisfied or satisfied with metro
         security and 97.5 percent of female users being very satisfied or satisfied with safety (ICR, p. 48,
         Table 12). No separate targets for security and safety were set up in the RF.
        No indicator was included to measure transport connectivity in the RF, but reduction of travel
         time makes it plausible that improved connectivity was achieved.
        It is plausible that the air quality was improved in the Quito because 152,610 passengers who used
         Metro Line One and avoided using private vehicles or buses on a daily basis contributed to the
         reduction of pollutants, because the Quito Metro is powered by electric power. There was no air
         quality indicator set in the RF.

At the output level, most of the original targets were either achieved or almost achieved, except for the two
which did not have associated project activities but would have be direct contributors to the daily ridership
increase outcome - none of the metro feeder routes were restructured and placed in operation and none of
MDMQ bus fleet were placed under unified fare collection system. At the outcome level, the project achieved
or exceeded the targets for reduced travel time, security and comfort of the current system and reduced
emissions of greenhouse gases (as defined in the PAD, p. 4, para 14 and LA, Schedule 1, p. 6). The project
achieved the original target for reduced operating costs at 98 percent (US$58.50 vs $60.00). It is plausible
that connectivity was improved, and emissions of air pollutants were reduced as discussed above. However,
the project achieved the daily ridership at 41 percent of its original target (152,610 vs 369,000 passengers
daily) which is a significant underachievement. Thus, the original objective is rated as Modest.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The Objective was not revised. It remained: “To improve urban mobility in the Borrower's territorial
jurisdiction”, but the targets of the two PDO indicators - passengers per day in PLMQ and reduction in
operating costs of Quito vehicle fleet - were revised and downsized, and a new PDO outcome indicator -
percentage of jobs accessible in 60 minutes of travel time - was added, along with two sub-indicators of
percentages of female and low-income users satisfied with the Metro services.

Revised Rationale
The TOC was discussed above under the Original Objective and remains valid under the Revised
Targets. During the first restructuring/AF, additional activities were included that were expected to contribute
to the achievement of the Objective and those included to carry out: (i) update of the demand model for the
PLMQ, (ii) urban development study related to the PLMQ and public transport system, (iii) study on
intermodality and promotion of public transport, (iv) development of the strategy for the promotion of Metro
culture, (v) incorporation of the gender perspective in the integrated public transport system of the Quito
Metropolitan District, (vi) implementation of prevention mechanisms for addressing and reporting violence and
sexual harassment against women and girls in the Integrated Public Transportation System of the Quito
Metropolitan District. In addition to the expected outputs that were listed above under the Original Objective,
additional outputs were expected, such as (i) completed update of the demand model for the PLMQ, (ii)
completed urban development study related to the PLMQ and Public Transport System, (iii) completed study
of intermodality and promotion of public transport, (iv) completed development of the strategy for the
promotion of Metro culture, (v) completed study on the incorporation of the gender perspective in the
Integrated Public Transport System of the Quito Metropolitan District, (vi) completed Implementation of
prevention mechanisms for addressing and reporting violence and sexual harassment against women and
girls in the Integrated Public Transportation System of the Quito Metropolitan District. In addition to the
outcomes discussed under the Original Objective, the outputs described in this section and under the Original
Objective were (i) certain percentage of female users satisfied with overall metro service, its security and
comfort; (ii) certain percentage of low-income users satisfied with overall metro service, its security and
comfort; and (iii) certain percentage of jobs accessible in 60 minutes of travel time. In addition to the
assumptions mentioned under the Original Objective, the following additional assumptions were used: the
new technical assistance studies which were included during the first restructuring/AF would be completed
and inform the decisions of the Municipality of Quito and the Metro Operator in promoting the use of the newly
constructed Metro Line One and feeder buses among potential users.

The same points about the causal links, logical gap, and assumptions as discussed in the above section are
applicable here.

Outputs

The following outputs were delivered by the project:

      The achievements reported under the Original Objective, for which targets were not revised
       during the first restructuring/AF, are valid here, too.



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)




      Completed implementation of a reporting mechanism for cases of violence against women and girls in
       the Quito Metro Line One. The target (Yes) for this new indicator introduced during the first
       restructuring/AF, was achieved.
      41.01 percent of technical and professional staff, directly employed by the operator of the Quito Metro
       Line One are female. The target of 20 percent for this new indicator, which was introduced
       during the first restructuring/AF, was exceeded.

In addition, the project also delivered the below list of studies which contributed to the project outcomes but
were not covered by the RF and, hence, had no target values:

    1. Completed update of the demand model for Quito Metro Line One;
    2. Completed study about incorporating gender perspective into the Integrated Public Transportation
       System;
    3. Completed development of the strategy for the promotion of Metro Culture;
    4. Availability of an advisor for the selection of the operator of the Quito Metro Line One;
    5. Completed technical structuring of the operation and maintenance of the Quito Metro Line One;
    6. Completed development of Sustainable Mobility Master Plan;
    7. Completed study to structure and establish the Administrative Entity of the Integrated Public Transport
       System (Single Transport Authority);
    8. Completed update of the fare integration model (Phase II). Determination of the revenue distribution
       formula;
    9. Completed Rolling Stock Tuning Service, which started in September 2023 and ended in February
       2024, and
   10. Completed analysis, evaluation, and formulation of project alternatives for exclusive public transport
       bus lanes and demand management measures that contribute to strengthening the metropolitan
       public transportation system, which started in December 2023 and ended in March 2024.

The following outputs were not produced at the end of the project as no relevant activities were included in
the project scope during the first restructuring/AF because they were to be implemented by the Municipality of
Quito with its resources outside this project’s scope:

     o None of the metro feeder routes were placed in operation. The revised target of 15 percent was not
         achieved, and
     o None of MDMQ bus fleet were placed under unified fare collection system. The revised target of 25
         percent was not achieved.

Outcomes

The above listed outputs lead to the following outcomes:

      The targets were not revised for travel time reduction, adequate passenger capacity occupancy, share
       of metro users satisfied with overall metro service, share of female users satisfied with overall metro
       service. Please refer to the discussion under the Original Objective which reports that the
       targets for those indicators were either achieved or exceeded.
      Please also refer to the discussions under the Original Objective on the two plausible
       achievements related to improved connectivity and air quality, which did not have indicators in
       the RF.

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)




      152,610 passengers transported per day in PLMQ, which is 52 percent of the revised target of
         295,999. The revised target was not achieved.
        US$58.50 reduction in operating costs of Quito’s vehicle fleet. The revised target of US$ 59.40 was
         almost achieved.
        64,056 metric ton reduction of GHG emissions per year from transport in DMQ. This indicator
         measured the achievement of emission reduction of pollutants, in addition to reduction of GHG
         emissions. The revised target of 58,170 metric tons per year was exceeded.
        In addition to the high share of satisfied users and female ones with metro security and safety
         reported under the Original Objective, which did not have separate targets in the RF, the ICR
         referred to 6 cases of sexual harassment out of over 20 million trips on the PLMQ during its first 5
         months of operation. , only (ICR, p. 18, para 44). According to the monthly beneficiary survey results
         of August 2024, users rate sexual reporting mechanisms 9 out of 10 in July 2024 and 9.5 out of 10 in
         August of the same year. No separate targets for security and safety were set up.
        50.8 percent of jobs accessible in 60 minutes of travel time. The target of 50.8 percent for this new
         indicator was achieved.

No data was collected to report on the percentage of low-income users satisfied with overall Metro services,
its security and comfort at the time of the ICR preparation. The Bank team informed the IEG that after the
Municipality of Quito adjusted the sensitive language of the income-related question, this question was only
introduced during the 2024 September beneficiary survey. The data was not yet matched against the answers
of low-income metro users, and the methodology is further being refined by the Municipality.

The ICR reported on the following additional achievements which were not included in the RF and did not
have end target values:

      The metro is providing fast and high-quality service to around 4 million trips per month. The average
       ridership was calculated for the first five month of the Metro operation. The Task Team also shared
       with the IEG the result of the August monthly survey which showed a growing trend in the monthly
       ridership – about 4.7 million trips in July and over 4.6 million in August.
      The highest daily ridership reached 183,204 in July and 199,899 in August 2024.
      The PLMQ has surpassed expectations in inducing modal shift away from private vehicles. From
       January through April 2024, 13.7 percent of riders of the PLMQ reported that they would otherwise
       have made the journey by private car (compared to 10 percent assumed ex-ante), 4.2 percent by taxi,
       2.5 percent by motorcycle, and 79.0 percent by BRT or local buses (ICR, p. 13, para 28 and Annex 4,
       p. 43, table 10). About the same modal shift trends were reported for July and August 2024: 12.1% of
       riders switched from private cars in July and 14.1 percent in August, 5.4 percent from taxi in July and
       4.1 percent in August, 79.3 percent from BRT or local buses in July and 77.7 percent in August.
      Over half of metro riders are female users – from 49 percent in December 2023 to 54 percent in April
       2024. The same August survey again confirmed that over half of the riders are female ones as the
       survey reported female riders representing 52.3 percent in July and 59 percent in August 2024.

The efficacy of the objective under the revised targets is rated as Substantial. At the output level, the
project exceeded, achieved or almost achieved most of the targets, except for the revised targets of the same
two indicators as discussed under the original objective. At the outcome level, the project either achieved or
exceeded the (unrevised) targets for overall Metro services, its security and comfort, and targets for reduced
travel time, improved connectivity, security and comfort of the current system and reduced emissions of
pollutants and greenhouse gases (as defined in the PAD, p. 4, para 14 and LA, Schedule 1, p. 6). The project

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 24
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



                              almost achieved the revised target for the reduction of operating costs (US$58.50 vs US$59.40) and achieved
                              the revised end target for daily ridership at 52 percent (152,610 vs 295,999 passengers transported per day),
                              which was backed-up by additional evidence showing a growing trend in the daily ridership since the
                              completion of the ICR. The mass transit project tends to require a few years of operation before reaching the
                              expected ridership/passenger volumes. No evidence was provided on the share of low-income users satisfied
                              with overall Metro services, as the relevant question is very sensitive for a local-income target group and is
                              being adjusted not to discourage this target group from using the metro line.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy under the original targets is rated as Modest due to significant underachievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall efficacy under the revised targets is rated as Substantial due to the project achieving or
                            exceeding almost all targets and is likely to achieve the daily ridership target as the latest evidence confirms a
                            growing trend since the ICR completion.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The efficiency of the project was evaluated based on an economic evaluation and a financial assessment of
   project implementation. The ex-post analysis used the same cost-benefit analysis (CBA) model used at project
   appraisal that was updated in 2018 (AF) and in 2020 (restructuring). Model parameters in the ICR were updated
   to the most recent available values.

   At the time of appraisal, a standard CBA was carried out for the project. The main benefits included time
   savings, reduction in vehicle operating costs (VOCs) and reduction in carbon dioxide emissions. Other benefits

                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 24
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



like transport-related local emissions, accidents, and noise reduction could not be measured with enough
certainty and thus were not considered. The main costs considered were investment costs, operation and
maintenance costs, and impacts of works during construction, for example, on traffic. The CBA results showed a
NPV of US$391 million at a 12 percent discount rate and the EIRR of almost 14.9 percent for the evaluation
period of 30-year period. A sensitivity analysis was carried out and considered the combined impact of lower
demand (26 percent decline) and higher costs (40 percent increase), and still produced a positive NPV.

At the time of AF, the project's economic analysis was updated to include the increase in civil works (the lowest
bid for Component 2 being 44.7 percent higher than estimated at appraisal) and under conservative
assumptions, the project's updated net present value (NPV) was US$4.315 billion, with an EIRR of 12.09
percent for a 35-year evaluation period (including five years of construction and 30 of operation). The sensitivity
analysis for the updated model calculated the switching values for demand decrease and cost overruns. The
sensitivity analysis showed that the project would still remain viable with a combined 150 percent cost increase
and a 20 percent demand decrease. The CBA methodology used at the AF time was aligned with the WB
Guidelines. The main changes included (a) the updated project cost to reflect the higher-than-estimated cost; (b)
the improved definition and justification of a new discount rate; (c) the improved estimate of a new social value
of time; and (d) the updated CO2 price.

The ex-post CBA showed that the project achieved an EIRR of 6.42 percent and an NPV (US$ 2016 millions) of
US$618 million at the discount rate of 4.8 percent.

                              Discount rate, %               EIRR, %                       NPV (US$2016 million)
At appraisal                  12                             14.9                          391
At AF                         4.65                           12.09                         4,315
At completion                 4.8                            6.42                          618.7

The ICR (para 41 and table 5) also compared per-km cost with other recent metro projects while admitting the
challenge of comparing different design parameters and construction periods. As a result of this comparison, the
ICR the Quito Metro Line One’s cost is one of the lowest with high-quality construction. The 22.9-km Quito Metro
Line One cost US$93.07 million per km, while the 12-km Sao Paulo Metro Line 5 cost which preceded the Quito
project by 3 years cost US$314.57 million per km. However, per-km costs cannot be really compared because of
different design parameters used in different metros in those countries.

Administrative Efficiency

The project experienced a substantial cost increase and substantial schedule delay (by 60 months) due to the
higher-than-estimated costs resulting in the AF and extended implementation schedule (AF PP, p. 36).. Despite
extensive value engineering/cost optimizations and renegotiation of the contract to reduce its scope, the final
contract price for Component 2 financed by the Bank was 30 percent higher than originally estimated. This
higher cost was anticipated at appraisal and the risk considered acceptable. The AF found that the primary
cause was an underestimation of indirect costs in the context of Ecuador compared to other countries in the
region given relatively high costs of doing business, different profit structures, and potentially higher political and
other risk perceptions on the part of bidders. The analysis at the time of the AF also showed that, despite the
differences in indirect costs, the price per km of the lowest-evaluated bid was within the lower range in the
market for recent metro projects and within the cost variance expected at appraisal.




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



The efficiency is rated as Modest due to (i) substantial cost increases resulting in the AF, (ii) significant (60-
months) delay in the project completion and (iii) lower ex-post EIRR than the EIRR which was recalculated at
the time of the AF.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       70.00
 Appraisal                                                  14.90
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       92.00
 ICR Estimate                                               6.42
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the current Bank strategy and Government strategy is rated as High; the efficacy
of the Original Objective is rated as Modest, and the Revised Objective is rated as Substantial; and efficiency is
rated as Modest. Considering these ratings and weighting by the share of disbursements before and after the
restructuring, the overall outcome is moderately satisfactory.

                                      PDO and targets before the 2018 PDO and targets after the 2018
                                      restructuring                       restructuring
Relevance of Objective                                             High
Efficacy                                         Modest                              Substantial
Efficiency                                                           Modest
                                                                                        4
                                                    3
Numeric value of outcome rating
                                      (Moderately Unsatisfactory)
                                                                          (Moderately Satisfactory)
Disbursements                                    200.15                              232.05
Share of disbursements                        46%                                   54%
Weighted value                                    1.38                                2.16
                                            1.38 + 2.16 = 3.54, rounds up to 4
Final overall outcome rating
                                              4 (Moderately Satisfactory)
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory




                                                                                                      Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The main risk of sustaining the achieved outcomes lies in the municipality’s
ability to implement the remaining integration of the surface transport systems with the metro and other
complementary investments in land use and transit-oriented development. The municipality has recently
approved the Urban Mobility Master Plan which outlines a phased approach for multimodal integration, but it
may take a longer time to initiate and eventually implement this Plan in several phases. If the WB proceeds
with financing the Quito Metro Line One extension project, the integration activities could be incorporated into
the project design either through direct investment or legal covenants to mitigate this risk.

Social and political risks. The restructuring of feeder bus routes and inclusion of regular buses into the
unified fare collection system cannot be implemented without the support of key stakeholders, i.e., local bus
operators. The bus operators have a strong political influence. Substantial efforts and resources would be
required from the Municipality to convince the operators in the potential economic benefits of these critical
reforms and gain their cooperation and agreement for their implementation.

Financial sustainability. Due to the lower than estimated daily ridership at present, the metro is unlikely to
recover its operations and maintenance expenses from the fares only. The Municipality of Quito is also highly
dependent on the central government’s budgetary support. While the municipal government may resort to
subsidies, this may not be sufficient in light of the plan for the Line One extension construction and other
integration activities yet to be implemented with the government financing.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The WB demonstrated its pro-active engagement and flexibility when invited to join a group of the project
  key stakeholders who were already in an advanced stage of the project preparation. The Bank prepared
  this complex project with multiple co-financiers in a record time (five months from the concept review
  meeting to the Board approval) and showed flexibility through the use of the IADB procurement
  guidelines. It also convinced the IADB to accept the WB’s approach to open international bidding for
  contracts instead of limiting the competition to only firms from member countries of the IADB. The WB
  recognized the client's weakness in lack of experience in implementing and operating a metro project and
  included a technical assistance component which was entirely financed by the IBRD loan. the WB
  recognized a risk of project cost underestimate.

  However, due to an extremely short preparation time of this complex project and joining multiple MDBs in
  an advanced preparation stage, the Bank had little time to reflect and remedy deficiencies in the project
  design, M&E arrangements, and to advise the client to include critical activities in the identification of an
  operation model . In addition, the implementation time was overly ambitious for such a complex mass
  transit project. The Bank also overestimated the client’s ability to fully and timely implement some
  complementary activities outside the project’s scope that were critical for the ridership increase. The
  Bank performance in ensuring quality at entry is rated as Moderately Satisfactory with moderate
  shortcomings.


                                                                                                    Page 16 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank demonstrated its proactive engagement during project implementation. It promptly prepared an
 AF to respond to the cost overruns, triggered new safeguards policies to properly address emerging risks
 and issues, adjusted the end targets of several indicators to reduce the risk of the PDO underachievement
 and scaled up the technical studies component (Component 5) to help the client define the operator
 business model and support the compliant implementation of the safeguards. In addition, the WB also
 provided significant technical support through mobilization of 9 trust fund grants to support the
 implementation of this project. These grant-funded activities directly influenced a number of critical outputs
 and outcomes in the project. One of these activities advised the client in its decision about an operator
 business model, facilitated the hiring of a Metro operator and carry out preparatory activities to launch the
 metro services. The WB also played an instrumental role in guiding the client on how to address
 safeguards issues in a proper and compliant manner, which helped minimize the scale of the issues and
 prevent them from recurring. For instance, after four fatalities involving the operation of trucks transporting
 the excavated soil, the WB helped the Municipality and the contractor identify the right measures to
 improve road and work zone safety and reduce accidents risks. Another trust fund activity executed by the
 Bank supporting this dialogue and conducted a road safety audit around the metro areas, which led to
 tangible improvements in street designs for vulnerable road users. The relocation of the last Task Team
 Leader (TTL) to Quito allowed the TTL to more efficiently and promptly respond to the project’s
 performance and implementation issues.

 The project had four restructurings, mainly for the reason of the closing date extension. Since the metro
 line was not yet launched during those restructurings, the Bank had no opportunity to evaluate the project's
 progress towards the achievement of the expected outcomes. During those restructurings the Bank failed
 to realistically predict the impact of complementary activities that were not implemented by the municipality
 on the Metro ridership, when the Metro would start operating. Despite of the Bank’s awareness about the
 client’s inability to implement the two pending integration activities, the Bank did not consider including any
 adequate measures to mitigate this risk during either of the four restructurings. The technical assistance
 activities to define an operator business model and advise in the selection of a metro operator were
 brought into the project scope under the WB’s guidance only during the AF in 2018 and were implemented
 only from 2020. Such a late execution of this critical activity led to multiple project extensions due to the
 significantly delayed launch of the metro services in the absence of an operator on the ground.

 The Bank performance in the quality of supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory with
 moderate shortcomings.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The TOC was not required at the time of project preparation. The RF was well defined and included 14
 indicators. Most of the intermediate indicators adequately captured the contribution of the project’s activities
 and outputs toward the achievement of the project’s outcomes. Most of the indicators were measurable and
 had realistic targets. Baseline values were determined for all outcome and intermediate indicators at
 appraisal. It was agreed that Quito Metro Company who was the main implementing entity would prepare
 semi-annual progress reports and the municipality would submit those reports to the WB.

 The shortcomings included (i) lack of an indicator to measure the air quality improvement which was
 included in the expanded definition of the PDO (ii) lack of indicators to monitor the progress of the
 technical assistance activities (Component 5) and their contribution to the outcomes, (iii) two intermediate
 indicators not linked to any of the project activities, and (iv) unrealistic end targets of the daily ridership
 outcome.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project regularly reported on the progress towards the achievement of intermediate indicators but not
  on the outcome-oriented indicators, until the launch of the metro operation. The AF/First Restructuring
  partially corrected some of the M&E design weaknesses, as it slightly reduced the end target of the
  outcome-oriented ridership indicator and introduced two new important outcome-oriented indicators.
  However, the end target of the ridership indicator was never revised and reduced during the last three
  restructurings despite lack of progress in the two complementary investment activities which were
  supposed to be executed by the Municipality outside this project’s scope. None of the restructurings
  introduced (i) an indicator to monitor the air quality, which was explicitly referred to in the expanded
  definition of the PDO, and (ii) indicators to monitor the progress of activities under Component 5, despite
  a scale up of Component 5 and its contribution to the PDO.



c. M&E Utilization
  The regularly monitored intermediate indicators allowed the project stakeholders to evaluate the
  progress of the associated components. As lack of progress was noted in the two intermediate indicators
  linked to the two complementary activities outside the project scope, the end targets for those indicators
  were downsized, but did not prompt the project stakeholders to either drop them and also reduced the
  end target of the ridership outcome indicator to which those intermediate indicators were supposed to
  contribute. The Quito Metro Company continues monitoring most of the outcome-oriented indicators
  through beneficiary surveys on a monthly basis after the completion of this project. Moreover, the Metro
  Company continues making improvements in the data collection and monitoring as it appreciates the
  value of these data for maintaining the high quality of its services and increasing the ridership. The
  project’s M&E design and arrangements are being further refined and improved as the Municipality and



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



  the WB are discussing the preparation of a follow-on project which will support the extension of Metro
  Line One.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category A. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12). The draft EIA was made available to the public on the WB website on January 10, 2013 and
   published on the website of the Quito Metropolitan Public Metro Company in 2012 as a part of project
   preparation with the other MDBs. As a result of a change in the original project design (a new location of 2.6
   km line section from the Quitumbe Station), an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was
   prepared for this new alignment, disclosed on the client’s website on March 24, 2017 and the WB’s website
   on November 21, 2017 (AF PP, p.40). The Resettlement Policy Framework was disclosed both in the
   country and on the WB’s website on June 17, 2013. During the interview, the Task Team informed the IEG
   that the Project did not have any physical resettlement, but only limited economic resettlement. According to
   the Task Team, the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was disclosed by the Borrower in May 2018 and the
   RAP Completion Report was disclosed by the Borrower in October 2023 and by the WB on December 15,
   2023. The AF/first restructuring triggered Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The Indigenous Peoples Policy
   Framework was disclosed on the WB’s site on May 10, 2018. According to the Task Team, this policy was
   triggered as a result of the presence of a vulnerable population — Comuna Pagulo —near the
   Casantopamba 3 landfill. The "Casantopamba Closure Plan" outlines all the mitigation measures
   implemented. As there was no impact on this community, no Indigenous Peoples Policy Plan was required.
   Neither the PAD nor the ICR discuss the dates of public disclosures for the project’s safeguards documents.

   Environmental and social risks remained high throughout the project implementation given the magnitude
   and complexity of this project. The ICR‘s conclusion about the safeguards implementation (p. 23, para 70) is
   that “the environmental and social risks and impacts caused by the project were duly managed and all
   environmental and social management plans and mitigation actions have been completed in line with Bank
   applicable safeguard policies, except for three outstanding actions that will be included in a post-closure
   action plan”. Those outstanding issues concern structural and non-structural damages to several houses in
   the Solanda neighborhood that are allegedly partially caused by the project construction activities and two
   pending payments of the compensations to the two project-affected people. As both cases are pending the
   court decision, the amounts have been deposited in the escrow.

   The ICR notes 9 work-related fatalities (para 49); four fatalities involved the operation of trucks transporting
   excavated soil to the landfill. Specific Environmental and Social Corrective Action Plans were developed
   and implemented to mitigate increased road safety risks from the movement of large trucks on city streets
   and landfills. The ICR does not report if those accidents were managed in line with the WB’s Environment
   and Social Incident Response Toolkit (ESIRT).




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



  The project was in compliance with the triggered safeguards policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project received waivers from the WB procurement guidelines which authorized the use of IDB
  procurement guidelines for the single contract in component 2. The PAD confirmed that the IDB
  procurement guidelines were very well synchronized with the WB’s ones and did not increase the level of
  overall risk. The technical assistance activities under Component 5 were implemented in compliance with
  the WB Procurement Guidelines for Selection and Employment of Consultants Services.

  Financial Management

  The Task Team informed IEG on September 24, 2024 that most of the external independent audit reports
  were submitted on time, except for one or two, and no qualified opinions were raised. The fiduciary risk
  rating was maintained at “high” throughout project implementation in order to maintain continued attention
  to financial management and compliance with fiduciary standards given a large amount of funds to be
  disbursed and complexity of co-financing arrangements.

  The fiduciary aspects were overall managed in compliance with the FM and procurement guidelines (with
  the necessary waivers obtained) and adequate attention was given to managing fiduciary risks.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Gender

  The Project paid significant attention to gender issues through addressing sexual harassment in public
  transport and in contributing to closing the employment gender gap in the transport sector. The project
  supported a number of technical studies to guide the Borrower on how to address gender related issues.

  Specifically, the project supported the implementation of the Zero Acoso Strategy targeting sexual
  harassment in public spaces. All metro cars were equipped with alert buttons which can be activated by
  victims or witnesses. When the button is pressed, the communication reaches the station agents and
  Metro Police, and at the next station, the control agent and police officer will enter the car to help the victim
  and deal with the harasser. The harassment is administratively sanctioned with a fine equivalent to one
  unified basic wage, which is around US$460, even if the victim decides not to file a formal complaint. In the
  first 5 months of the Metro operation with over 20 million trips, only 6 cases of sexual harassment were
  reported and the metro users rated security 9 out of 10 (ICR, p. 18, para 44). According to the August
  beneficiary survey conducted by the Municipality, the beneficiaries continue rating security 9.5 out of 10,
  while women continue representing more than half of the metro riders. This is a major achievement of this
  project, given that sexual harassment remains a major risk for women on buses.



                                                                                                     Page 20 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



   In terms of closing the employment gender gap, the project included in the Metro operator’s contract the
   requirement to create an organizational and employment plan that would promote equal opportunities for
   women. The operator’s plan included gender-sensitive actions starting from recruitment through career
   development to encourage a more diverse workforce, strategic partnerships with national universities, and
   adoption of response protocols and ethics codes of conduct to prevent and address violation of women’s
   rights within the organization. As a result, the operator has achieved positive results: 41.01 percent of
   employees are women (ICR, Annex 1), which exceeded the project’s target of 20 percent, and 50 percent
   of management positions are taken by women.



d. Other
   Diversity in the employment in the public transportation

   Due to the operator’s commitment to diversity, recruitment efforts were expanded to indigenous people and
   indigenous women. The ICR (p. 18, footnote 23) reported that as of April 2024, about 8 percent (9 out of
   113) of technical positions in the organization were held by indigenous employees and all but one were
   indigenous women.

   Poverty reduction and shared prosperity

   The ICR (para 48) reported that the PLMQ increased the accessibility of all residents between 8–11
   percent. However, this improvement occurred in shorter trips (up to 40 minutes) for higher-income
   populations living near the city center and in the vicinity of metro stations with greater baseline accessibility
   and in longer trips (between 60 and 80 minutes) for the lower-income population on the periphery of the city
   with lower baseline accessibility. The population living in peripheral areas, particularly in the south, saw
   increases of 9 percent on longer trips of 50 minutes or more, allowing them to access more than 3,000
   additional opportunities with the completion of the PLMQ than they could before the project in the same
   amount of travel time.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



If a project has multiple co-financiers, the availability of a well-defined framework with their
clear responsibilities and commitments from the start may contribute to effective
coordination between co-financiers and reduce the risk of implementation delays due to
possible disagreements on key issues. This Quito Metro project had several financiers who,
together with the Quito Municipality and GoE, co-signed the Principles of Coordination (PoC) at the
launch of this project, while each of these financiers signed separate financing agreements with the
Municipality. The PoC laid out a clear framework for the fiduciary and safeguards implementation
arrangements, as well as integrity and conflict resolution mechanisms. It was the first project where
the WB agreed to use another MDB’s procurement guidelines (IDB’s in this case), while the other
MDB agreed to waive its procurement provision that only firms from member countries could
participate in the bidding process and accepting the WB’s approach to an open international bidding.
Close and effective coordination between the financiers was critical in the implementation of this
mega project.

If a TA to identify a business operator model and select a metro operator is not defined
upfront to help the Borrower which has never implemented a similar metro project, the
project risks delaying the launch of the metro services and achievement of the expected
outcomes. Because such a TA was included only during the first restructuring in 2018 and
implemented later during 2020-2022, the metro services could not be launched due to the absence
of a metro operator. Hence, the project required three more extensions of the closing date after the
first restructuring, until the metro started its operation and the expected benefits could be realized.

Well-prepared safeguards assessments may minimize implementation delay risks. Because
not only feasibility studies and detailed designs, but also safeguards assessments underwent
independent reviews, that allowed carefully selecting the alignment that minimized social impacts
and avoided physical resettlements. As no large-scale resettlements were needed, the construction
works started on time and, in general, went through any

If the project’s expected outcome is dependent on complimentary investment activities to be
financed/implemented outside the project scope, there is a high risk of that outcome may not
be achieved due to lack of the project’s direct control of those activities. Restructuring of
metro feeder routes and the integration of entire bus fleet operating under the unified fare collection
system are important to increase metro ridership. However, these activities were supposed to be
executed by the Municipality outside this project’s scope and eventually did not happen, which
negatively affected the achievement of several dependent outputs and increase in the daily ridership
outcome. The end targets of relevant outcome and interim indicators shall be set realistic and not
dependent on the delivery of activities outside the project’s scope.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  This project is a good candidate for thematic or cluster evaluation on a modal shift. This project was designed
  to and supported a modal shift from private vehicles and buses to the metro. The results for modal shift

                                                                                                     Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



  reported in the first five months of the metro operation were again confirmed 8-9 months later after the Metro
  service launch. The Quito Municipality conducts monthly surveys to assess trends in ridership, modal shifts
  and levels of satisfaction among metro users in different aspects.

  This project is also recommended for evaluation of gender-related impacts: employment and travel safety. The
  project made impressive achievements in addressing gender issues within less than a year since the launch of
  the Metro operation. Female employees represent 40 percent of the Metro operator’s workforce, with 50
  percent of management positions taken by women. Moreover, the evaluation can expand to assess the
  employment impact on indigenous people, as 8 percent of technical positions were taken by indigenous people
  in the Metro operator company and all, but one, of these positions were taken by indigenous women.

  Safety for female riders on public transportation is a serious issue in the Latin American countries. This project
  made a commitment through its outcome indicators to ensure safety and security for all metro riders, including
  women. The results reported in the ICR confirmed a high level of satisfaction with safety and security among
  women – 97.50 percent. With alert buttons installed in every train, only six sexual harassment cases were
  reported out of over 20 million trips in the first 5 months of the Metro operation. The August 2024 survey
  reported that users who were surveyed online and in person continued rating metro safety and security at 9.5
  on the scale from 1-10, which is an increase by half point from the first five months. As the share of female
  riders has increased from 49 to 59 percent as reported in the August 2024 survey, along with the increase in
  the overall ridership, that confirms that women feel safe to use the metro.

  Learning from this transport operation on how to increase female employment in the male-dominated transport
  sector and improve safety and security for female riders on the public transportation is important for future
  operations in the public space not only in this country but also for other countries experiencing similar gender
  issues. Evaluations of modal shift and gender related experiences in this project would benefit the Transport
  GP’s urban mobility pipeline which keeps growing.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well and clearly written, follows the majority of the guidelines, provides a detailed overview of
the project, focuses on results and uses a lot of evidence from many credible sources, appropriately
referenced, to analyze the efficacy and efficiency of the project. The project’s TOC is well reconstructed and is
helpful to understand how the ratings have been reached. The ICR is candid in the assessment of factors
during the project preparation and implementation, development risks, M&E shortcomings, and Bank
performance. The ICR provides specific and useful recommendations for future projects based on the project’s
experience.

The ICR has some minor shortcomings. The safeguards section lacks conclusion if the project was in
compliance with all triggered policies. It would have been also useful to include in the financial management
discussion regarding the timeliness of external audits and if there were any qualified opinions.

The overall quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating

                                                                                                      Page 23 of 24
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
EC Quito Metro Line One (P144489)



Substantial




                                                                  Page 24 of 24
