     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



                                                                                      Report Number: ICRR0024294

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                 Operation Name
 P177985                                      Catalyzing Private Financing in India

 Country                                      Practice Area (Lead)
 India                                        Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                    Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-94240,IDA-71830                         30-Jun-2023                                        750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jun-2022                                  30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                             750,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              750,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          750,000,000.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Antonio M. Ollero            Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

According to the Program Document (page i), the program development objective of the India Catalyzing
Private Investment for Sustainable Recovery and Growth Development Policy Operation was "to catalyze
sustainable private sector financing for India's economy, with the focus on infrastructure and MSMEs."



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



Considering the separate emphasis on financing for climate change mitigation and adaptation, this ICR
Review evaluates this operation using the following three objectives:

1. To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.
2. To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.
3. To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program had three policy areas.

Catalyzing Long Term Private Sector Finance supported reforms to reduce dependence on public
financing and to leverage private financing, including from long-term institutional investors and the capital
markets, for infrastructure projects and for housing, including for the low-income and informal market
segments, by: (a) creating a new National Bank for Infrastructure and Development (NaBFID) to mobilize
private long-term finance for infrastructure; (b) establishing the National Monetization Pipeline to recycle
brownfield into greenfield infrastructure assets; (c) allowing the Employees Provident Fund Organization to
invest in alternative investment funds and infrastructure investment trusts; (d) revising regulations for the
Securitization of Standard Assets to better link mortgage lenders to the capital markets; and (e) establishing
the Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS) Pass-Through Certificate (PTC) securitization platform.

Developing the Markets for Green Finance supported reforms to develop green finance markets and
instruments for resilient growth by: (a) issuing the country's first sovereign green bond; (b) requiring the top
1,000 listed companies to disclose their environmental, social, and governance (ESG) parameters; (c)
enhancing disclosure by ESG mutual funds; and (d) supporting the creation of a national carbon trading
market.

Improving Access to Credit for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises and for Women Entrepreneurs
supported reforms to ensure the flow of credit to MSMEs and women entrepreneurs adversely affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic and the ensuing economic downturn by: (a) raising the credit guarantee cover limit and
introducing guarantee cover for bank and non-bank co-lending under the Credit Guarantee Trust Fund for
Micro and Small Enterprises (CGTMSE); (b) providing sectors most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
continued access to the Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS); and (c) implementing the
Credit Guarantee Scheme for Microfinance Institutions (CGSMFI).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Program Cost and Financing. The program was estimated to cost US$750 million at appraisal and was
financed by a loan of US$667 million from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and
a non-concessional credit of US$83 million from the International Development Association. Both the loan and
the credit were fully disbursed by closing.

Dates. The program was approved on June 29, 2022, became effective on December 1, 2022, and closed as
scheduled on June 30, 2023.


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)




3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Binding Constraints to Development. The structural and policy reforms supported by this operation aimed to
 address binding constraints to development posed by a recent deceleration in credit growth in the economy,
 creating financing gaps in three sectors critical to economic progress -- infrastructure finance, green finance,
 and MSME finance. Although extensive financial sector reforms, introduced since three decades ago,
 had stabilized the financial system -- interest rates had been liberalized, capital markets deregulated,
 restrictions on capital inflows eased, private entry into banking, mutual funds, insurance, and pension markets
 encouraged, and supervisory systems strengthened -- vulnerabilities built up in recent years
 were constraining the mobilization of private investment needed to power growth. Rooted in balance sheet
 weaknesses -- stressed assets at banks and over-leverage companies (World Bank, 2018, India Systematic
 Country Diagnostic - Realizing the Promise of Prosperity) -- the financial sector vulnerabilities were reflected in
 serious financing gaps: (a) with the share of private sector finance in infrastructure dropping from 37 percent in
 2008 to 25 percent in 2019, the annual infrastructure finance gap (the difference between the amount of
 infrastructure investment needed and the amount of financing available) topped 4 percent of GDP; (b)
 meanwhile, half of MSMEs, the bedrock of the economy (accounting for 30 percent of GDP), lacked access to
 formal credit, with the MSME finance gap estimated at Indian rupee (INR) 18-25 trillion (9.5 - 13.2 percent of
 GDP) in 2018 (IFC, 2018, Financing India's MSMEs - Estimation of Debt Requirement of MSMEs in India); (c)
 additionally, the country was highly vulnerable to climate change (ranked the seventh most impacted nation
 globally (Germanwatch e.V., 2021, Global Climate Risk Index, 2021 - Who Suffers Most from Extreme
 Weather Events?), implying that finance should begin to account for the impacts of climate change on priorities
 in infrastructure and MSMEs.

 Country Development Priorities. The objectives of the reform program were supportive of the development
 priorities of the Government of India at program appraisal and closing. The government envisioned an average
 annual growth rate of 8 percent over the long-term, with GDP topping US$7.5 trillion and the poverty rate
 shrinking to 5 percent by 2031. The near-term plan, laid out in a three-year action agenda for 2017-2019, and
 the medium-term plan, New India @2022, articulated an implementation framework focused on strengthening
 the enablers of growth, including strengthening the financial sector, apart from rationalizing public spending
 and improving fiscal management.

 World Bank Group Strategy. The objectives of the reform program were supportive of the World Bank Group
 country strategy in India at program closing, which was organized around three focus areas -- Efficient
 Resource Growth, Enhancing Competitiveness and Enabling Job Creation, and Investing in Human Capital
 (World Bank, 2018, Country Partnership Framework [CPF] for India for the Period FY18-FY22). The program
 objectives were consistent with CPF Objective 2.2 - "Increase resilience of the financial sector and financial
 inclusion" and CPF Objective 1.5 - "Improve disaster risk management and resilience to climate change." To
 implement the country strategy, the World Bank Group committed to systematically apply the "Maximizing
 Finance for Development" approach (World Bank, 2017, Maximizing Finance for Development: Leveraging the
 Private Sector for Growth and Sustainable Development) to crowd in and leverage private sector solutions,
 finance, and expertise to meet the country's development goals.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

This operation supported nine prior actions (PAs) directed at the three objectives.

 Table 1. Prior Actions
 Objective 1 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.
 PA1 - The Borrower has established the National Bank for Financing Infrastructure and Development
 (NaBFID), as a development financial institution with the mandate of offering credit enhancement
 products and mobilizing long term private finance for the infrastructure sector, pursuant to which (i) the
 Government of India has allocated capital; and (ii) NaBFID shall be regulated and supervised by the
 Borrower’s central bank, RBI.
 PA2 - The Borrower (i) through NITI Aayog has launched the National Monetization Pipeline (NMP) to
 create greenfield infrastructure assets by recycling brownfield core assets of the Borrower; (ii) through
 RBI, has permitted FPIs to invest in debt securities issued by InvITs; and (iii) through the Ministry of
 Labour and Employment, has approved investments of up to 5 percent of EPFO’s annual deposits in
 AIFs, including InvITs.
 PA3 - The Borrower has taken steps to link housing finance companies to capital markets through
 securitization: (i) through RBI, by the issuance of the revised regulatory framework for Securitization of
 Standard Assets; and (ii) through NHB, by approving the setting up of a multi-originator Residential
 Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS) Pass-Through Certificate (PTC) securitization platform.
 Objective 2 - To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.
 PA4 - The Borrower has taken steps for the launch of the country’s first sovereign green bonds, as
 evidenced by: (i) the policy decision of the Union Government to issue sovereign green bonds in FY
 2022-23 as part of the overall government borrowing; and (ii) the RBI’s inclusion in the borrowing
 calendar for H1 FY2022-23 of their commitment to the issuance upon completion of the framework for
 issuance.
 PA5 - The Borrower, to ensure transparent and standardized disclosures on the ESG parameters,
 through its securities regulator, SEBI, (i) has revised the ESG reporting guidelines for the top 1,000 listed
 companies by market capitalization; and (ii) has, through AMFI, issued guidelines on disclosure norms for
 investments made by ESG mutual funds.
 PA6 - The Borrower, through its Ministry of Power, has: (i) designated BEE as the nodal agency to set up
 a voluntary national carbon market and trading scheme to promote low-carbon alternatives; and (ii)
 through BEE, has prepared and disclosed a blueprint document laying out the rules and modalities for the
 functioning of a national carbon market overseen by a high-level inter-ministerial committee.
 Objective 3 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.
 PA7 - The Borrower, through CGTMSE, has strengthened the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Banks
 (CGS-I) and Credit Guarantee Scheme for NBFCs (CGS-II) for serving the needs of MSE sector during
 recovery stage through: (i) expanding the limit for guarantee cover per borrower; and (ii) introducing
 guarantee cover for co-lending by banks and NBFCs.
 PA8 - The Borrower, through NCGTC, has revised the guidelines for the operations of the Emergency
 Credit Line Guarantee Scheme (ECLGS) to ensure MSMEs in sectors worst affected by COVID-19 have
 continued access to the Guaranteed Emergency Credit Line.
 PA9 - The Borrower, through NCGTC, has implemented the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro-Finance
 Institutions (CGSMFI) in support of small borrowers and women entrepreneurs impacted by COVID-19.

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)




Objective 1 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.

      Infrastructure Finance. India had under-invested on infrastructure, at 4-5 percent of GDP, well below
       the 7-8 percent of GDP required to meet the country's development goals (Ministry of Finance,
       Economic Survey 2018-2019). The infrastructure financing gap reflected: (a) the results of an over-
       reliance on bank financing for infrastructure investment, as asset-liability mismatches eventually
       constrained the ability of commercial banks to offer long-term finance for infrastructure projects; (b)
       elevated risk-aversion and impaired confidence among private investors, owing to the accumulation of
       non-performing infrastructure assets and infrastructure loan defaults over the past decade; and (c) a
       lack of credit enhancement products in the domestic capital market. Overall, the country ranked low
       globally -- 70th of 141 countries -- on infrastructure quality (World Economic Forum, Global
       Competitiveness Index, 2021).
      PA1 would help address the persistent financing gap in infrastructure by shifting the principal source of
       funding for infrastructure projects from the public (the state budget and public sector banks) to the
       private sector (institutional investors): (a) the Government established a new development finance
       institution, NaBFID, in April 2021 to mobilize long-term private finance for infrastructure and to offer
       credit enhancement products (the National Bank for Infrastructure and Development Act of 2021); (b)
       the Government allocated INR 200 billion in capital for the NaBFID in February 2022; and (c) the central
       bank, the Reserve Bank of India, issued a decision in March 2022 to regulate and supervise the
       NaBFID. Although initially organized as a state-owned enterprise, the NaBFID was envisioned to have a
       diversified ownership eventually, with the Government reducing its ownership in the entity to a minority
       26 percent. The NaBFID was modeled after similar country infrastructure development banks (in
       Malaysia and Colombia, among others, according to the Program Document) and would provide end-to-
       end support -- structuring, financing, and credit enhancement -- to make projects commercially viable.
       Three design features would help the NaBFID fulfill its mandate -- the recruitment of experienced and
       reputable experts at competitive salaries, the development of innovative financing instruments for the
       infrastructure capital market (interest rate, credit, and currency derivatives), and a performance review
       every five years by an independent agency. Based on the plans offered, including for the NaBFID's
       organizational structure, product mix, and governance standards -- all of which were deemed consistent
       with international best practice -- the relevance of PA1 is rated satisfactory.
      PA2 launched three measures to mobilize private, foreign, and institutional financing for
       the infrastructure sector. First, on the supply side, the country's top policy think tank, the NITI Aayog
       (the National Institution for Transforming India), launched the National Monetization Pipeline in August
       2021 to create greenfield infrastructure assets by recycling the brownfield core assets of the
       Government. Many governments had used asset monetization -- the transfer of revenue rights over
       infrastructure assets (roads, railway stations, train tracks and operations, power transmission lines,
       hydroelectric and solar power assets, and telecom assets) by a government to private parties for a
       specified period of time in return for upfront money, a revenue share, and a commitment to invest in the
       assets -- to ease public fiscal constraints and to free up government balance sheets for new greenfield
       infrastructure. Second, on the demand side, in a decision on November 2021, the Reserve Bank of India
       permitted foreign portfolio investors to invest in debt securities issued by infrastructure investment trusts
       (investment vehicles that allowed investors to invest directly in infrastructure projects). And third, also on
       the demand side, the Ministry of Labor and Employment authorized the Employees' Provident Fund
       Organization in November 2021 to invest up to five percent of its annual incremental deposits in
       alternative investment funds and in infrastructure investment trusts. The three measures were linked to
       effectively mobilizing sizable private investment in infrastructure: (a) the central government had

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



       infrastructure assets worth INR 6 trillion (US$80 billion equivalent) which could be monetized over four-
       years (INR 960 billion had actually been monetized in FY2021-2022), with the funds raised
       subsequently used to finance 5.4 percent of the total infrastructure investment planned under the
       National Infrastructure Pipeline; (b) the entry of foreign portfolio investors (which had already invested
       INR 500 billion (US$7.1 billion equivalent) in 2021 alone) into the infrastructure investment trust debt
       market could open up a large source of fresh funding not only for infrastructure investment trusts but
       also for real estate investment trusts under the Reserve Bank of India's Voluntary Retention Route (the
       program that allows foreign portfolio investors to invest in debt securities without being subject to certain
       regulatory restrictions); and (c) around INR 1.8 trillion (US$24 billion equivalent) in incremental deposits
       at the Employees' Provident Fund Organization would be available annually for investment in
       infrastructure investment trusts. Considering the foregoing three measures, the relevance of PA2 is
       rated satisfactory.
      Housing Finance. Although it had grown vigorously in the past decade, driven by the Housing for All
       program, India's housing finance market lagged that of its peers, measured by mortgage loans-to-GDP:
       (a) housing finance companies dominated housing finance, accounting for 40 percent of market assets,
       and played a critical role in affordable housing, including to the informal sector; (b) but housing finance
       companies faced asset-liability mismatches and lacked access to sustainable long-term funding; (c)
       mortgage securitization would be a suitable solution to the long-term funding problem; (d) but the
       majority of securitization transactions (around 63 percent of the total) was implemented through the
       direct assignment route (the bilateral sale of loan portfolios) rather than through the issuance of pass-
       through certificates (the international best practice) -- bilateral sales could only cater to a limited pool of
       investors and suffered from inefficiencies in price discovery.
      PA3 supported two measures to strengthen the access by housing finance companies and other
       mortgage lenders to the long-term capital markets by improving the mortgage securitization framework.
       The Reserve Bank of India issued guidelines in September 2021 streamlining the issuance of pass-
       through certificates (PTC) (fixed-income securities representing an undivided interest in a pool of
       assets), removing the bar on the securitization of purchased loans (loan from a seller to a buyer),
       reducing risk retention requirements (regulations requiring entities to retain a financial interest in the
       assets they securitize), and introducing Simple, Transparent, and Comparable transactions
       (securitization transactions that met certain criteria to help investors understand and evaluate the risks
       involved) to provide additional capital relief to lenders. And the National Housing Bank approved the
       establishment of the multi-originator RMBS PTC securitization platform (the system that facilitates
       the pooling of debt obligations and transforms them into securities to be sold to investors) in November
       2021 to enable standard securitization transactions by banks, housing finance companies, and
       investors, and provide long-term funding to mortgage lenders. The link between these measures and the
       objective to catalyze sustainable private sector financing for housing was fairly evident, a priori: (a) an
       efficient pass-through securitization market with a wide investor base would help housing finance
       companies and other mortgage lenders to issue longer-term instruments, institutional investors
       (insurance companies and pension funds) to engage in housing finance, and the market to scale up the
       issuance of innovative products for affordable housing; (b) the securitization platform would allow small-
       and medium-sized lenders, who were unable to participate in securitization transactions on a stand-
       alone basis, to pool their loan portfolios through the intermediary and issue high-rated pass-through
       certificates. The relevance of PA3 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.

      Climate Finance. India would require an investment of 1.5 percent of GDP annually on energy transition
       to achieve its Intended Policy Scenario (how a policy is meant to function under ideal conditions and the

                                                                                                       Page 6 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



  positive effects it aims to achieve) laid out at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in 2021,
  the 26th Conference of the Parties or COP26, according to Bank estimates. This reform operation
  envisioned the country achieving this target by deepening the financial sector, creating new financial
  instruments to mobilize funding for climate change adaptation and mitigation, and developing the
  financial infrastructure and the regulatory framework for climate finance.
 PA4 supported the issuance by the Government of the country's first sovereign green bond to raise
  funds for climate mitigation and adaptation targets set under the country's Nationally Determined
  Contribution (NDC) to the Paris Agreement (the international treaty to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
  and adapt to the effects of climate change, adopted by 196 parties at the United Nations Climate
  Change Conference in 2015). Indian firms had sold corporate green bonds since 2015 (some US$6.1
  billion in 2021 alone) but the government had yet to issue its first sovereign green bond at the time of
  program appraisal in 2021. The Ministry of Finance announced the issuance of the country's first
  sovereign green bond in February 2022, part of the overall government borrowing program for FY2022-
  23, while the Reserve Bank of India included the issuance in the borrowing calendar for the first
  semester of the same year. The bond proceeds would fund public sector projects that helped reduce
  carbon intensity -- it was expected that the bond sale would signal the country's commitment to a low
  carbon economy, reduce the cost of capital for green infrastructure projects, and attract additional
  private capital for sustainable development. The relevance of PA4 is rated satisfactory.
 PA5 aimed to promote the transparent disclosure by listed companies of their ESG parameters as well
  as the sustainability related opportunities and risks that they faced. The securities regulator, the
  Securities and Exchange Board of India, revised the disclosure framework, converting the voluntary
  Business Responsibility and Sustainability Reporting system of 2021 into a mandate in 2023 and
  requiring disclosures of energy consumption, water withdrawal, air emissions, waste management, and
  sustainable sourcing by the country's top 1,000 listed companies. The new framework enhanced the old
  one in several aspects by: (a) requiring the disclosure of quantitative data, in addition to qualitative
  information; (b) broadening the list of indicators covered; and (c) including elements from international
  standards such as from the Task Force on Climate Related Financial Disclosures (pertaining to climate-
  related corporate financial risks). Meanwhile, the Association of Mutual Funds in India issued new
  guidelines in February 2022 prescribing disclosure norms for ESG investments -- ESG-themed mutual
  funds would need to disclose their objectives, document their investment strategy and policy, and report
  on their investments. The two measures would bolster the objective to catalyze sustainable private
  sector financing for green investing: (a) ESG reporting by corporates would direct financing toward
  environmentally and socially sound companies, while (b) ESG reporting by mutual funds would
  encourage asset managers to consider sustainability-related opportunities and risks in their investment
  decisions. The relevance of PA5 is rated satisfactory.
 PA6 aimed to further develop the carbon market in India (the trading system where companies and
  individuals buy and sell "carbon credits"), incentivizing climate change mitigation efforts. India had two
  operating market-based trading schemes -- the Perform, Achieve, and Trade scheme at the Bureau of
  Energy Efficiency, which promoted energy efficiency, and the Renewable Energy Certificate
  mechanism, which supported clean energy. The Ministry of Power selected the Bureau of Energy
  Efficiency in March 2021 to develop a full-scale domestic carbon market by building on the Perform,
  Achieve, and Trade scheme. Subsequently, the Bureau of Energy Efficiency laid out the rules -- the
  Roadmap of Sustainable and Holistic Approach to National Energy Efficiency -- in October 2021 for the
  functioning of the national carbon market, both on a compliance and a voluntary basis. The policy
  decision by the Ministry of Power and the preliminary work by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency were
  essential actions to establish a national carbon market in India -- the trading platform was originally
  expected to be established by June 2024, according to the Program Document, after which a cap-and-
  trade mechanism (a market-based system where the Government sets a limit (cap) on the total amount

                                                                                             Page 7 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



         of pollution allowed, and companies are issued permits (allowances) which they can buy and sell) will be
         introduced in phases. The relevance of PA6 is rated satisfactory.

 Objective 3 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.

       MSME Finance. MSMEs in India suffered disproportionately from the effects of the COVID-19
        pandemic, with credit to MSMEs declining as risk aversion among lenders rose and economic activity
        declined. The Government responded to the credit crunch with an overhaul of the credit guarantee
        system for MSMEs and with emergency credit guarantee schemes, both of which required only limited
        upfront fiscal spending, and which crowded in private funding from private banks and non-banking
        financial companies. The ensuing challenge was to ensure the flow of credit to MSMEs in the post-crisis
        recovery.
       PA7 required the CGTMSE -- which guaranteed 50-85 percent of bank and non-bank loans to MSMEs
        for up to INR 20 million and which facilitated collateral-free lending -- to expand the limit for guarantee
        cover per borrower and to introduce a guarantee cover for co-lending by banks and non-banks.
        According to the Government, the policy innovation would bolster lending to MSMEs by an additional
        INR 2 trillion over the next five years. Over the long-term, the CGTMSE would also complete the
        digitalization of its claims process and introduce green guarantees, the latter supported in part by
        the Raising and Accelerating Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Performance Program-for-Results
        Project for India (2021-26). The relevance of PA7 is rated satisfactory.
       Under PA8, the National Credit Guarantee Trust Company revised, in March 2022, the guidelines for the
        ECGLS -- which the Government launched in May 2020 to provide fully guaranteed additional credit to
        MSMEs -- to ensure that sectors most affected by COVID-19 would have continued access to the
        emergency scheme. The emergency scheme -- which was slated to expire no later than March 2023 --
        had forestalled 14 percent of MSME loans from turning into non-performing assets and averted job
        losses for 14 million workers, according to an evaluation report. The revised guidelines would allow
        existing beneficiaries to mobilize additional financing (borrowers with outstanding loans in end-February
        2020 were previously excluded from further participating in the program), new borrowers to access the
        scheme, and more types of credit facilities to be covered by the emergency measure. The relevance of
        PA8 is rated satisfactory.
       With PA9, the Government created the Credit Guarantee Scheme for Micro Finance Institutions in July
        2021 to provide guarantees to microfinance institutions, which, unlike banks, lacked direct access to the
        liquidity facilities of the Reserve Bank of India. Microfinance institutions were a vital source of financing
        for small enterprises, especially women owned or led enterprises. The Credit Guarantee Scheme for
        Micro Finance Institutions would provide guarantee coverage to lenders for the funding they provided to
        microfinance institutions which, in turn, on-lent to small borrowers. The scheme would provide a 75
        percent guarantee to bank lending to microfinance institutions, with 50 percent of the funds allocated to
        lower-rated microfinance institutions and 80 percent for new lending to small borrowers. The relevance
        of PA9 is rated satisfactory.



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)




Rationale

The program defined nine results indicators (RIs) to capture the impact of the PAs and to measure
progress toward the program objectives.

 Table 2. Results Indicators
 Results        Associated Relevance Baseline           Target        Actual Value Actual         Achievement
 Indicator      Prior Action Rating                                                 Change in     Rating
                                                                                    Results
                                                                                    Indicator
                                                                                    Relative to
                                                                                    Targeted
                                                                                    Change, in
                                                                                    Percent
 Objective 1 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.
 RI1 - Total    PA1          Satisfactory 0              1,000        353.2         35.3          Modest
 volume of                                (June 2022) (June 2024) (June 2024)
 loans
 disbursed by
 NaBFID for
 the
 infrastructure
 sector, in INR
 billion
 RI2 - Total    PA2          Moderately 960              1500         1320          66.7          Substantial
 funds raised                Satisfactory (FY2021-22) (FY2022-23) (FY2022-23)
 through
 monetization
 of brownfield
 assets
 included under
 the National
 Monetization
 Pipeline, in
 INR billion
 RI3 - Volume PA3            Satisfactory 73.8           100          117.7         167.6         High
 of RMBS PTC                              (FY2021-22) (FY2022-23) (FY2022-23)
 securitization
 transactions,
 in INR billion
 Objective 2 - To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.
 RI4 - Volume PA4            Satisfactory 0              230          160           69.6          Substantial
 of sovereign                             (March         (June 2023) (June 2023)
 green bond                               2022)
 issuances, in
 INR billion

                                                                                                         Page 9 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



RI5 - Share of PA5          Moderately 0                100         100         100            Substantial
the top 1,000               Satisfactory (March         (June 2024) (June 2024)
listed                                   2022)
companies
complying with
enhanced
ESG
disclosure
requirements,
in percent
RI6 - Trading PA6           Satisfactory No             Yes         Yes         100            High
platform                                 (March         (June 2024) (June 2024)
established to                           2022)
facilitate the
national
carbon
market, yes/no
Objective 3 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.
RI7 - Volume PA7            Satisfactory 368.9          500         1047        517.2          High
of incremental                           (FY2020-21) (FY2022-23) (FY2022-23)
guarantee
cover under
the CGTMSE,
in INR billion
RI8 - Volume PA8            Satisfactory 51.6           75          209.4       674.4          High
of guarantees                            (FY2020-21) (FY2022-23) (FY2022-23)
under the
CGTMSE
approved
toward the
loan accounts
of women
entrepreneurs,
in INR billion
RI9 - Total    PA9          Satisfactory 0              90          100         111.1          High
lending under                            (July 2021) (July 2022) (July 2022)
CGSMFI
made primarily
to women
borrowers, in
INR billion


Objective 1 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.

      RI1 - The total volume of loans disbursed by NaBFID was selected to measure the impact of
       creating the NaBFID to mobilize private long-term finance for infrastructure projects. An increase in

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



       disbursements would reflect the provision of private long-term finance for infrastructure. RI1 was
       adequate for this purpose, reflecting the actual investment made in infrastructure. The relevance of
       RI1 is rated satisfactory.
      RI2 - The total funds raised through the monetization of brownfield assets under the National
       Monetization Pipeline was adequate to measure the impact of recycling brownfield into greenfield
       assets (PA2). The funds raised though this monetization program would be available to fund
       investment under the National Infrastructure Pipeline, indicating success in the mobilization of
       private finance for infrastructure. But PA2 consisted of two other reform measures -- the
       authorization by the Reserve Bank of India for foreign portfolio investors to invest in debt issued by
       infrastructure investment trusts and the investment by Employees Provident Fund Organization in
       alternative investment funds and infrastructure investment trusts -- for which RI2 is not the results
       indicator. The relevance of RI2 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI3 - The volume of RMBS PTC securitization transactions was adequate to measure the impact
       of improving the regulatory framework for securitization and establishing the securitization platform
       (PA3). An increase in securitization transactions would signify the mobilization of private long-term
       finance for housing, achieved through asset pooling, the creation of special purpose vehicles,
       "tranching" (division of the pooled assets into risk classes), credit enhancement, and the issuance
       and distribution of RMBS PTCs, giving mortgage lenders access to the capital market. It would
       have been more informative, however, if the program also reported on the number, and the profile,
       of new issuers and new investors in the RMBS PTC market -- information about which would have
       been available given the size of the PTC market but are not disclosed in the ICR. The information
       conveyed by additional indicators would reflect the breadth and the depth of growth in the
       securitization market. The relevance of RI3 is rated satisfactory.

Objective 2 - To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.

      RI4 - The volume of sovereign green bond issuances would measure the impact of the
       Government issuing the country's first sovereign green bond (PA4) and of additional sovereign
       green bond sales after the inaugural issue, if there were any. The relevance of RI4 is rated
       satisfactory.
      RI5 - The proportion of the top 1,000 listed companies that complied with enhanced ESG
       disclosure requirements would measure the impact of the new Business Responsibility and
       Sustainability Reporting requirements of the Security Exchange Board of India (PA5). The
       indicator, however, does not reflect anything of the quality of the ESG disclosures by the reporting
       firms in the absence of standards for the quality of the information set required by the securities
       regulator (the regulator had yet to develop its reporting portal, according to the ICR). The
       relevance of RI5 is rated moderately satisfactory.
      RI6 - The establishment of a trading platform to facilitate the national carbon market was an
       appropriate results indicator to the prior actions designating the Bureau of Energy Efficiency as the
       creator and administrator of the national carbon market and laying out the rules for the operation of
       the carbon market (PA6). After the issuance of the Roadmap of stainable and Holistic Approach to
       National Energy Efficiency in October 2021, several more actions were necessary to implement
       the plan: (a) the Bureau of Energy Efficiency consulted with stakeholders on the Draft Blueprint for
       a National Carbon Market starting in January 2022; (b) the Government created a steering
       committee to provide strategic direction for the creation of the market and trading scheme in March
       2022; and (c) Parliament amended the Energy Conservation Act of 2001 in December 2022 to
       authorize the market rules drafted by Bureau of Energy Efficiency. As carbon trading could not
       commence until the conclusion of this legislative, regulatory, and organization-building process,

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 21
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



                      setting the creation of the trading platform as the results target was entirely appropriate to
                      measure the impact of PA6 toward the achievement of the objective to catalyze sustainable private
                      sector climate financing. The relevance of RI6 is rated satisfactory.

               Objective 3 - To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.

                     RI7 - An increase in the volume of incremental guarantee cover under the CGTMSE was adequate
                      to measure the impact of prior actions raising the guarantee cover limit for each borrower and
                      introducing guarantee covers for bank and nonbank co-lending (PA7). An increase would signify
                      the successful mobilization of private financing for MSMEs. The relevance of RI7 is rated
                      satisfactory.
                     RI8 - An increase in the volume of guarantees under the CGTMSE that were approved toward the
                      loan accounts of women entrepreneurs was adequate to measure the impact of the prior action
                      giving sectors worst affected by the COVID-19 pandemic continued access to the guaranteed
                      emergency credit line (PA8). An increase in the metric would signify the successful mobilization of
                      private financing for MSMEs. The focus on women entrepreneurs gave the results indicator added
                      significance -- women-led MSMEs, which typically faced more restrictive collateral requirements
                      than other MSMEs, were most adversely affected by the crisis. Hence, a results indicator focused
                      on women entrepreneurs would be fully adequate to measure the impact of PA8. The relevance of
                      RI8 is rated satisfactory.
                     RI9 - An increase in total lending under the CGSMFI that were made primarily to women
                      borrowers was adequate to measure the impact of prior action of implementing the CGSMFI for
                      small borrowers and women entrepreneurs impacted by the COVID-19 crisis (PA9). Like RI8, RI9
                      focused on women-led MSMEs, the explicit target of the prior action. An increase in the metric
                      would reflect the successful mobilization of private financing for MSMEs. The relevance of RI9 is
                      rated satisfactory.



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change. Private capital for infrastructure investment was scarce and bound to get even scarcer,
                relative to the demand, given the fundamental asset-liability mismatch in infrastructure investing among
                commercial banks, the principal source of private capital for infrastructure projects so far. Two innovations
                would address this problem -- the creation of a specialized development finance institution for infrastructure,
                funded with long-term capital, and the monetization of brownfield infrastructure assets owned by the
                government. The impact of these actions would be evidenced by the volume on infrastructure loan
                disbursements by the new NaBFID and the volume of funds raised by the NMP. Two other measures would

                                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



help mobilize private capital for infrastructure, focused on liberalizing the investment regime for the sector --
permitting foreign portfolio investors to invest in InvITs and allowing the EFPO to investment in AIFs. There
were no results indicators defined for these prior actions. Separately, to attract more private capital for
investment in housing, streamlining the system for issuing RMBS PTCs and creating a multi-originator RMBS
PTC securitization platform aimed to boost PTC issuance as the alternative to loan sales in mortgage
securitization. The impact of this reform would be measured by the volume of RMBS PTC securitization
transactions. Altogether, the results chain was coherent and credible, although it could have been
strengthened with definition of results indicators for the two investment liberalization measures.

Achievement of Objective. The degree of achievement of the objective to catalyze private sector financing
for infrastructure is moderately satisfactory. The total volume of loans disbursed by NaBFID for the
infrastructure sector reached INR 353.2 billion (US$4.24 billion equivalent) by closing (June 2024), only
partially achieving the target increase to INR 1 trillion (US$11.98 billion equivalent). The total funds raised
through the monetization of brownfield assets under the NMP increased from INR 960 billion (US$11.5 billion
equivalent) in the baseline (FY2021-22) to INR 1320 billion (US$15.81 billion equivalent) by closing (FY2022-
23), partially achieving the target increase to INR 1500 billion (US$17.97 billion equivalent). The impact of two
related reform measures -- permitting foreign portfolio investors to invest in InvITs and allowing the EFPO to
invest AIFs -- were not reported in the ICR for lack of results indicators. However, late data obtained by the
Bank reveal that investments by foreign portfolio investors in InvITs and real estate investment trusts rose
from US$112 million in the baseline (2020) to US$1.48 billion post-closing (2024) (although how much of the
increment was due to the liberalization measure directly is unquantified), but that investment by the EFPO in
AIFs remained nil at closing (2023). Meanwhile, the volume of Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities Pass-
Through Certificate securitization transactions increased from INR 73.8 billion (US$0.88 billion) in the
baseline (FY2021-22) to INR 117.7 billion (US$1.41 billion) by closing (FY2022-23), exceeding the target
increase to INR 100 billion (US$1.19 billion equivalent). While at least some part of the NaBFID loan
disbursement and the NMP monetization targets were met -- deserving a moderately satisfactory
achievement of the objective to mobilize private capital for infrastructure investment -- the "other" problem
(i.e., other than finance) plaguing the infrastructure sector in India -- the poor implementation of infrastructure
projects -- was not addressed by this operation. Narrowing or closing the financing gap for infrastructure
investment without addressing the project implementation problem would not solve the country's infrastructure
under-investment issue.



Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To catalyze sustainable private sector climate financing.

Rationale
Theory of Change. With India extremely vulnerable to the effects of climate change but facing a wide gap in
financing its NDC to the Paris Agreement (only a fourth of the requirement for 2019-2020 was available),
three prior actions focused on mobilizing private capital for climate finance to address the funding shortfall --
the issuance of the country's first sovereign green bond, the requirement for the country's top 1000 firms to
disclose their ESG investments, operations, and performance, and the creation of the trading platform for the

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



national carbon market. The impact of these actions would be measured by the volume of sovereign green
bond issuance, the percentage of the top 1000 firms that complied with new ESG disclosure requirements,
and the establishment of the carbon market trading platform respectively. Of these results indicators, only the
volume of sovereign green bond issuance would provide tangible evidence that climate financing had indeed
been mobilized as a result of the prior actions. The compliance rate with ESG rules and the establishment of
a trading platform can only be viewed as output indicators, with the outcome -- the mobilization of private
capital for climate financing -- being measurable only in the future when the effects of the ESG transparency
initiative would have materialized and the trading platform would have become fully operational with actual
sales and purchases of carbon credits.

Achievement of Objective. The degree of achievement of the objective to catalyze private sector climate
financing is satisfactory. The volume of sovereign green bond issuances reached INR 160 billion (US$1.92
billion equivalent) by closing (June 2023), partially achieving the target increase to INR 230 billion (US$2.75
billion equivalent). After the inaugural issue of INR 160 billion in in June 2023, the Government sold another
INR 200 billion in new tranches in November and December 2023, according to the ICR. The share of the top
1,000 listed companies that complied with enhanced ESG disclosure requirements was 100 percent by
closing (June 2023), achieving the target increase to 100 percent. However, the contribution of this result to
the achievement of the objective is weaker than implied by the 100 percent compliance rate. The Security
Exchange Board of India had not developed the reporting portal for ESG disclosures nor standardized the
reporting norms required of the top firms. This implied that the quality of the ESG disclosures, notwithstanding
the perfect compliance ratio, would have varied across firms, weakening the ability of the new ESG disclosure
system to inspire investor confidence in the climate finance market as intended. Finally, the trading platform
to facilitate the national carbon market was established by closing (June 2024), meeting the target. As the
trading platform had yet to become fully operational however, its impact on the objective to catalyze private
sector climate financing had yet to be demonstrated.



Rating

Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Already facing a huge financing gap of as much as 13 percent of GDP in 2018, the
MSME sector suffered disproportionately from the economic slowdown and the credit crunch following the
outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The Government had responded to the credit crunch with an
overhaul of the credit guarantee system for MSMEs. As the country aimed to rebound from the crisis, it was
important to ensure the availability of MSME financing during the recovery phase of the economic cycle by
strengthening the innovations to the credit guarantee schemes deployed during the pandemic -- expanding
the guarantee limits under the CGTMSE, introducing guarantee covers for co-lending by banks and non-
banks, continuing the ECGLS in MSME sectors worst affected by the crisis for a while longer, and
implementing the CGSMFI focused on small borrowers and women entrepreneurs. The impact of these



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 21
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



                      actions would be measured and reflected in a greater volume of credit guarantees and credit guarantee-
                      supported lending to MSMEs.

                      Achievement of Objective. The degree of achievement of the objective to catalyze private sector financing
                      for MSMEs is highly satisfactory. The volume of incremental guarantee covers under the CGTMSE rose from
                      INR 368.9 billion (US$4.42 billion) in the INR 1047 billion (US$12.54 billion equivalent) by closing (FY2022-
                      23), exceeding the target increase to INR 500 billion (US$5.99 billion). The volume of guarantees under the
                      CGTMSE that were approved toward loan accounts of women entrepreneurs rose from INR 51.6 billion
                      (US$0.62 billion equivalent) in the baseline (FY2020-21) to INR 209.4 billion (US$2.51 billion equivalent) by
                      closing (FY2022-23), exceeding the target of INR 75 billion (US$0.9 billion equivalent). Total lending under
                      the CGSMFI primarily to women borrowers reached INR 100 billion (US$1.2 billion equivalent) by closing
                      (July 2022), exceeding the target increase to INR 90 billion (US$1.07 billion equivalent). The latter two results
                      were significant because they benefitted an MSME sector worst affected by the credit crunch -- women-
                      owned or -led MSMEs. While these actions helped ease the credit crunch faced by MSMEs following the
                      crisis, they however created new contingent liabilities for the Government -- the CGTMSE and the CGSMFI
                      were public credit guarantee schemes -- that must be closely monitored and addressed in the future.



                      Rating

                      Highly Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The efficacy of the objective to catalyze sustainable private sector financing for infrastructure is rated moderately
satisfactory, the objective to catalyze sustainable private sector financing for green investing, satisfactory, and the
objective to catalyze sustainable private sector financing for MSMEs, highly satisfactory. The overall efficacy is
rated satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


      6. Outcome

      Rationale

      The relevance of prior actions is rated satisfactory. The efficacy is rated satisfactory. The outcome of the
      operation is rated satisfactory.



                                                                                                                        Page 15 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Several development outcomes achieved by this operation will likely face moderate to substantial
sustainability risks.

Infrastructure Project Implementation and Infrastructure Finance. Uncertainties with the implementation of
the National Infrastructure Pipeline could adversely affect the mobilization of private, long-term, and foreign
finance for infrastructure. The risks arise from chronic problems with the implementation of infrastructure
projects in India in general: (a) project implementation is often slow -- only five percent of the National
Infrastructure Pipeline has been implemented so far; (b) projects are typically marred by cost overruns and
completion delays -- difficulties with land acquisition, delays with regulatory clearances, and problems with
financial closures raise costs and protract execution; an (c) operational problems spill into financial difficulties
for investors and lenders -- investors and lenders consequently face liquidity issues and asset quality
impairments.

ESG Disclosures and Climate Finance. Although all top 1,000 listed companies complied with the ESG
disclosure requirements mandated by the Security Exchange Board of India, the ESG filings have not been
tested for their quality. The securities regulator has yet to standardize reporting contents and formats and will
develop an online portal in the future for this purpose. The drawback with a lack of standardization is that the
quality of disclosures will be uneven, failing to motivate ESG investment. Post-closing information obtained
by the Bank indicate that the securities regulator is undertaking steps to improve the disclosure framework,
including by: (a) introducing a set of Key Performance Indicators pertaining to ESG attributes; (b) prescribing
ESG reporting on the firms' value chains; (c) requiring assessments of the disclosures by an independent
competent agency; and (d) developing ESG ratings for investors. These initiatives suggest that the new ESG
disclosure regime is at best an evolving enterprise.

Greenium and Climate Finance. To the extent that the "greenium" -- the green premium, or the amount
by which the yield of a green bond is lower than that of an otherwise identical conventional bond -- is a factor
in ESG investment in India (i.e., investors are willing to pay extra or accept lower yields for green bonds in
exchange for their sustainable impact), then any compression in the current greenium (calculated at 6 basis
points for the inaugural sovereign issue in February 2023) could dampen investor enthusiasm for Indian
green bonds. Many factors influence the greenium, including issuance costs, and these could affect investor
appetite for green bonds.

MSME Finance and Contingent Liabilities. The expanded use of public credit guarantee schemes for MSMEs
-- the permanent CGTMSE and the emergency ECLGS and CGSMFI -- helped address the credit crunch
problems faced by MSMEs following the COVID-19 crisis, but created new contingent liabilities for the
Government. A recapitalization of the CGTMSE might be necessary in the future to mitigate the associated
fiscal risks.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

                                                                                                        Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)




a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


Analytical Underpinning. The reforms were informed by analytical work produced by the Bank and the
Government, including those delivered as part of technical assistance activities.

     PA1 - World Bank, Technical Assistance to the Department of Economic Affairs on Infrastructure
        Finance, 2019: Commercial banks are unsuited for long-term finance for infrastructure projects
        because of asset-liability mismatches. A development finance institution would obviate this
        problem. Moreover, a development finance institution could offer a range of services -- financing,
        structuring, and credit enhancement -- to make infrastructure projects commercially viable.
       PA2 - World Bank, Technical Assistance to the Department of Economic Affairs on Infrastructure
        Finance, 2019, and NITI Aayog, National Monetization Pipeline Reports, various years: Asset
        recycling and monetization through the National Monetization Pipeline and the innovative
        instruments like infrastructure investment trusts would help create value in infrastructure by
        unlocking the value created by public investment and by tapping into the operational efficiencies
        contributed by private management.
       PA3 - World Bank and International Finance Corporation, Technical Assistance to the Government
        of India on Housing Finance, and Reserve Bank of India, Expert Committee Report on Housing
        Finance, 2019: Housing finance companies and other mortgage lenders need access to long-term
        funds to expand housing finance. Securitization would enable the mobilization of long-term funds
        from investors.
       PA4 - World Bank, Technical Assistance to the Government of India on Bond Market
        Development, and International Finance Corporation, Technical Assistance to the Government of
        India on Sustainable Finance: A sovereign green bond would be key to developing the climate
        finance market. It would signal the country's commitment to a low carbon economy and help crowd
        in private capital for climate finance.
       PA5 - International Finance Corporation, Technical Assistance to the Government of India on
        Sustainable Finance and Securities, and Exchange Board of India, Papers on the ESG Framework:
        ESG reporting by the top firms would improve corporate transparency, strengthen risk
        management, and promote stakeholder engagement on sustainable finance.
       PA6 - World Bank, Technical Assistance to the Government of India on the Partnership for Market
        Readiness: Carbon markets have lowered the cost of reducing emissions in many countries. A
        domestic carbon market would do the same for India, as several leading companies have already
        embedded an internal carbon price into their business strategies and operations.
       PA7 - Financial Institutions, Resources, Solutions and Tools (FIRST), Technical Assistance to the
        Small Industries Development Bank of India, and Reserve Bank of India, Expert Committee Report
        on MSMEs, 2019: The CGTMSE scheme has helped MSMEs access collateral-free funding. The
        scheme could be made more effective and inclusive by adding new classes of borrowers and
        lender, introducing new products, and digitalizing the claims process.
       PA8 - TransUnion CIBIL Ltd., ECLGS Impact Assessment Report, 2021: The ECLGS scheme has
        helped preserve jobs during the COVID-19 pandemic. Focusing on sectors most severely affected
        by the crisis is warranted as the economy moves towards recovery.


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



      PA9 - Microfinance Industry Association Reports and Small Industries Development Bank of India
       Reports: Microfinance institutions need funding support to ensure that credit to small borrowers,
       especially women entrepreneurs, does not decline sharply during the COVID-9 pandemic.

Links to Related Operations. This program would reinforce the development outcomes of Bank
operations advancing related objectives. Among these related operations, those initiated prior to (e.g.,
three years prior to), or concurrently with, this program included:

      On Housing Finance - (a) the Tamil Nadu Housing and Habitat Development Project for India
       (2020-25) aimed to strengthen the housing sector institutions of Tamil Nadu for increased and
       sustainable access to affordable housing; and (b) the Second Tamil Nadu Housing Sector
       Strengthening Program Development Policy Loan (2022-24) aimed to support the Government of
       Tamil Nadu to increase access to and sustainability of affordable housing by deepening policy
       reforms and strengthening institutions.
      On Climate Finance: (a) the Innovation in Solar Power and Hybrid Technologies Project for India
       (2019-24) aimed to demonstrate the operational and economic feasibility of utility scale innovative
       renewable energy technologies and battery energy storage solutions, and to strengthen institutional
       capacity to facilitate scale-up of such technologies on a commercial basis in India.
      On MSME Finance: (a) the India SEWA 2025 Digital Financial Inclusion of Informal Sector (2019-
       23) aimed to foster increased use of digital financial services by women engaged in informal
       activities in target states; (b) the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Emergency Response
       Development Policy Loan (2020-21) aimed to support the Government of India in preserving flows
       of finance to MSMEs through the COVID-19 crisis and lay the foundations for a stronger MSME
       financing ecosystem in the recovery phase; and (c) the Raising and Accelerating Micro, Small, and
       Medium Enterprise Performance Program-for-Results Project for India (2021-26) aimed to
       strengthen MSME performance through sustainable and innovative market-based services at
       central level and in selected states.

Collaboration with Development Partners. The Bank collaborated closely with other development
partners in the design and implementation of the reforms advanced by this operation. The Bank drew on
the International Finance Corporation's engagement with the Government on climate finance and on
MSME finance, including the joint Bank-IFC Technical Assistance to the Small Industries Bank of India, to
inform and shape the design of the second (PA4, PA5, and PA6) and third (PA7, PA8, and PA9) program
components. The Bank coordinated the implementation of some reform measures with the Asian
Development Bank, specifically measures strengthening credit guarantee schemes for MSMEs (PA7).

Implementation Risks and Mitigation Measures. The Bank considered the risk of the program to be
moderate overall. The residual risk stemmed from any weak response by the private sector to the effort by
the reform program to mobilize long-term finance for infrastructure, housing, and climate investment and
for MSME lending. The Program Document considered the strong commitment by the Government to the
reform measures, the improved capacity of the private sector to respond to economic incentives, and the
robust pipeline of bankable infrastructure and green projects to be strong mitigating factors to address
program implementation risks.



Rating


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



Satisfactory


b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Monitoring. The Bank monitored the implementation of the reforms closely. Monitoring data was readily
available to the Bank from the Ministry of Finance, the Reserve Bank of India, and the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation, according to the ICR.

Implementation Support. The Bank consulted regularly with program beneficiaries, including banks, non-bank
financial companies. microfinance institutions, and their industry associations (e.g., the Indian Banks
Association), to help identify and address program implementation issues. The consultations led to enhanced
efforts to strengthen ESG disclosure practices (PA5), among others, according to the ICR. The consultations
also resulted in regular reviews by the Bank and the Government of the operations of the credit facilities (PA7)
supported by this operation, especially the emergency guarantee facilities (PA8 and PA9), to ensure that they
were responsive to the exigencies posed by the COVI-19 pandemic.




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

---

Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The operation had positive impacts on poverty, gender, and social outcomes, according to the ICR, although the
evidence cited pertained solely to the gender effects of the third program policy area (see Section 9.C).



b. Environmental

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)




The reform program had positive environmental impacts, according to the ICR. The document cites the completion
of prior actions under the second program component to make the argument. The issuance by the Government of
sovereign green bonds, the compliance by the top 1,000 listed companies of new ESG reporting requirements
(notwithstanding the lack of standardization), and the establishment of the trading platform for the national carbon
market (see Section 3.B) would help India meet its climate change adaptation and mitigation objectives, according
to the argument. The ICR does not offer any additional data to support this statement.



c. Gender

The ICR cited RI7, RI8, and RI9 data to support its conclusion about the positive gender impacts of the operation.
Incremental guarantee covers under the CGTMSE, guarantees under the CGTMSE women entrepreneurs, and
lending under the CGSMFI to women borrowers all exceeded their targets (see Section 5 - Objective 3), providing
women-led MSMEs continued access to credit facilities during the COVID-19 pandemic and mitigating the adverse
economic and social effects of the crisis on disadvantaged women entrepreneurs.



d. Other

---

10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR followed OPCS guidelines on ICRS for development financing operations, with a
substantive discussion of the relevance of the prior actions and their contribution to the program objectives. The
assessment of the program's efficacy was well founded and included information beyond that conveyed by the
results indicators. The account of the Bank's performance at design and during implementation was sufficiently
detailed. The discussion of the risks to the development outcomes achieved by this operation was insightful and
remarked on topics and issues that were not more thoroughly discussed in the Program Document --
infrastructure project execution, the green premium, and contingent government liabilities.



a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreement/Comments

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Catalyzing Private Financing in India (P177985)



Outcome                           Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                  Satisfactory          Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                  ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Two lessons are drawn from the ICR, with some adaptation.

A more conservative performance results target would be suitable for a new institution. The new National
Bank for Infrastructure Development, created in 2021 to mobilize private long-term finance for infrastructure
projects, disbursed only a third of the target loan volume for infrastructure projects by mid-2024. While lingering
problems with project implementation in infrastructure remained a problem in India, including in the National
Infrastructure Pipeline (see Section 7), the novelty of the agency was a significant factor in the agency's
performance. In the three years since its creation, the new development finance institution had to recruit staff,
establish internal processes, and set governance standards before it could approve or disburse loans for
infrastructure projects.

Sustained engagement by the Bank with a government over time on structural and policy reforms
enables the Bank to be responsive to a client's request for support, including in crisis situations. The
Bank's and the International Finance Corporation's long engagement with the Government of India -- through
operations, technical assistance, and analytical and advisory services -- on MSME development and MSME
finance (see Section 8.A) allowed the Bank to readily support interventions to sustain the flow of public and
private credit to MSMEs during the COVID-19 pandemic, including through the recovery from the crisis. The
expansion of the CGTMSE, the extension of the ECLGS, and the implementation of the CGSMFI drew from the
Bank's, the International Finance Corporation's, and the multi-donor FIRST's long-standing work with the
Ministry of Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises, the Small Industries Development Bank of India, the
CGTMSE, and the National Credit Guarantee Trust Company to improve the productivity, the financial viability,
and the competitiveness of the MSME sector in India.




13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 21 of 21
