     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024333

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P144336                                    NWRMP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Kyrgyz Republic                            Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16315,TF-B1013                          31-Dec-2022                                           11,798,811.89

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Apr-2014                                01-Apr-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            12,240,000.00                                    12,240,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             12,239,032.07                                    11,798,811.89

 Actual                                         11,798,811.89                                    11,798,811.89




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Craig Phillip Kullmann      Dileep M. Wagle              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives in the PAD (p.4) are: i) to improve water resources management
   capability; and ii) to improve irrigation service delivery for the benefit of water users. The Financing
   Agreement for the grant (p. 5) has the same objectives.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening National Water Resources Management Capacity (estimated cost US$
   2.7 million). Activities financed under this component included: (i) installing a digital information exchange
   system between the Department of Water Resources and Land Improvement (DWRLI) offices at the central,
   regional and district level; (ii) development and implementation of a water information system based on data
   from different existing organizations; and (iii) strengthening the capacity of the Water Resource
   Management (WRM) division of DWRLI to do basin mapping, development of preliminary basin water
   management plans and a National Water Strategy on water resources, developing procedures for water and
   wastewater permits, and conducting a sector expenditure and benefits review as the basis for a financing
   plan for the water resources sector. This component also aimed to finance an information campaign on the
   critical water sector developments and develop reports on key transboundary water issues.

   Component 2: Improving irrigation service delivery to Water Users Associations (estimated costs
   US$ 2.0 million). This component financed activities to strengthen the capacity of the DWRLI to manage off-
   farm irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems including increased fee collection from water users; and increase
   the expenditure on system maintenance. This component financed inventories of I&D schemes, establishing
   procedures for determining annual maintenance requirements, and performance-based management,
   maintenance, and operation pilots are six I&D systems, upgrade of the IT hardware and software at the
   district irrigation offices, developing a training program for new I&D staff.

   Component 3: Improving irrigation management by Water Users Associations (estimated cost US$
   1.7 million). This component financed activities to strengthen local and federal water user associations
   (WUA and FWUA) as well as local Water Councils (WCs) and the National Union of WUAs to improve their
   capacity for coordination and management. The component financed TA for: (i) an assessment and
   strengthening of 481 WUAs; (ii) supporting and strengthening roughly 29 FWUAs managing off-farm
   systems; (iii) assessments of 70 WUAs; (iv) technical assistance to WUAs to prepare inventories and
   maintenance plans for their systems; (v) training programs for WUAs, WUA SUs, and FWUAs to address
   social dimensions of water management including training activities to ensure member engagement and
   participation, social accountability, and the role of women in water management.

   Component 4: Project management (estimated costs US$ 1.5 million). This component financed capacity
   building and project management, including administration, coordination of the project, procurement,
   financial management (FM) and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) in line with the procedures of the World
   Bank.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: The estimated total project cost at appraisal was US$7.75 million, but the actual total cost was $10.91
   million).




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)



   Financing: At appraisal, the IDA grant financing was estimated at US$7.75 million with additional grant
   financing of US$4.49 million for a total amount of US$ 12.24 million. The amount disbursed was US$10.91
   million, which was 89 percent of the grant.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, the Borrower did not have a planned contribution.

   Dates: The original project closing date was August 30, 2017. In total, the project was restructured six times
   along with the closing date to allow the completion of project activities, reallocation of loan proceeds,
   disbursement arrangements, modification of components, additional financing, and revision of results
   indicators.

   The project was restructured on August 26, 2019, for the fifth time to include additional financing and modify
   the results framework and PDO. The sixth restructuring modified the results framework and extended the
   closing date by 15 months. The project was approved on April 4, 2014, became effective on April 29, 2015,
   and closed on April 1, 2024, for a total of 10 years of implementation, including 81 months of extensions
   and additional financing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are sufficiently outcome-oriented and appropriate for the
development status of the country. Despite being well-endowed with water resources, only 54 percent of
the rural population had access to safely managed drinking water supplies in 2020, and irrigation and
drainage infrastructure are outdated and not resilient to climate change. (CPF FY24-28, p. 18) The rural
population comprises 62 percent of the population, with a 40 percent poverty rate, which relies heavily on
irrigation for agriculture. (PAD, p 3). Strengthening water resource management was considered essential
for increasing agricultural productivity and poverty reduction as well as contributing to other critical sectors
important for economic growth such as energy production and water consumption for industry and human
consumption.

The PDOs were relevant to the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) FY14-17 at appraisal and its Strategic
Area of Engagement 3: Natural Resource and Physical Infrastructure and specifically improving
management of water resources. During implementation, the PDO remained relevant to the World Bank
CPF for FY19–FY22 under Focus Area 2: Raise productivity and build connectivity. It contributed to the
achievement of CPF Objective 4: Enhance growth of natural resource sectors, especially hydropower by
improving water management within the framework of a changing climate. Under the new CPF for FY24–
FY28, the PDOs were relevant most notably to two of the three CPF’s high-level outcomes
(HLOs): Improved Access to Sustainably Managed Natural Resources (HLO2); and Enhanced Human
Capital and Empowerment of Vulnerable Populations (HLO3). HLO2 specifically focused on energy, water,
agriculture, and resilience to climate change, both to safeguard the livelihoods of rural populations and as a
driver of economic growth.

The PDOs remain relevant and aligned with government priorities and strategies. The PDO’s are aligned
with the country’s Water Code, which was signed into legislation in 2005, and aims to modernize water
resource management in the country. An important element of the country’s National Development Strategy

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      NWRMP (P144336)



               2018–2040 is the development of energy- and water-efficient irrigation networks, with the improvement of
               agricultural production, which is considered key for food and nutrition security. In July 2017, the government
               adopted the National Irrigation Program for 2017–2026, which indicated that climate-resilient irrigation
               infrastructure should be modernized to (a) create new jobs, improve socioeconomic conditions, and reduce
               migration; (b) develop crop farming; and (c) increase tax revenues and GDP.

               The project and PDOs are based on the historical experience of the Bank in the sector. Prior to this project,
               the Bank invested in the Water Management Improvement Project (WMIP) 2006-2013, as well as the
               Irrigation Rehabilitation Project (IRP) 1998-2005, and the On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP-1 and 2) 2003-
               2015. The key lesson learned from earlier projects was the need to focus on strengthening the capacity of
               existing institutions and implementation of the Water Code rather than focusing on the establishment of new
               ones. Secondly, the project proposed to pilot an approach to testing different models for operation and
               maintenance that would be scalable rather than assuming a predefined model will work. This project was
               highly relevant and strategically focused on strengthening the institutional capacity for water resource
               management. A historical gap with water reforms in the country was the lack of implementation of the Water
               Code that was established in 2005. This project aimed to close the policy-implementation gap where
               previous efforts had fallen short.

               Given the relevance at appraisal and closing of the PDOs to the CPFs, the lessons learned from prior
               operations, and that the PDOs are aligned with the country’s Water Code, the rating is considered High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve water resources management capability.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) in the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR, p. 44) identified that
                             the outcome of interest was to improve the recipient’s water resources management capacity.

                             The mix of inputs identified is adequate to reach the outcome. These included the financing of interventions
                             through various components: (i) enhancing and establishing water administration units at the national and
                             basin level, (ii) developing and implementing water information systems at national, regional, and local levels,
                             (iii) strengthening the capacity of DWRLI to do basin mapping, water management plans, and a national water
                             strategy, and developing policies and procedures for water use permitting, and (vi) an assessment of
                             investment planning in selected irrigation schemes.



                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NWRMP (P144336)



As a result, the expected outputs would have been: (i) national and basin water administration units legally
established and trained, (ii) a nationwide water information system installed, (iii) river basin management
plans developed and approved, (iv) staff trained on the water information system, and (v) national water
strategy approved, and (vi) and national irrigation, drainage, and land improvement policy is approved.

As a result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: (i) national and basin water
administration units are using water information systems to inform planning and decision-making about the
management of water resources; and (ii) national water strategy and national irrigation, drainage, and land
improvement policy are being implemented.

The result of these intermediate outcomes would be the PDO outcome of improved recipient water resources
management capacity, contributing to a higher level of outcome in terms of increased resilience to climate
change and increased access to water for human and productive uses.

The project was originally conceived as a two-phase program with each phase consisting of a three-year
period. The implementation of the project did not follow separate projects but was rather implemented as one
project with additional financing. The ToC’s activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes provide
a logical and properly sequenced causal chain sufficient to reach the PDO outcome target. The ToC included
explicit assumptions such as that: (i) the national water department would be financed through water user
fees, (ii) the political environment would support the implementation of strategies and policies, and (iii) water
users and farmers would be willing to pay full cost recovery levels. (ICR, p 44). The proposed activities
appeared to be logical and adequate in scope and nature to strengthen the capacity to manage water
resources. The results framework indicators were appropriate to capture key outputs, intermediate outcomes,
and outcomes. While the ToC had an explicit assumption that the political environment would support
implementation, it was less clear if there were other important power dynamics with the establishment of
multiple institutional entities at different levels that would have supported or resisted the implementation of the
reforms that typically accompany reform processes.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      Comprehensive River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) would be prepared for all 5 river basins,
       approved by relevant River Basin Councils (RBCs), and endorsed by the National Water Council
       (NWC). (Original target was 5 RBMPs developed and approved): (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p.
       47) The ICR reported that 5 RBMPs were developed through data analysis that was conducted at the
       central government level which was validated through stakeholder engagement at the local and
       regional level . (ICR, p 13) Development of the plans included 16 training and seminars for the RBC
       working groups along with basin webpages with data and analytics. The RBMPs included tailored
       development programs and projects based on local needs assessment. The drafts were completed in
       2021, but formal approval is pending by the RBCs as they await their own legal authorization to be
       formally recognized.
      National Water Strategy (NWS) would be formally adopted as a government strategy, endorsed by the
       National Water Council (NWC), including investment prioritization and financing plan (Yes/No).
       (Original target was Yes). (Achieved) (ICR, p. 12). This indicator was added during the restructuring
       for the additional financing. A national water strategy accounting for surface and groundwater based
       on the compilation of the five river basin plans was established using a bottom-up participatory
       approach and was endorsed in 2023 by the National Water and Land Council.

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NWRMP (P144336)




      Water use permitting and fee system operational as percentage of total permits to be issued was zero:
       (Original target was 50 percent). (not achieved) (ICR, p 13-14) This indicator was added during the
       restructuring for the additional financing. The project financed the development of conceptual models
       for permitting and the calculation of fees for surface water extraction, which were approved by the
       Cabinet of Ministers in October 2021 and included in a new edition of the Water Code, but the revised
       Water Code has not been approved by Parliament. Implementation of the permitting and collection
       schemes for surface water extraction were not implemented by the time of the ICR nor at the time of
       the ICRR. (ICRR interview) The ICR reported that a Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
       project will continue to support water use permitting, which was expected to be approved by the end of
       2024.
      Nationwide Water Information System (WIS) would be operational, financially sustainable, online
       accessible, and Water Information Center established (Yes/No). (Original target was Yes). (Achieved)
       (ICR, p 12) This indicator was added during the restructuring for the additional financing. The ICR
       reported that the WIS is operational and is accessible through a website/portal and has been
       connected with all 53 irrigation units through a single digital network. The WIS has allowed water
       resources to be measured, quantified, and recorded in a digital data management system. At Project
       closure, five online thematic databases were operational, and 80 percent of the data had been
       digitalized. (ICR, p 12)
      80 percent of water resources were measured, quantified and recorded in digital data management
       system. (Original target was 90%) (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p. 27). The WIS enabled water
       agencies to more efficiently manage and communicate water resource information for decision-
       making. The system and the digitalization of water information have reduced the irrigation agencies’
       workload and improved data systematization efficiency. The WIS has improved the management of
       information from a paper-based system to an electronic one. The ICR reported that the operating
       costs of the WIS were partially covered through the central government’s budget, which allocated
       KGS 267 million for 2023–2025 under the Action Plan for implementation of NWS 2024. The
       functioning and further improvement of the WIS, including necessary training, data collection and
       updates, will continue to be supported under the ongoing World Bank-financed Climate Resilient
       Water Services Project (CRWSP) (P173734). (ICR, p 13)

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework were the following:

      Department of Water Resources Management would be formally established under the State Water
       Resources Agency (SWRA), gradually financed through the water use fee (No/Yes). (Original target
       was Yes). (Achieved) (ICR, p 25). The Water Resource Services (WRS) was established in 2021 to
       oversee water resource management in the country. The WRS was originally established under the
       Ministry of Agriculture and was then moved to the Ministry of Water Resource, Agriculture, and
       Processing Industry in 2024. The integrated water resource management has been consolidated
       under the WRS. The ICR reported that 10 percent of the WRS costs are covered by industry water
       user fees. (ICR, p. 12)

      Basin Water Resources Management offices and River Basin Councils (RBC) to be formally
       established and become operational. (Original target: 5). (Partially achieved) (ICR, p. 13) This
       indicator was added during the restructuring for the additional financing. At the basin level, the Project
       supported the delineation of the country’s five main river basins which were formally approved by the

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NWRMP (P144336)



       NWLC in February 2023. In addition, the Project also supported the WRS in developing basic models
       and statutes of RBCs that include representatives of more than 10 different agencies. The standard
       regulation on RBCs was approved by the resolution of the Cabinet of Ministers on April 6, 2023. The
       RCBs have identified each of the basin representatives, but the ICR reported that the NWLC planned
       to formally legalize the five RBCs by the end of September 2024.

The ICR reported the following additional outcome that did not have a target and was not included in the
results framework but was related to inputs in the ToC that would contribute to the strengthened water
resource management capacity.

      The Basin Water Authority (BWA) is a government water agency responsible for water allocation,
       distribution, and water service to all water users in a given river basin. The ICR reported that one BWA
       was formally established and became functioning (meaning that financial, technical, and human
       resources were allocated), while for the remaining four BWAs, directors were yet to be elected by the
       respective RBCs. (ICR, p 13)

The project partially or fully achieved its output, intermediate outcome, and outcome indicators as articulated
in the results framework except for the water use permitting and fee collection for surface water. Notable
achievements of the project included: (i) the establishment of the Water Resources Service in the Ministry of
Water Resource, Agriculture, and Processing Industry enabling a central entity to oversee water resource
management activities; (ii) development of RBMPs to detail critical information and investment needs for
major basins, (iii) the designation of officials to the RBCs enabling them to carry out functions while they await
legal ratification, and (iv) the implementation of the WIS enabling water resource management entities at the
central, regional, and local level to exchange information to better manage water resources and make
informed decisions. The indicators adequately measured progress against the Objective. The achievement of
the results had minor shortcomings and therefore the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve irrigation service delivery for the benefit of water users.

Rationale
The ToC in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. 44) identified that the outcome of interest was to
improve irrigation service delivery for the benefit of water users.

The mix of inputs identified was adequate to reach the outcome. These included the financing of interventions
through various components: (i) training WUAs and federal water user associations (FWUA) on management,
operation, and maintenance (MOM) of irrigation schemes as well as billing and collection, (ii) inventories of
infrastructure for I&D schemes, (iii) procedures for developing costing requirements for maintenance, (iv)
performance-based management, maintenance, and operation pilots in six I&D systems, (v) upgrading of
information and technology (IT) hardware and software at district irrigation offices, (vi) capacity assessments
of WUAs and FWUAs, (vii) training of WUA and FWUA on social engagement and accountability, and the role

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NWRMP (P144336)



of women in water management, and (viii) consultancy to develop National Irrigation, Drainage and Land
Improvement (NIDLI) Policy.

As a result, the expected outputs would have been: (i) 6 pilot irrigation service contracts would be signed for
management, operation, and maintenance, (ii) irrigation offices at district and regional levels would have
installed new IT systems to manage data, (iii) I&D inventories and maintenance plans would be developed,
(iv) training for WUA and FUWAs would be conducted, (v) water management councils (WMCs) be
established, (vi) NIDLI policy be developed.

As a result of these outputs, expected intermediate outcomes would have been: (i) WUAs and district
irrigation offices, regional and federal entities implementing management, operation, and maintenance plans
and procedures, (ii) six pilot irrigation service contracts being implemented, (iii) district, provincial, reservoir
management agencies, and DWRLI exchanging information on water resources, (iv) WUAs having adequate
water to meet their demands, and (v) consumers being satisfied with the services provided by WUAs.

The result of these intermediate outcomes would be achievement of the PDO outcome of improved irrigation
service delivery for the benefit of water users contributing to a higher level of outcome of increased resilience
to climate change and increased access to water for human and productive uses.

The ToC’s activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes, and outcomes provide a logical and properly
sequenced causal chain sufficient to reach the PDO outcome target. The ToC included explicit assumptions
that are the same as objective 1. (ICR, p 44). However, a shortcoming in the assumptions was that there was
no mention that the infrastructure and availability of water were adequate and sufficient to meet water
demands. The results framework indicators were appropriate to capture key outputs, intermediate outcomes,
and outcomes related to the activities financed by the project.

OUTPUTS:

The output level indicators for this objective in the results framework included:

      6 Irrigation Service Contracts with MOM plans, irrigation service level, and Irrigation Service Fee (ISF)
       would be signed between Dep ILI and WUAs. (Original target 6). (Achieved) (ICR, p 14) This indicator
       was added during the restructuring for the additional financing. These contracts involved an inventory
       of current technical conditions of I&D infrastructure and an improved methodology for the estimation of
       annual MOM costs related to 106 WUAs. The ICR reported that this had helped to prioritize
       rehabilitation interventions for on-farm and off-farm irrigation and drainage infrastructure that were
       financed by the APNIP project (P132754) in the pilot areas. (ICR, p 14)
      100 percent of system passports would be digitized and would provide information to the Water
       Information System (WIS) on-line. (Original target was 100 percent) (Achieved) (ICR, p 28). A system
       passport is a compilation of information about the characteristics of an irrigation scheme such as
       design capacity, dimensions, and assets that make up the schemes (PAD, pg. 26). Digitalization of the
       irrigation schemes’ assets enabled better asset management by WUAs, RBCs, and the central
       government.
      53 district irrigation offices (RVKs), provincial irrigation offices (OVKs) and reservoir management
       agencies would be exchanging digital information with DWRLI Head Office and each other. (Original
       target 53) (Achieved) (ICR, p 27). The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NWRMP (P144336)




  Increase in average annual maintenance expenditures for off-farm systems to 586 KGS/ha. (Original
     target 600). (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p 28) The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.
     ISF collection rates for 6 off-farm systems would cover at least 90% of the agreed tariff (based on
     annual MOM plans) after completion of rehabilitation works. (Original target: 6) (Achieved) (ICR, p 28)
     The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.
    WUA ISF would increase to 743 KSG/ha towards sustainable levels to meet MOM costs for on-farm
     systems. (Original target was 1,000 KSG/ha) (Partially achieved) (ICR, p 29). The ICR reported that
     as a result of the project, the WUAs demonstrated an increase in investment per hectare to cover
     O&M costs, which increased from a baseline of KGS 272 per ha in 2013 to over KGS 743.6 per ha in
     2023. (ICR, p 15)
    There were 486 water user associations (WUAs) with completed inventory and preliminary
     maintenance plans. (Original target was 315) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 28) The ICR did not elaborate on
     this indicator.
    408 operational water user associations were created and/or strengthened. (Original target was 460)
     (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p 28). The ICR reported that the Project increased technical
     capacities of irrigation service providers at WUAs and provincial and district irrigation offices
     (Oblvodkhoz/Rayvodkhoz, OVK/RVK) levels by developing improved and joint MOM procedures,
     detailed asset management plans, and training and capacity-building programs. (ICR, p 14)
    103 Water Management Councils (WMCs) were established, trained and applying training in off-farm
     and on-farm canal management. (Original target was 95) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 29) The ICR did not
     elaborate on this indicator.
    10 Federations of WUAs would take responsibility for MOM of off-farm systems. (Original target was
     15) (Partially achieved). (ICR, p 29) The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.
    36 RVK staff would utilize revised MOM procedures in preparing annual MOM plans. (Original target
     was 30) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 29). The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.
    There were 62,653 hectares of irrigated area with improved off-farm irrigation and drainage (I&D)
     services with water delivery more adequately meeting WUA water demand. (Original target was
     60,000 hectares). (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p 28). The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.

  National Irrigation, Drainage and Land Improvement Policy (including Irrigation & Drainage Investment
     Plan) would be endorsed by the NWC (Yes/No). (Original target was yes) (Achieved) (ICR, p 29) The
     National Irrigation, Drainage and Land Improvement Policy was endorsed by the NWC in December
     2023. As part of its development, the government was also equipped with an Irrigation and Drainage
     Investment Plan to facilitate the prioritization of infrastructure investment for the government as well as
     for the international donor community. The two strategic documents were developed for mid- and
     long-term interventions on the following aspects: (a) strengthening human resources and institutional
     capacity, (b) improving normative regulatory frameworks on dam safety, (c) improving water
     accounting and storage management, (d) improving investment prioritization and tariff setting
     procedures, and (e) enhancing cooperation between research and development.

  There would be 5 percent female representation in WUA Representative Assembly and WUA Council
     in 60 percent of WUAs. (Original target was 15 percent) (Not achieved) (ICR, p 29) This indicator was
     added during the restructuring for the additional financing. The Project made some improvements to
     increase female representation in WUA Representative Assembly and WUA Councils; however, the




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   NWRMP (P144336)



       increase was negligible - from 4 percent at baseline to 5 percent by closing, despite explicit efforts to
       target women in project activities and in training sessions (ICR, p16)

OUTCOMES:

The outcome level indicators for this objective in the results framework are the following:

      Irrigation and Drainage Management (IDM) divisions adopted revised procedures for Management,
       Operation and Maintenance (MOM) in 6 pilot schemes. (Original target was 6) (Achieved) (ICR, p 26).

      97 percent of WUAs are supplied with adequate volumes of water for the six pilot schemes by Dep ILI.
       (Original target was 75 percent) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 15). The ICR reported that adequate demand
       was defined by whether 90 percent of the WUAs in a district had their water demand met.

      92 percent of WUAs provided satisfactory services, as measured by the percentage of water users
       responding in surveys that they are satisfied with services provided by the WUA. (Original target was
       83) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 26). This indicator was measured in the six pilot I&D districts where 106 out of
       the 440 registered WUAs operated. The pilot districts and associated WUAs benefited from
       rehabilitation efforts of irrigation systems funded by the World Banks APNIP, as well as the improved
       management, operation, and maintenance provided through this project. The ICR stated that the WUA
       Support Unit reported that in 2023 80 percent of the 440 registered WUAs were rated as ‘good’ or
       ‘satisfactory’ by water users. The ICR did not provide a source or report to substantiate this data point.

      761,973 hectares were provided with irrigation and drainage services (ha). (Original target was
       750,000 ha) (Exceeded) (ICR, p 26) These were the number of hectares managed by the WUA that
       benefited from institutional strengthening and capacity building. (ICRR interview)

      The number of direct project beneficiaries was of the order of 278,313. (Original target was 298,000
       people) (Substantially achieved) (ICR, p 26) The ICR reported that the Project did not provide new
       construction or rehabilitation of I&D infrastructure, but contributed to improved I&D services through
       capacity building of 408 WUAs serving about 278,313 water users (direct project beneficiaries). (ICR,
       p 14). The ICR did not provide a breakdown of how it calculated this figure.
      8.70 percent of direct beneficiaries were female. (Original target was 10 percent). (Substantially
       achieved) (ICR, p 26). The ICR did not elaborate on this indicator.

The project substantially achieved or exceeded its output, intermediate outcome, and outcome indicators as
articulated in the results framework with the exceptions of the increase in the irrigation service fee and the
percentage of female representation on WUAs. The ICR did not elaborate on various indicators that were
included in the results framework, which would have bolstered and substantiated the ICR’s storyline given the
high achievement of the indicators. Likewise, the ICR storyline could have more clearly articulated the
distinction in interventions that the project provided between different geographic areas, and how those
impacted the intermediate and outcome indicators such as with the six pilot schemes and the rest of the
WUAs. Nevertheless, the project’s results framework tracked an array of interventions at the output,
intermediate outcome, and outcome levels that captured the complexity of the project interventions that took
place at central, regional, district, and local levels. Overall, the number of indicators and the quality of what




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                NWRMP (P144336)



                            they were measuring - such as satisfaction of water users - adequately measured progress against the
                            Objective. The achievement of the results had minor shortcomings and therefore the rating is Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ICR documented the achievement of the output, intermediate, and outcome indicators with minor
                            shortcomings in their achievement. The results framework adequately measured the theory of change. The
                            rating for Objective 1 was Substantial and Objective 2 was Substantial, which resulted in an overall efficacy
                            rating of Substantial with minor shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: An economic and financial analysis was neither carried out at appraisal, the AF stage,
   nor in the ICR, on account of the challenges of calculating a net present value and an economic rate of return for
   technical assistance activities. The ICR reported that the project was the first 3-year phase of a two-phase
   program. The ICR did document that a moderate investment of US$1.7 million in improving irrigation
   management by WUAs increased the average annual WUA ISF nationwide (700,000 ha) from KGS 270 per ha
   (US$3.9 per ha) in 2017 to KGS 800 per ha (US$11.6 per ha) in 2023, generating additional contributions in
   MOM of US$5.4 million a year in 2023. (ICR, p 17)

   Operational and Administrative Efficiency: The project was designed to be implemented in two three-year
   phases for a total of 6 years; however, the second phase was incorporated through additional financing. The
   project was extended 6 times for a total of 81 months (almost 7 years) including the additional financing beyond
   the initial closing date of August 2017. The project was approved in April 2014. The reasons for these
   extensions were in largely due to: (i) initial delays in effectiveness and implementation on account of delays in
   government approval and parliamentary ratification of the grant (12 months), (ii) delays in approval of the
   additional financing (10 months), (iii) COVID-19 restricted travel of consultants, (iv) political crises in 2017 and
   2020, and 8 ministerial changes that affected procurement approvals and implementation, and (iv) changes to
   the implementing agency (five times). The project was implemented over 10 years, of which six years were
   anticipated at design for project implementation. Conclusion. The project experienced operational and
   administrative delays of 48 months beyond the envisioned 72-month implementation period at appraisal for both



                                                                                                                             Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NWRMP (P144336)



phases resulting in a total implementation period from approval to closing of 10 years. The efficiency rating is
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project was aligned with the previous and current World Bank CPF as well as the government priorities and
legislation. The project largely achieved its stated output and outcome indicators which were well articulated to
support the theory of change, but the ICR could have elaborated on all of the results achieved. The project
faced delays of 48 months for both phases. Nevertheless, taken together, a High rating for Relevance, a
Substantial rating for Efficacy, and a Modest rating for efficiency results in a Moderately Satisfactory rating for
the overall outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Project’s benefits will likely be sustained in the short to medium term. The project laid the groundwork for
the design of a USD$ 100 million investment project – the CRWSP (P173734), which will continue to support
the government with investments and reforms at least through 2028. The government has demonstrated its
continued dedication to the sector through the adoption of its new National Water Strategy, with the main
pillars focusing on promoting the rational use of water resources and scaling up the use of water-saving
technologies based on principles of IWRM and river basin planning.

The role of the autonomous WUAs has the potential to be weakened in the future if the government and its
legislature make changes to the role of local governments and state basin water agencies at the on-farm
level. This risk is considered moderate. The sustainability of irrigation service fees is considered moderate

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NWRMP (P144336)



and varied across the country with some areas paying increased fees with limited water availability and
others demanding that water be provided for free through local governments, which is not unique to the
country.

The risk that the WIS will not be maintained and used is moderate. At the writing of the ICR, it was reported
that the WIS was functioning and further improvement, including necessary training, will continue to be
supported under the ongoing World Bank-financed CRWSP. Moreover, the government has indicated that
the WIS will be integrated with the Kyrgyz national e-government system, which would require that all data
entry and storage become a mandatory government service for citizens of the Kyrgyz Republic.

If future political crises materialize, it is possible that related institutional changes could negatively impact the
sustainability of project outcomes; however, the ICR (p. 19) indicates that the government has remained
committed to water sector reforms and gradually implemented them during this project despite dealing with
political crises. The overall risk to development outcomes is moderate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project was strategically relevant and designed, based on lessons learned from previous projects
  such as the Water Management Improvement Project (WMIP) (P088671) that attempted to push for
  sector reforms that were not aligned with the prevailing power dynamics in the sector. WMIP attempted to
  set up an independent State Water Authority, which was not successful despite it being part of the Water
  Code. This project focused on implementing the functions of the State Water Administer within the
  existing institutional arrangement effectively going with the grain of the sector power dynamics.

  The Project took advantage of the grant opportunity provided by the Swiss Development Corporation
  (SCD) which had been engaged in the sector. The World Bank’s experience in the country and
  relationship with government counterparts supported the design of a technical assistance program with a
  clear Theory of Change aligned with the government's Water Code and existing institutional
  arrangements. However, the Bank team underestimated the capacity of the PIU to manage multiple
  projects, which should have been known given the Bank’s prior experience in the sector. Overall, the
  quality at entry is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team provided regular implementation support to the Project with relatively minimal
 turnover of Task Team Leaders (TTL) over the 10 years of implementation. There were three TTLs and the
 Project benefited from having the TTLs and technical teams based in-country and the region, which proved
 critical to develop trust with government counterparts (ICCR interview). Over the course of the project, the

                                                                                                         Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)



 task team carried out 18 official implementation support missions that were well documented in the Aide
 Memoires. The task team contended with significant changes in the government and implementation unit
 but provided close support throughout (ICRR interview).

 The candor and quality of the Implementation Status and Results Reports of the World Bank were
 satisfactory, and the project was downgraded at appropriate times when implementation lagged. The task
 team was proactive in restructuring the project as needed to ensure that the PDOs could be achieved. The
 task team conducted joint supervision missions with SCD and ensured close coordination between the
 donor and government enabling the additional financing and achievement of results. The shortcomings
 during supervision were related to the monitoring and evaluation and the lack of reporting on the quality of
 the data provided by the PIU. The reporting improved over time after a dedicated M&E specialist was hired
 in 2015. Overall, the quality of supervision was considered Satisfactory.

 The World Bank worked with the client to design a project that was relevant and aligned with government
 priorities and brought the client the required expertise over the operation’s life. The World Bank team
 closely supervised the Project and proactively restructured it as needed to ensure successful
 implementation. The minor shortcoming was the overestimation of the PIU's capacity to manage several
 projects given the Bank’s experience in the country. Overall, the World Bank’s performance is rated
 Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework indicators were adequate and sufficient to measure the project results at the output,
 intermediate, and outcome levels for the PDOs, and were aligned with governments roadmap to implement
 their Water Code. The objectives were clearly specified, and the indicators captured the components
 activities and outputs as well as the contribution to the outcomes of the PDO statement. The M&E design
 had some minor shortcomings. For example, while baseline information was reported for indicators, the
 ICR was not clear about the design and the methodology used to collect it other than mentioning that the
 baseline figures were collected from the previous World Bank projects. Additionally, the Project was
 designed to implement activities countrywide except for the six pilot schemes where additional or modified
 activities would take place such as improved management, operation, and maintenance plans. The M&E
 design could have been stronger to measure the difference in outcomes between areas that were receiving
 additional benefits such as in the pilot areas vs the non-pilot areas to make a stronger case to scale up or
 not to scale up pilot activities. During the Additional Financing, two new PDO and four intermediate results
 indicators (IRI) were added to reflect institutional changes that occurred during project implementation. The
 ICR stated that other minor weaknesses were that some of the IRIs had targets that were too ambitious
 and would require a longer time period to achieve such as increased irrigation service fee rates. However,

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)



 overall, the results framework indicators adequately captured the theory of change with 8 PDO and 18 IRI
 indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project M&E system was not put in place initially because the PIU did not have an M&E specialist
  until 2015. The PIU was responsible for monitoring the project’s progress. The ICR noted that progress
  reports and results framework updates were generally timely and made available by the PIU to the World
  Bank. (ICR, p 15). The World Bank’s implementation Status and Results reports (ISRs) document that
  the PIU was reporting against the indicators throughout the life of the project, showing gradual
  improvements signaling that the M&E was being used to inform dialogue on project implementation. What
  is not clear from the ISRs and the ICR is the quality and reliability of the data that were provided by the
  PIU. The PIU did undertake two surveys of water users in 2022 and 2023 within a sample of WUAs to
  measure water users’ satisfaction with the performance of WUAs enabling the PIU to report against the
  indicator.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E results were used to inform project management, allowing course corrections and the
  justification for additional financing. The ICR reported that the M&E system was used as a tool to initiate
  proactivity when project implementation slowed. (ICR, p 21) The M&E system and results framework
  were adjusted accordingly during implementation to respond to institutional changes as well as reflect
  modifications at restructurings to capture additional activities.

  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in the M&E systems design, implementation, and utilization,
  and were generally sufficient to assess the achievement of the project objectives and measure the
  theory of change. The M&E rating is Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental safeguards. The Project was classified as Category 'B' and only triggered OP 4.01 for
   Environmental Assessment, since the project was not expected to involve any large-scale, significant, or
   irreversible adverse environmental impacts. The project screened relevant activities before they were
   executed, and the screening procedures were identified in the Environmental Management Framework
   (EMF), which was published prior to appraisal. The EMF specified that terms of reference for technical
   assistance activities such as planning would follow World Bank Safeguard policies.

   The Project procured mostly goods, services, and works for establishing the water information system as
   well as consultancy services for capacity building and advisory purposes. There were selective small-scale

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    NWRMP (P144336)



  demonstrations on modern irrigation efficient technologies. (ICR, p 21) The Project closed with a
  Satisfactory environmental safeguards rating.

  Social safeguards. The Project established a grievance redress mechanism from the Project start. The
  PIU maintained a registry for all complaints and received four that were related to procurement procedures
  which were duly addressed. WUAs and RCBs played an important role in organizing agricultural
  communities across the Kyrgyz Republic. These organizations are facilitating broader consultations with
  community-level stakeholders allowing for local issues and knowledge to be considered and integrated into
  the basin plans. In addition, the project supported the establishment of public water management councils
  to help resolve conflicts between water users and WUAs. The Project financed training programs that
  included attention to the social dimensions of participatory water management under WUAs, including
  member participation and accountability, resolution of water-related conflicts, inclusion of vulnerable groups,
  and strengthening the role of women. (ICR, p 21) The Project closed with a Satisfactory social safeguards
  rating.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The ICR (p 21) noted that the financial management performance, including
  budgeting and planning, accounting and financial reporting, flow of funds, internal controls, and external
  audit, was rated Satisfactory throughout implementation. The ICR noted that there was no issue with the
  quarterly financial reports and annual audits carried out by private auditors. The Project closed with a
  Satisfactory rating for financial management.

  Procurement. The ICR noted that procurement had moderate shortcomings throughout the life of the
  project and particularly at the beginning when familiarity with World Bank procurement procedures was
  weak. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) also suffered from complex decision making within the
  Department of Water Resource and Land Improvement related to procurement matters and the frequent
  changes to the institutional arrangements causing significant delays. The ICR reported that the
  procurement performance improved in the second half of Project implementation by replacing staff and
  hiring additional specialists. The World Bank procurement staff provided regular monitoring and capacity
  building to the PIU staff. Minor shortcomings remained concerning contract management, advertisement
  and disclosure arrangements, bidding processes, and incomplete information uploaded in the Systematic
  Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) tool. The Project closed with a Moderately Satisfactory
  procurement rating.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR reported a positive unintended impact related to encouraging and fostering the interest of young
  professionals to work in the irrigation sector. The project organized a knowledge exchange event with four
  Kyrgyz universities (160 students) to learn about good practices in irrigation, two students went on to
  conduct research on the pilot schemes financed by the project which they used to defend their thesis. The
  Bank team and PIU were intentional about integrating academia into the project to support building a
  pipeline of future professionals.


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     NWRMP (P144336)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM) reforms are inherently complex, and
development partners need to able to support clients with best-fit solutions rather than best
practice allowing the human and social systems involved in IWRM reforms to gradually adapt
to new realities. Because reforms and changes to social systems are conservative, development
partners need to adopt realistic expectations about what can be achieved within specific timeframes.
The Bank’s sustained engagement in the sector over the last 20 years, use of a mix of lending and
grant-financed technical assistance, and a willingness to shift from best practice to fit-for-purpose
interventions enabled the government to make changes at a rate acceptable to stakeholders.
Whereas the predecessor project (WMIP) failed to achieve certain institutional reforms that mirrored
best practice in IWRM such as having an independent state water authority, this project took a more
incremental approach and focused on ‘function’ rather than ‘form’, and worked to embed the
functions of a state water authority into existing institutional arrangements.

Projects implemented on a national scale with activities scattered across the country can
benefit from a specialized M&E firm to support M&E systems. While the project's M&E system
was effective in measuring results and overall success, a dedicated M&E firm could be engaged for
future projects to extend the client's capacity and bring in good practices to manage the complexity
of dispersed project activities and ensure effective and efficient progress monitoring. (ICR, p 23)

Effective donor coordination between the World Bank and bilateral organizations can
leverage financial and technical resources benefiting government clients. This project
demonstrated that solid coordination, knowledge sharing, and trust between the World Bank task
team and bilateral donors such as SCD can maximize both financial and technical resources. The
World Bank had deep experience in the country and was able to draw on its global experience in the
sector, bringing that knowledge to the client with financial and technical support from SCD. The
partnership and trust that was developed enabled the project task teams to adequately support the
client when project implementation slowed and facilitated the additional grant financing. (ICRR
interview)


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      NWRMP (P144336)



To improve the sustainability of training activities, projects could consider strategic
partnerships with local universities and vocational colleges to integrate project training
materials into their curricula. This ensures that the knowledge is passed on to future generations
and remains relevant and accessible. Projects could also work with local government bodies or
sectoral agencies to institutionalize the training programs within their regular operations as well as
encourage organizations involved in the training to develop succession plans that include knowledge
transfer to new members or employees. (ICR, p 24)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes
  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
  Yes. While the project was a relatively small grant-financed project, the lessons learned from the stand-alone
  technical assistance grant have the potential to provide rich insights for other countries and World Bank
  operations. An assessment could explore the benefits of having a stand-alone technical assistance grant that
  is not directly embedded in a larger investment operation, but could be complemented by other investment
  projects. An assessment could explore how such a modality influences the dialogue between the Bank and the
  client, what aspects of this arrangement were unique to the Kyrgyz Republic, and what elements could be
  transferable to other countries.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed review of the project, a clear theory of change, and a narrative that largely
supports the ratings. The ICR was candid and the lessons well thought through. One of the main shortcomings
of the report was that it did not elaborate or incorporate all of the indicators into the storyline of the ICR. The
results framework had numerous indicators, which may have limited the team from expanding on each one in
depth; however, the richness of the results framework is what underpins the project’s theory of change. Not
incorporating more of the intermediate results indicators into the storyline was a missed opportunity to fully
appreciate the changes that the project supported. Nevertheless, these shortcomings were considered minor
and the ICR Rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
NWRMP (P144336)




                                                                  Page 19 of 19
