     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024283

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P159883                                     Efficient and Green Freight Transport

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                       Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A9121                                    31-Dec-2022                                           7,580,597.14

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Dec-2018                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               8,246,095.00                                    8,246,095.00

 Revised Commitment                                7,580,597.14                                    7,580,597.14

 Actual                                            7,580,597.14                                    7,580,597.14




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Elisabeth Goller             Christopher David            Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
                              Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project development objective (PDO), as stated in the grant agreement, is to (i) improve the recipient’s
   institutional capacity to formulate and evaluate policies and strategies to promote green freight transport
   systems, and (ii) pilot innovative carbon emission reduction measures in the freight transport sector in
   selected provinces. In this validation, in the same way as in the implementation completion and results report
   (ICR), the PDO is parsed as follows:



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



   (i) to improve the recipient’s institutional capacity to formulate and evaluate policies and strategies to promote
   green freight transport systems, and

   (ii) to pilot innovative carbon emission reduction measures in the freight transport sector in selected provinces.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: National Technical Assistance and Policy Development (cost at appraisal US$4.85
   million; cost at restructuring US$5.35 million; actual cost: US$11.94 million)

   Component 1A: Development of Policy and Strategy for Low Carbon Multimodal Freight Transport, to
   finance technical and analytical support for the development of national policies, plans, strategies and
   standards for a low carbon multimodal freight transport system, including, inter alia (i) a structural carbon
   emission reduction strategy of China's freight transport sector, including a national freight flow model, (ii) an
   action plan for efficient and green freight corridors, and (iii) guidelines on multimodal freight development for
   the Yangtze River Economic Belt.

   Component 1B: Development of National Policies and Guidelines for Green Urban Freight Distribution, to
   finance, inter alia: (i) guidelines for green and efficient urban freight transport development and (ii)
   guidelines and solutions for an e‐commerce based urban freight distribution system.

   Component 1C: Development of an Abatement Cost Analytical Tool for Freight Transport Emission
   Reduction, to finance a tool to analyze the emission reduction potential and abatement cost of different
   physical, operational, and policy interventions in the freight transport sector, including to (i) review and
   summarize various “avoid/shift/improve” interventions for freight transport emission reduction; (ii) develop
   the marginal abatement cost (MAC) curve for various interventions; and (iii) apply the MAC curve to develop
   the roadmap for emission reduction in key regions (e.g., Jing‐Jin‐Ji, Pearl River Delta).

   During the 2022 restructuring, the following three new activities were added to this component: (i) study on
   modern logistics system including infrastructure, operations, equipment and business environment that
   support the green transition of China’s economy, (ii) study on the impact of new international and domestic
   circumstances on freight transport and way forward for a low-carbon freight transport system, and (iii) study
   on the freight hubs and last-mile connectivity to ports.

   Component 2: Subnational Technical Assistance and Pilots (cost at appraisal and at restructuring
   US$3.05 million; actual cost: US$2.77 million)




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



  Component 2A: Selected activities related to multimodal transport across the Bohai Gulf, including, inter alia
  to: (i) develop policies and incentives to attract freight traffic to the sea ferry route; (ii) evaluate the
  performance of local logistics operators; (iii) develop solutions to improve the efficiency of freight
  transport; and (iv) monitor and evaluate carbon emission reductions.

  Component 2B: Selected activities related to Urban Freight Joint Distribution in Weifang, including, inter alia
  to: (i) collect urban freight data and install emission monitoring sensors in sample trucks; (ii)
  develop recommendations to improve the efficiency of urban freight distribution; and (iii) carry out training
  for truck drivers and campaigns on green urban freight distribution schemes.

  Component 2C: Selected activities related to Sea‐Rail Intermodal Transport in the port of Xiamen, including,
  inter alia to: (i) develop a multimodal transport information platform for sea‐rail‐road orders; and (ii)
  develop an optimization plan for multimodal freight operations at Xiamen Port.

  Component 2D: Selected activities related to Integrated Urban‐Rural Distribution in Guangdong, including,
  inter alia to: (i) develop a transport organization plan for urban‐rural integrated distribution; (ii) develop the
  common module for integrated urban‐rural distribution and apply the module in the existing logistics
  platform; (iii) monitor and evaluate activities; and (iv) carry out training and campaigns on urban‐rural
  integrated distribution.

  Component 2E: Selected activities related to the Integrated Development of the Inland Waterway of the Han
  River, including, inter alia to: (i) the develop a strategic plan for the integrated development of the inland
  waterway of the Han River; and (ii) purchase and install solar‐powered navigation lights along selected pilot
  segments of the Han River.

  During the 2022 restructuring, Component 2C: Selected activities related to Sea‐Rail Intermodal Transport
  in the port of Xiamen was cancelled and the development of a data collection and analysis platform for
  freight vessels and pilot emission reduction measures on selected freight vessels on the Yangtze River in
  Hubei were added.

  Component 3: Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project Management (cost at
  appraisal US$5.77 million; cost at restructuring US$5.27 million; actual cost: US$6.50)

  Component 3A: Capacity Building to provide technical support for, inter alia: (i) knowledge and capacity
  building on multimodal freight transport and urban freight distribution; (ii) dissemination activities; and (iii)
  eco‐driving professional standard development and training courses for truck drivers.

  Component 3B: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).

  Component 3C: Project Management.

  During the 2022 restructuring, the international study tours were cancelled.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The actual total project cost was US$21.21 million, which is 155 percent of the appraisal
  estimate of US$13.67 million (ICR, annex 3). The higher project cost was due to an increase in the


                                                                                                         Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



   depth and breadth of the research carried out under component 1, which happened because of the
   recipient's strong interest in the efficient and green freight agenda (ICR, para 62). The Bank team in its
   written response to IEG of November 13, 2024 (all references to the Bank's written response refer to this
   date) noted that 15 technical assistance (TA) activities were completed instead of six TA activities
   envisaged at appraisal.

   Financing. The project was expected to be partially financed through a GEF grant of US$8.25 million. The
   project disbursed US$7.58 million, corresponding to 92 percent of the appraisal estimate. The full grant
   amount was not disbursed because of the appreciation of US dollar vis-a-vis the Chinese Yuan.

   Recipient Contribution. The expected recipient contribution at appraisal was US$5.42 million. The actual
   recipient contribution was US$13.63 million, corresponding to 251 percent of the appraisal estimate.

   Dates and Project Restructuring. The project was approved on December 18, 2018, became effective on
   March 31, 2019, and was expected to close on December 31, 2022. The closing date was extended by one
   year to December 31, 2023 to make up for the delays caused by an initial slow project start and the impact
   of COVID. The December 1, 2022 restructuring, in addition to extending the closing data, (i) under
   component 2, cancelled the Xiamen pilot and reallocated of US$700,000 from Xiamen to Hubei to support
   new pilot activities, (ii) reallocated US$500,000 from component 3 to component 1 to support the
   new TA activities, (iii) revised the results framework, and (iv) changed the implementation schedule.

   Split Rating. Several outcome targets were revised, but on balance the project scope remained the same
   or even slightly expanded. Therefore, no split rating is applied, and the project achievements are assessed
   based on the revised targets.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. At appraisal, China had experienced rapid economic growth over decades,
resulting in increased energy consumption and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. At that time, China was
the largest GHG emitter, accounting for about one quarter of global GHG emissions (ICR, para 3). China
continues to be a large emitter of GHG emissions, with its carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions accounting for
nearly a third of annual global CO2 emissions (World Bank China Overview:
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/china/overview). At appraisal, 66 percent of freight in China was
moved by carbon-intensive road transport. Railway and waterway transport, which is cost effective and
environmentally friendly, was underutilized. The problems that caused obstacles to multimodal transport
were (i) lack of multimodal freight hubs, (ii) lack of standardization of transport units, equipment and
operational rules and documentation, (iii) institutional barriers between mode operators and lack of
incentives, and (iv) lack of information sharing. China also had no national freight flow model to support
data informed policy analysis and decisions. Because of the booming e-commerce, urban freight transport
was rapidly increasing, but approaches to last-mile urban distribution were inefficient. This caused air
pollution, GHG emissions, and traffic congestion.

Alignment with Strategy. At appraisal in 2018, the PDO was fully in line with the Bank’s FY13-FY16 China
Country Partnership Strategy, which focused on greener development and low-carbon transport. By aiming

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



               to foster greener freight solutions, the PDO supported the Strategic Theme 1: Supporting Greener Growth.
               The PDO remained consistent with Engagement Area 2: Promoting Greener Development and its objective
               of Promoting Low-Carbon Transport in the FY20-FY25 China Country Partnership Framework. At appraisal,
               the PDO was also aligned with China's 2016-2020 13th Five-Year Plan, which focused on the development
               of a modern integrated transport system. It remained in line with China's 2021-2025 14th Five-Year Plan,
               which supported Modern Comprehensive Transport Development.

               Previous Sector Experience. The PDO built on the Bank's previous efforts in China to foster efficient and
               green freight transport. This included several logistics and freight transport projects, such as the (i)
               Guangdong Green Freight Demonstration Project (P119654), which demonstrated the global and local
               environmental benefits of applying energy efficient vehicle and operating technologies, improving energy
               efficiency, and reducing GHG emissions in the road freight transport sector, (ii) Hubei Xiaogan Logistics
               Infrastructure Project (P132562), which enhanced the connectivity and efficiency of logistics operations, (iii)
               Three Gorges Modern Logistics Center Infrastructure Project (P153473), which improved freight transport
               and logistics services, and (iv) Hubei Inland Waterway Improvement Project (P158717), designed
               to improve inland waterway transport capacity and reliability along the Han River.

               The relevance of the Objectives is rated as substantial. At appraisal and project closing, the
               PDO was fully aligned with the country's and Bank’s previous and current strategies. The PDO was also
               designed to build on the efforts in previous projects in the freight sector in China. The PDO was appropriate
               to address the development problems of an inefficient and not sufficiently environmental-friendly freight
               transport system. However, the second objective of the PDO, i.e., to pilot innovative carbon emission
               reduction measures in the freight transport sector in selected provinces, could have been formulated with
               greater focus on the transformational expectation of the pilots given the experience and capacity in China
               and because the indicators to measure this objective were mostly outcome indicators.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the recipient’s institutional capacity to formulate and evaluate policies and strategies to promote
                             green freight transport systems

                             Rationale
                             According to the theory of change (ToC), activities to develop national policies, plans, strategies, standards,
                             guidelines, tools and capacity for a low carbon multimodal freight transport system and green urban freight
                             distribution were expected to have as main outputs (i) national policies, plans, strategies, standards and
                             guidelines for a low carbon multimodal freight transport system and urban freight distribution, (ii) a national
                             freight flow model, and (iii) an abatement cost analytical tool. In terms of outcomes, this was to lead to the (i)

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



Ministry of Transport (MOT) approving the national policies, plans, strategies, standards, and guidelines, (ii)
the provinces and cities complying with and using these MOT-issued documents and tools, and (iii) officials
and other stakeholders with greater capacity. All this was expected to contribute to improved institutional
capacity to formulate and evaluate policies and strategies to promote green freight transport systems.
The ToC has logical gaps insofar as not all outputs, while necessary, are sufficient to achieve the desired
outcomes. For instance, the approval of plans and guidelines and the development of tools does not
necessarily mean that they are used and hence strengthen the institutional capacity to formulate and evaluate
policies and strategies to promote green freight transport systems. There is limited linking of the various
activities to an overall trajectory towards reasonable change in the sector. The main assumptions were that (i)
the TA and analytical support would be of good quality, (ii) the MOT would approve the policies, plans,
strategies, standards, and guidelines, (iii) the national government, provinces, and cities would comply with
and use the policies, plans, strategies, standards, guidelines, tools, and models, and (iv) the capacity
strengthening activities would lead to greater capacity.

Outputs

The following outputs materialized during the life of the project to achieve objective 1 (ICR, paras 26 - 41 and
annex 1):

      15 national TAs, exceeding the target of 9 national TAs completed. The Bank team, in its written
         response to IEG, pointed out that all TAs had to pass a technical review committee before acceptance
         in line with what is mentioned in the PAD (page 31). According to the Bank team, such approval
         indicates a higher likelihood that the TAs will be used, as it reflects the committee's endorsement of
         their relevance and quality. In its written response, the Bank team also pointed out that the results of
         these TAs has influenced the contents of the documents adopted under this project. Finally, the Bank
         team in the interview with IEG of November 14, 2024 (all references to the interview of the Bank team
         with IEG refer to this date) pointed out that all the TAs completed before the 2022 restructuring have
         been used in policy making or as inputs for tools, recommendations, or other measures. However,
         more recent TAs added with the restructuring, such the research on the impact of China's
         demographic change trends on green freight and countermeasures, were completed just before
         project closing and their impact is not yet known.
        5 national TAs informed by citizen engagement, achieving the target of 5 TAs informed by
         citizen engagement.
        A national freight flow model to optimize the allocation of transport system resources at the national or
         regional levels, achieving the target of completing this model.
        1,153 people trained in national-level trainings and workshops on finance, procurement, and areas
         necessary to implement of different project activities, exceeding the target of 500.
        6,458 trained truck drivers in national green truck driver trainings, exceeding the target of 300.

Outcomes

      The MOT adopted the MAC analysis tool and the national freight model for freight emissions
         reduction, achieving the target of two analytical tools adopted by MOT for implementation in
         national planning and policy development. The national freight flow model has been used to inform
         several key policy documents at national and provincial level, such as the Guangdong Province
         Comprehensive Transportation Service Development Plan (2021-2025) (ICR, para 28).


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)




      The MOT adopted the Action Plan to Promote the Development of Multimodal Transport and Optimize
       and Adjust the Transport Structure (2021-2025), the 14th Five-Year Plan for Comprehensive
       Transportation Services, and the 14th Five-Year Plan for Modern Integrated Transportation Hub
       Systems, achieving the target of three national plans adopted by MOT for implementation. The
       Bank team, in its written response and the interview with IEG, explained that these plans set out the
       high level objectives at national level, which provinces, autonomous regions, and cities translate into
       their own plans. The Bank team also pointed out that China is a compliance-oriented country,
       therefore, if a national plan is adopted by the MOT, it is generally complied with. However, a lack of
       commitment of local authorities and the unavailability of resources for implementation might
       jeopardize the implementation of the plans.
      The China Greater Bay Area (Guangdong-Hong Kong SAR-Macao SAR) Standards Innovation
       Alliance adopted the guidelines on Urban Distribution Path Optimization and Intelligent Scheduling,
       largely achieving, in substance, the target of one guideline on improving urban freight
       transport issued by MOT for implementation. The Bank team, in its interview with IEG, clarified that
       the adoption by the China Greater Bay Area Standards Innovation Alliance, the leading alliance in the
       trucking sector, means that the industry already uses the guideline without need for a formal issuance
       by the MOT. The MOT's involvement in this area consisted of adopting standards to assess how
       green the urban freight distribution system is and issuing draft guidelines on Urban Distribution Path
       Optimization and Intelligent Scheduling.
      The Bank team, in its written response and the interview with IEG, clarified that the project supported
       the development of a low-carbon urban freight solution, i.e., a freight scheduling and optimization
       software, which the MOT recognized and widely and actively disseminated. The project also
       supported pilot applications of the solution in logistics companies in Meizhou, Shenzhen, Jieyang,
       Chaozhou, Qingdao, Weifang, Jinan and other places. For instance, in Guangdong an estimated 20
       percent of freight operators uses the urban freight solution. Therefore, since part of the industry is
       already using the solution even without the MOT's formal adoption, the target of the MOT adopts the
       E‐commerce based urban freight distribution solution, in substance, is considered largely
       achieved.
      The MOT adopted the Action Plan to Promote the Development of Multimodal Transport and Optimize
       and Adjust the Transport Structure (2021-2025) and the 14th Five-Year Plan for Comprehensive
       Transportation Services, achieving the target of MOT adopts the action plan for multimodal
       freight transport development. The Bank team, in its written response and the interview with IEG,
       confirmed that the outcomes under this target are the same as the ones reported for the target of
       three national plans adopted by MOT for implementation above.

The project outputs were used as inputs in regulatory measures not captured by targets in the results
framework, such as (i) the MOT's Guiding Opinions on Accelerating the Construction of a Modern
Transportation and Logistics System, which are still in draft (ICR, para 37), (ii) the China Railway
Corporation's policies on railway-waterway combined transport and the construction of relevant dedicated
railway lines for railway-waterway combined transport (ICR, para 31), and (iii) Implementation Opinions of the
Ministry of Transport, the National Railway Administration, the Civil Aviation Administration of China, and the
State Post Bureau.

The efficacy of this objective is rated as substantial. The recipient's institutional capacity to formulate and
evaluate policies and strategies to promote green freight transport systems improved. At the output level, the
project exceeded the target of national TAs completed, achieved the targets for citizen engagement and the
national freight model, and exceeded the target of trained officials and other stakeholders. At the outcome

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



level, the project achieved the targets with minor shortcomings. These shortcomings are as follows:
(i) reporting the same outcomes for the two separate targets of "three national plans adopted by the MOT
for implementation" and "the MOT adopts the action plan for multimodal freight transport development"; and
(ii) the lack of MOT's formal issuing of the guideline on improving urban freight transport and its
formal adoption of the E‐commerce-based urban freight distribution solution. This meant that these targets
were in substance largely achieved without the interventions of the MOT. The project provided inputs for
additional regulatory measures not captured in the results framework, and it is plausible to assume that the
trained officials and other stakeholders at least somewhat enhanced their capacity in the field of green freight
transport systems.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To pilot innovative carbon emission reduction measures in the freight transport sector in selected provinces

Rationale
According to the ToC, activities to (i) develop policies and incentives for highway-waterway multimodal freight
transport and logistics solutions in the Yantai pilot on the Bohai Gulf, (ii) improve urban freight efficiency in the
Weifang pilot, (iii) foster integrated urban‐rural distribution in the Guangdong pilot, (iv) foster integrated
development of inland waterway transport in the Hubei pilot, and (v) disseminate knowledge through
TransFORM were expected to have as outputs (i) an enabling environment for drop-and-pull for freight
transport and an association to attract logistics operators, (ii) recommendations to improve urban freight
efficiency, (iii) completed pilot on integrated urban‐rural distribution, (iv) an integrated development plan,
freight vessels analysis platform, and freight vessels emission reduction pilot, and (v) disseminated lessons
and knowledge. These outputs were expected to have as outcomes (i) increased sea ferry-highway freight
transport in the Bohai Gulf freight corridor, (ii) piloted urban freight distribution solutions in Weifang, (iii) less
empty trucks on return trips from rural to urban in Guangdong, and (vi) better planning of multimodal freight
transport for the Han River. All these outcomes were expected to lead to CO2 emission reductions. The main
assumptions were that (i) the project outputs would be of good quality and (ii) the plans, policies,
recommendations, and other outputs would be adopted and implemented. While comprehensive in covering
the full range of activities, the ToC misses a clear connection to how several of the outputs, such as an
integrated development plan and recommendations to improve urban freight efficiency are sufficient
motivators for change.

Outputs

The following outputs to achieve objective 2 and measured in the results framework materialized (ICR, paras
26 - 41 and annex 1), but most indicators do not well capture the outputs of the planned project activities (see
section 9):

      The project trained 233 villagers under the Guangdong integrated urban‐rural distribution system
       pilot, exceeding the target of 200 villagers trained.


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)




      The project trained 134 female villagers under the Guangdong integrated urban‐rural distribution
       system pilot, exceeding the target of 100 female villagers trained.
      Three Yangtze River cargo vessels enrolled in the Hubei pilot, achieving the target of three.
      Four international freight transport conferences held under TransFORM, achieving the target of four.

The following outputs not captured in the results framework were also achieved:

      Under the Yantai pilot, the project designed solutions to promote the development of drop-and-pull
       transport, which include information networking promotion, logistics parks construction improvements,
       upgrading for cargo roll-on-roll-off transport ships, further optimization of regional docking work, and
       forming logistics alliances (ICR, para 43). It also supported unified technical standards for drop-and-
       pull trucks, a single bill of lading operated by third-party logistics operators through established ICT
       platforms, and facilities at the port, such as a lounge for truck drivers (ICR, page 13).
      Under the Weifang pilot, the project supported the installation of 140 emission monitoring sensors in
       sample trucks and developed the Weifang City Logistics Vehicle Sample Configuration Plan and the
       Weifang City Logistics Vehicle Access Plan (ICR, page 14 and para 44). The Bank team, in its
       interview with IEG, clarified that these sensors collect data on driving behavior, which is monitored by
       the city's Transport Bureau and used for policy making.
      Under the Hubei pilot, the project financed in-depth study of the Yangtze River's complex navigation
       environment and ship type characteristics, new energy technologies for ships, and energy efficiency
       improvement technologies for ship operations (ICR, para 46) and a carbon emission data analysis
       software system for Yangtze River cargo ships (ICR, para 47). It also financed 20 solar-powered
       navigation lights along the Han River (ICR, page 14).
      Under the Guangdong pilot, the project supported open-source smartphone application software that
       was used by freight companies to develop three smartphone applications “Yue Cheng Pei”, “Huo Hao
       Hao Yun”, and “Qing Cheng Pei”. These applications helped match drivers with cargo sources to
       reduce the percentage of empty trucks and the driver waiting time and corresponding expenses (ICR,
       page 14 and para 45).

Outcomes

      The project is expected to reduce 33,164,175 tons of CO2 emissions, significantly exceeding the
       target of 15,600,000 tons. These are indirect scale-amplified reductions, directly from the project
       pilots and indirectly from replication of successful pilots as a result of policy incentives and capacity
       strengthening, during the project's lifecycle in line with what was envisaged in the PAD (page30).
      The drop‐and‐pull Bohai Gulf ferry traffic is 10.16 percent, slightly exceeding the target of 10
       percent.
      Weifang adopted the Weifang City People's Congress Standing Committee's Decision on
       Strengthening the Management of Limited-time Free Parking in Public Places, achieving the target
       of Weifang adopts the proposal for improving urban freight transport efficiency. This decision is
       partially based on work done for the Weifang City Logistics Vehicle Access Plan.
      The Hubei Province's 14th Five-Year Plan for Comprehensive Transportation Development, 14th Five-
       Year Plan for Water Transport Development, Inland Waterway Planning (2035)", and 14th Five Year
       Plan for Integrated Transportation Services were adopted, achieving the target of Hubei
       Department of Transport adopts the Han River inland waterway integrated development plan.
       All four plans make use of the findings of the project-financed TA.

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)




                                    The empty trucks on the return trip from rural villages to urban centers in Guangdong were reduced
                                     from 95 percent at appraisal to 79.1 percent by project end, achieving the target of 80 percent of
                                     empty trucks on the return trip from rural villages to urban centers in Guangdong.

                            The efficacy of this objective is rated as high. At the output level, the project piloted innovative carbon
                            emission measures in the freight sector and exceeded or achieved its targets. However, these targets did not
                            adequately capture the outputs of the project pilots. At the outcome level, the estimated CO2 emission
                            reduction significantly exceed the target. The project also fully achieved the target of adopting proposals and
                            plans and reducing the percentage of empty return trips from villages to urban centers. So, while there were
                            limitations in the connection between the outputs and their ability for emission reductions, the indicators
                            showed that there was considerable uptake and openness to change that resulted in improved performance
                            in the sector.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy is rated substantial. The project achieved the first objective with minor shortcomings,
                            and it is rated substantial. The project fully achieved and partially exceeded its second objective, which is
                            rated high.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Analysis

   At appraisal, an incremental cost analysis to assess the incremental costs and environmental benefits of the
   project scenario compared to the business as usual case was carried out. The incremental costs of the project
   included the funds to support national-level TA to improve the efficiency of intermodal freight systems, provide
   support for local pilot projects, and carry out capacity building. The environmental benefits included direct and
   indirect CO2 emission reduction benefits. Detailed analyses of the direct and indirect environmental benefits for
   the Yantai (Bohai Golf) and Guangdong pilots were carried out. The incremental cost analysis showed an
   estimated incremental cost of US$13.67 million and estimated total global environmental benefits of US$15.6
   million. Based on this, the cost effectiveness of the project, i.e., the unit cost of CO2 emissions mitigated under
   the projects, was US$0.876 per ton of CO2 (PAD, para 68).


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



By project end, the same analysis was repeated with minor changes. The analysis covered one additional year
of useful life of the pilot interventions because of the one-year project closing data extension. The project
covered the Yantai (Bohai Golf), Guangdong, Hubei, and Weifang pilots, but only considered the scale up
effects of the Yantai (Bohai Golf) and Guangdong pilots to estimate the indirect environmental benefits (ICR,
para 51 and annex 5). In its written response, the Bank team specified that the incremental cost of the project
was US$21.21 million and the estimated total global environmental benefits amounted to US$33.16 million.
Based on this, the cost effectiveness of the project is estimated at US$0.640 per ton, which is 27 percent more
efficient than the US$0.876 per ton estimated at appraisal.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project was expected to be implemented in four years. However, it had a slow start after its approval in
December 2018 because it took the national project management office (NPMO) more than one year to open
the project's designated account and sign the agreements on the implementation arrangements with the pilot
provinces. The project was also affected by the COVID outbreak in 2020, especially at the local level where the
Transport Bureaus were fully occupied to ensure mobility and logistics in their jurisdictions (Restructuring paper,
para 20). In addition, staff turnover in some local project agencies negatively affected the projects efficiency
(ICR, annex 6). Because of all this, the one-year closing date extension was needed.

The actual project cost was 55 percent higher than the appraisal estimate because, as mentioned in section 2,
more TAs and TAs with greater depth and breadth were carried out.

On balance, the efficiency of project implementation is rated substantial. The project's cost
effectiveness was 27 percent higher than estimated at appraisal because of the larger global environmental
benefits. However, the project suffered from administrative inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's overall outcome is rated as satisfactory. The relevance of the PDO to government priorities
and the World Bank strategies is rated as substantial. The project achieved its PDO, and the efficacy of the

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



objectives is rated as substantial. The project was implemented largely efficiently despite an one-year closing
data extension.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to development outcomes:

Government ownership and commitment risk: The most significant and likely risk is that measures
implemented in the Bohai Bay pilot in Yantai will not be replicated in at least 10 other locations and the
measures implemented in the Guangdong pilot will not be replicated in at least 20 other locations as
assumed in the CO2 emission reduction estimate. For the Bohai Bay pilot in Yantai, the ICR (para 77) states
that "it is promising that this target will be met since the MOT made commitments to accelerate the
development of multimodal transport in at least 63 major ports across the country and it was assumed that at
least some of these developments would be influenced by the learnings derived from this pilot". In its written
response, the Bank team clarified that the main stakeholder to replicate the pilot experiences is the MOT.
Similarly, for the Guangdong pilot, the ICR (para 77) states that "as of July 2023, the MOT announced 118
counties as the third batch of urban and rural transport integration demonstration counties. Of these, there
are 74 counties that have characteristics [...] suitable for the replication of the measures done in the
Guangdong pilot." the Bank team, in its written response highlighted that "the measures supported by the
project are now well and truly mainstream across China and are not considered risky." The Bank team, in its
interview with IEG, clarified that most of the TA activities carried out early during project implementation have
already been used extensively. However, there is a risk that some of the more recent activities will not be
fully used, hence will not contribute to improve the recipient’s institutional capacity to formulate and evaluate
policies and strategies to promote green freight transport systems.

Technical risk: The project developed innovative policies, strategies, and pilots in the area of green freight
transport, which have a low technical risk. As pointed out by the Bank team in its written response, "things in
China move fast and the recipient and other stakeholders have high capacity. While these
policies, strategies, and pilots were innovative at project appraisal, they have been massively mainstreamed
as business as usual across China since then."




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The quality at entry is rated as satisfactory. The Bank team ensured that the project design built on
  the government’s development priorities and the previous project experience in China. The Bank
  team made sure that the project design was closely aligned with the Bank’s engagement strategy. The

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



  Bank team supported a project design that combined TAs at the national level to shape the framework for
  green freight transport and pilot projects at the subnational level. The selection of these pilot projects was
  based on how well they fitted with the national green freight transport priorities. This had proven
  successful on green urban transport in China in the past. The Bank team also provided international best
  practices on green freight transport and logistics and built strong strategic partnerships with the public,
  academic, professional institutions, and private organizations, in Germany, Canada, USA and UK to
  inform the pilot projects on planning, development, and financing of the logistics clusters (PAD, para 42).

  The Bank team paid attention to citizen engagement by including an indicator to measure the TAs
  informed by citizen engagement in the results framework.

  The Bank team also ensured that sound institutional arrangements were set up. Since the
  implementation agencies for three pilot projects had no previous experience with World Bank projects,
  the Bank team provided training on fiduciary aspects and supported adequate safeguards preparation.
  Given the nature of project and the previous World Bank experience in China, a modest overall risk rating
  was adequate. Risks were adequately identified, and mitigation measures were mostly sound (the staff
  turnover in some project implementation agencies, while anticipated and mitigated through repeat training
  and consultant support, still negatively affected project efficiency). The ICR (annex 6) notes that the
  recipient praised the professional support provided by the Bank team during project initiation.

  Although the Bank team did ensure that the PDO was clear and achievable, one of the objectives could
  have been improved with greater focus on the transformational expectations for the intervention given the
  experience and capacity in China. The Bank team could also have mitigated the heavy reliance on
  assumptions in the project results' logic. Finally, although the M&E system design was adequate to
  assess the achievement of the results, the Bank team could have insisted on better capturing some of the
  project outputs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team supported project implementation by focusing on technical aspects and project
 management. It provided extensive technical guidance to the implementing agencies on all aspects of the
 project, including but not limited to the overall project management approach and strategic study outputs.

 The Bank team worked closely with the implementing agencies to manage implementation challenges,
 such as the delay in setting up the designated account and the implication of COVID. The Bank team
 provided regular trainings to the implementing agencies. Because the Bank team was Beijing-based, it
 was able to provide swift and just-in-time support to the recipient (ICR, para 74). The Bank team
 satisfactorily supported safeguard and financial management issues. The ICR (annex 6) notes that the
 recipient appreciated the professional support and guidance provided by the Bank team during project
 implementation.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



 Finally, the Bank team restructured the project promptly after the Mid-Term Review. In terms of
 minor shortcomings, the Bank team could have added indicators to the results framework to capture key
 outputs of the pilot projects at the restructuring.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD (para 55), the NPMO under the MOT and the local project management offices
 (PMO) were expected to be responsible for M&E. The local PMOs were to ensure that local level
 enterprises submitted the data needed for project M&E. In addition, the project had a M&E budget for
 consultants to assist the PMOs in data collection and analysis, particularly with collecting data and
 assessing the CO2 emission reductions and targets of the pilot projects.

 The results framework included 19 indicators. All indicators had baselines and realistic project end
 targets. The indicators to assess the achievements of the efficacy of objectives 1 and 2 were adequate, but
 the project could have benefitted from better targeted or additional output indicators to monitor the key
 outputs of each pilot project.

 The PAD (annex 1) included clear definitions for the descriptive indicators, which were useful in assessing
 the project achievements. It also included guidance on data collection. However, as the Bank team clarified
 in its interview with IEG, the methodology to assess the CO2 emission reductions was not spelled out in a
 sufficiently clear manner at appraisal, which gave rise to lengthy discussion during project implementation
 and at evaluation.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para 64), the NPMO and the local PMOs diligently collected the data required for
  the indicators. The ICR (para 64) and the Bank team in its interview with IEG stated that indicators
  related to CO2 emission reductions were largely calculated following the methodology established at
  appraisal, but updates were made to some assumptions based on more recent and accurate data. Data
  used was reliable and of good quality.

  The indicators were updated during each mission and reported in the Implementation Status and Results
  Reports. During the 2022 restructuring, the indicators and targets were revised to reflect the project



                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



  changes, but the project missed an opportunity to add indicators to better monitor the outputs of the pilot
  projects.

  Finally, the ICR (para 64) states that the M&E functions and processes will likely not be sustained after
  project closing as the indicators were designed specifically for project monitoring.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 65) notes that the M&E data was used by the Bank team, the NPMO, and the local PMSs
  to monitor project progress and inform the directions of project implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal, the project was classified as category B for environmental assessment purposes. The project
   included no civil works or feasibility studies for civil works. The TAs to be carried out under the project
   focused on green freight transport, so they were designed with environmental protection objectives through
   energy saving and pollution and CO2 emission reductions. However, it was anticipated that the TAs could
   have potential environmental implications in terms of downstream implementation of their findings and
   recommendations. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment OP/BP
   4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP
   4.12 mainly as a precautionary measure. The project prepared and disclosed an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework (ESMF). The environmental classification and the triggered safeguards policies
   did not change with the 2022 restructuring.

   In terms of environmental and social performance during project implementation, the NPMO
   assigned an environmental and social focal point to manage the project's environmental and social
   performance and contracted an environmental and a social consultant to assist in the ESMF
   implementation. The project conducted environmental and social capacity building and training workshops
   for the PMOs or contractors at least once a year. An effective working mechanism and procedure for
   environmental and social assessment was established between PMOs and contractors.

   Since the outcomes of TAs and other project activities, such as the digital platforms, could have had
   environmental and social implications going forward, the project prepared terms of reference to carry
   out environmental and social assessments and incorporated them into the scope of the TA activities and
   platform development. This ensured that environment and social risks were identified and the corresponding
   measures were put forward. The ICR does not provide details on these risks and mitigation measures.

   The ESMF performance was monitored and reviewed by both national PMO and the World Bank through
   the regular missions and progress reports. Existing grievance redress services were used to collect
   suggestions or complains related to the proposed TA studies and any downstream investment. The ICR

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



   (para 68) points out that overall, the ESMF was well implemented, the project environmental and social
   performance is satisfactory.

   There was no need to apply the safeguard polices on Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12), Natural Habitats
   (OP4.04), and Indigenous Peoples (OP4.10) during project implementation because the environment and
   social impacts screening concluded that no TA supported the preparation of feasibility studies of
   infrastructure investments, technical designs, or other activities directly linked to future investment projects
   (whether or not funded by the World Bank).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The ICR (para 72) notes that the that the project carried out the procurement activities in
   line with the legal covenants and the World Bank’s procurement guidelines and that the project's
   procurement performance was satisfactory. The ICRR does not mention any procurement problem. The
   project procured 35 consulting services and two contract for goods, which were all completed by project
   closing. The recipient's procurement staff attended procurement training provided by the Bank team during
   project preparation and trainings organized by the World Bank and Tsinghua University during project
   implementation. In addition, the NPMO organized continuous capacity building events on procurement and
   contract management for staff members of the NPMO and the local PMOs.

   Financial management. The ICR (para 71) notes that the projects financial management performance
   was satisfactory. The project submitted the financial audit reports for 2019 to 2022 on time with acceptable
   quality. No significant financial management issues were disclosed in the audit reports, which all had
   unqualified opinions. Most of the interim financial reports (IFRs) were also submitted to the World Bank in a
   timely manner, but a few had short delays. The IFRs were found to be of acceptable quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)




12. Lessons

The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR, with additions by the IEG
after discussions with the Bank team:

Supporting pilot projects that are fully aligned with national strategic priorities and focusing
on key leverage points helped in achieving significant CO2 emission reductions. The project's
success was significantly influenced by its close alignment with China's national strategic priorities,
particularly on energy conservation and CO2 emission reduction. The Bank team clarified in its
written comments, that when the project was designed, the national government laid out its
objectives and selected the proposals from subnational government that most aligned with these
objectives. By focusing on key leverage points within the transport sector, the project was also able
to maximize performance benefits with minimal capital investment, demonstrating the effectiveness
of targeted interventions. This is likely to have important consequences for the longevity and
catalytic nature of the project’s support.

Continuous capacity building and knowledge sharing ensured buy-in into the green freight
agenda. The project's success in promoting green freight practices was significantly influenced by
its capacity building and knowledge sharing activities, which included training programs, seminars,
and knowledge sharing platforms. These activities helped spread green freight transport ideas to
more industry stakeholders. In particular, by equipping companies with the knowledge and tools to
measure their carbon footprints, set low-carbon goals, and develop sustainable roadmaps, the
project has fostered a culture of environmental responsibility within the industry. The project's use of
professional media platforms to publicize project results and promote the concept of green freight
further amplified its impact and contributed to the long-term sustainability of its outcomes. This
lesson therefore highlights the importance of investing in long-term capacity building and knowledge
sharing to ensure that project outcomes are likely sustained beyond the project's completion.

Multimodal transport is a powerful tool for emission reduction. The project demonstrates the
effectiveness of promoting multimodal transport, particularly rail-water intermodal transport, in
reducing CO2 emissions and energy consumption. By shifting freight from road to rail and water, the
project showed that it is possible to significantly reduce transport distances, leading to substantial
reductions in fuel consumption and GHG emissions. This lesson underscores the importance of
prioritizing multimodal transport strategies in future projects aimed at achieving sustainable freight
transport.

Digital solutions and standardization are essential for optimizing freight efficiency. The
project's success in implementing digital solutions (platforms) for freight matching, route
optimization, and logistics information sharing highlights the crucial role of technology in improving
freight efficiency and reducing costs. These digital solutions facilitated seamless connections,
optimized vehicle loading rates, and reduced waiting times for truck drivers, ultimately contributing to
a more efficient and cost-effective freight system. Furthermore, data standardization with platforms
across modes, to share data, helps smoothen multi-modal operations, enable shorter connections
times between different modes, and better route planning/optimization. This lesson emphasizes the
need for incorporating digital solutions in future projects to enhance freight logistics and promote
sustainable practices.


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



A lack of standardized CO2 emission data collection methodologies leads to difficulties in
robust monitoring. The methodology to collect data on CO2 emissions of the pilot intervention
used at appraisal was not very clear, and the project teams had many discussions on how best
collect data and monitor CO2 emissions. Although the project made significant strides in collecting
data on CO2 emissions and other environmental indicators, the data collection and monitoring
systems still require further refinement. The project highlights the need for standardized data
collection methodologies and robust monitoring systems to ensure accurate and reliable data CO2
emission reduction data. This lesson emphasizes the importance of investing in data infrastructure
and strengthening data management practices to effectively track progress and measure the
effectiveness of green freight initiatives.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, consistent, well-structured and written, and largely comprehensive. It includes useful tables
with project outputs and outcomes. The ICR follows the ICR guidelines with regard to the narrative and the
rating.

The quality of the evidence is adequate. The ICR is results oriented. It adequately analyses the outputs and
outcomes captured in the results framework, but it could have given more focus on if and how several TA
activities were used. It could also have described more in detail the link between the outputs of the pilot projects
and the CO2 emission outcomes. For example, the ICR (page 14) reports that "140 emission monitoring
sensors were installed in trucks and data from these sensors was sent to Weifang Transportation Energy
Consumption Platform and Emergency Command Center Platform for further analysis." It does not explain what
happened with the results of the analysis and how they contributed to CO2 emission reductions. Most links,
however, are clear in the Carbon Emission Reduction Annex 5. The efficacy analysis could have dwelled more
extensively on the attribution of CO2 emission reductions to project activities. It could also have benefitted from
better justifications why certain outcomes were considered as achieved even if the target was not fully
achieved. For example, two project outputs had to be approved by the MOT but were adopted by the industry
instead.

The CO2 emission reduction calculations and the economic analysis are sound, but the ICR did not report the
total incremental costs and the estimated million tons of CO2 emission reduction. The Bank performance and
M&E sections are largely adequate. The safeguard and fiduciary sections are concise, well presented, and
contain all necessary information. The lessons are derived from experience and based on analysis, but the
presentation of a few could have benefitted from more details, and their importance only became fully clear in
IEG's interview with the Bank team.




                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Efficient and Green Freight Transport (P159883)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                 Page 19 of 19
