     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024296

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P116748                                     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Armenia                                     Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80550,IBRD-83880                       30-Jun-2016                                            59,525,269.28

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 26-May-2011                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             39,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                              70,065,585.20                                                 0.00

 Actual                                          59,525,269.28                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Dileep M. Wagle             Christopher David             Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)
                             Nelson




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The project’s development objective was “to increase the reliability and capacity of the power transmission
   network”. This was as per the Financing Agreement, 2011, Schedule 1, p.5, as well as the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD), p.4.

   In the analysis that follows, the PDO can be parsed as follows: (i) “To increase the reliability of the power
   transmission network”, and (ii) “To increase the capacity of the power transmission network”.


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



   Because there was no change in the PDO, and the scope of the project increased on account of the additional
   financing introduced in 2014, this review will not conduct a split evaluation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  05-May-2014

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening of the Power Transmission Network (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$45.0
   million – of which IBRD US$34.0 million; Actual cost at closing: US$64.34 million – of which IBRD
   US$53.03 million). This component was intended to finance investments in replacement of around 230 km
   section of transmission line, that formed the North-South transmission backbone connecting the Hrazdan
   Thermal Power plant and the Shinuhayr substation. The purpose of the investments was to improve the
   reliability of the transmission line and increase its capacity from 250 MW to 310 MW (later changed to 380
   MW). The investments included such items as intermediate and anchoring pylons, replacement of 220 kV
   conductors, replacement insulators, and construction of new concrete foundations for the pylons.

   The additional financing in 2014 added incremental investments and interventions, such as: (i) the
   rehabilitation and extension of the Haghtanak substation, and (ii) the rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 and
   Vanazdor-1 substations. The second restructuring in 2015 added to Component 1 the replacement of a
   25km 110 kV transmission line between Lalvar and Noyemberyan (later revised to 27.5 km). The third
   restructuring in 2017 added the rehabilitation of the Zovuni substation, to replace the remaining obsolete
   equipment such as disconnectors, voltage transformers, switchgears, etc.

   Component 2: Technical Assistance (Estimated cost as appraisal: US$4.7 million - of which IBRD
   US$3.5 million; Actual cost at closing: US$7.07 million, - of which IBRD US$6.50 million. The component
   included activities to strengthen the institutional capacity of the State-owned grid operator, High Velocity
   Electric Networks of Armenia (HVEN), including: (a) training HVEN staff to strengthen capacity in technical
   supervision, planning, procurement, financial management and project management; (b) computer software
   for transmission network system planning and technical analysis, (c) implementation support, including
   hiring of consultants, supervision of field works and ensuring safeguards compliance, and (d) incremental
   operating costs of HVEN. The additional financing in 2014 and the second restructuring (2015) made some
   modifications to Component 2, adding expenditure categories and additional funds to finance
   implementation support consultants covering the additions to the scope of Component 1.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



   Project Cost and Financing

   All of the project’s financing was provided through two IBRD loans, an initial loan of US$39 million (with
   US$13 million to come from the Borrower), followed by an additional financing (AF) amount of US$40
   million equivalent (with US$10 million to come from the Borrower).

   Dates

   The project was approved on May 26, 2011, becoming effective on November 28, 2011. The original
   closing date was June 30, 2016. However, this date was extended via six restructurings – including an
   additional financing - to December 30, 2023; i.e. by a total of 48 months.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context

As a result of economic reforms, Armenia’s economy had performed well from 2001 until the advent of the
financial crisis in 2008. Growth had taken place at a rapid 12 percent per annum between 2001 and mid-
2008, driven by an increased inflow of remittances, high commodity prices and foreign investments. The
global financial crisis however hit Armenia severely, affecting inward remittances, resulting in a contraction
of the economy by 14.2 percent and an increase in poverty by nearly 5 percentage points. A fragile
recovery was underway by 2010, as a result of a government-led stimulus package combined with
increased public investments to create jobs. At the time of appraisal, the most important strategic challenge
facing the country was the need to improve the productivity and competitiveness of its tradables sector,
including through improvement of basic infrastructure services, to accelerate growth in the medium term.

Armenia’s power sector had achieved remarkable results during the 2000s, with a 100 percent collection
rate, requiring no subsidies and being one of the top taxpayers in the country. It had been unbundled, with
70 percent of generation assets privatized and a competent regulatory agency in place. However,
challenges had begun to emerge, in terms of a potential supply gap on account of the planned shut-down of
the nuclear plant in 2016 and phasing out of older thermal plants, deteriorating reliability and limited
affordability for low-income households. The shortage of generation capacity was expected to reach
between 1,150 – 2,270 MW by 2027. Heavy reliance on imported fuels and old, under-maintained
transmission and distribution assets moreover put Armenia at risk of supply interruptions, price fluctuations
and possible outages. The average age of the transmission lines was around 45 years and HVEN had not
made any substantial investments in rehabilitation of the lines. At the same time, power tariffs were
becoming increasingly unaffordable for low-income consumers, who – in 2009 - were spending around 10
percent of their total household budgets on power and gas.

The Government’s Energy Sector Strategy and the Sustainable Development Program recognized these
challenges. The increase in power sector reliability was one of the key strategic objectives of the
sector. Towards that end, the Government prioritized rehabilitation of the power transmission network as a
means of achieving these objectives and requested the World Bank’s support to replace and rehabilitate
sections of the transmission line. In terms of sector experience, the Bank had knowledge and considerable

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



               experience with transmission projects globally, coupled with a history of successful engagements in the
               power sector in Armenia, where it played an important role in reforming the sector as well as in supporting
               the Electricity Transmission and Distribution project.

               Alignment with Country Strategies

               The project’s PDO was aligned with the World Bank’s country strategy for Armenia at appraisal, through to
               project closing. At appraisal, the project supported Objective 4, Results Area 5 (‘Strengthening Knowledge
               and Competitiveness’) of the Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY09-FY12, which was
               aimed at “reducing transmission losses”, thereby to help improve competitiveness by increasing the
               transmission capacity of the high voltage network by 60MW and reducing transmission losses. During
               implementation, the project’s objectives supported Objective 1.4, to ‘improve access, quality and
               sustainability of key infrastructure with nationwide scope”, within Cluster 1 (‘Supporting Competitiveness
               and Job Creation”) of the CPS for FY14-FY17. They also remained substantially relevant to the priorities of
               the subsequent CPF for FY19-FY23, as reflected in CPF Objective 3 (“Enhanced Connectivity and Access
               to Reliable Infrastructure” – which included transport and digital, in addition to energy), where one of the
               targets was the reduction of plant and equipment failures in power transmission substations.

               As indicated earlier, the project’s PDO had been aligned with Armenia’s Government Programs, at the time
               of appraisal, including the Energy Sector Strategy and the Sustainable Development Program. Energy
               security was a priority in the Government’s revised ‘2014-2020 Action Plan for Implementation of the
               Provisions of the Energy Security Concept of Armenia’. The challenge of power supply reliability was
               recognized by the Government, as reflected in various strategic documents, including the Concept of
               National Energy Security adopted in 2013 and the Armenian Development Strategy for 2012-2025 (2012).

               Based on the above, the relevance of the project’s objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             “To increase the reliability of the power transmission network”

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC)

                             The project was designed to increase the reliability and capacity of the transmission network by financing the
                             rehabilitation and capacity expansion of overhead transmission lines and substations. In this way, the theory
                             of change was fairly straight-forward: The project would contribute both directly and indirectly to the project’s

                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



development objectives. Directly, by maintaining and enhancing the capacity of the transmission network;
indirectly, by addressing supply gaps, by reducing losses and increasing transmission capacity. It also aimed
to contribute to affordable tariffs by cutting losses and operations and maintenance (O&M) costs. The
Additional Financing (AF) that was introduced expanded the scope of the operation to include another
transmission line and substation work, but did not alter the logic of the theory of change.

The project’s activities aimed to strengthen the transmission network by a combination of measures to
replace a 230-km segment of transmission line by increasing its capacity from 250 MW to 310 MW, and –
under the AF – by rehabilitating specific substations and replacing an additional 27.5 km of transmission line,
plus replacement of additional assorted equipment, such as transformers and switchgears. The activities also
aimed to provide project management support and capacity building, through the provision of training to
HVEN staff, computer software for network planning and implementation support through specialized
consultants. The activities were expected to lead to increased capacity of the network, reduction in outages
and improved technical performance and system reliability. The longer-term outcome expected was a
positive contribution towards improving the competitiveness of Armenia’s economy. While the ICR does not
specifically discuss this, these activities appear to have been of adequate scale to create a critical mass for
change. It should be noted however that the ICR does not specifically discuss any of the key assumptions
underlying the TOC.

Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were consistent with the above results chain. The
initial two PDO indicators focused on the 220 kV Hrazdan-Shinuhayr transmission line’s capacity and
reliability, with an intermediate indicator tracking the length of line rehabilitated. The AF introduced two PDO-
level indicators measuring the impact of rehabilitating the three substations through reduced equipment
failure and interruption frequency, along with an intermediate indicator measuring the number of substations
rehabilitated. Subsequent restructurings introduced intermediate indicators relating to the number of
customers served and the project’s GRM performance (disaggregated by gender).

Outputs

As indicated above, the project rehabilitated selected sections of overhead transmission lines and substations
in the Armenian high-voltage network to achieve the objective of improving reliability.

- 257.5 km of transmission lines were constructed or rehabilitated under the project, exceeding the initial
target of 230 km, which had been revised to 255 km in 2015.

- 2 substations were rehabilitated during this period, only partially achieving the initial target of 3 substations
(and the revised target of 4).

- 100 percent of registered project-related grievances were responded to within the stipulated service
standards for response times – thereby fully achieving the target.



Outcomes

The project was mostly successful in reducing outages on the target section of the transmission line, from a
baseline of 20 per annum to 6, against a target of 3.


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



Plant and equipment failures per year in target substations were reduced from a baseline of 8 to 1 per year by
closing, fully achieving the original target of 1 and revised target of 2 failure per year.

Average interruption frequency, measured per annum in the project area, was reduced from a baseline of
0.31 to 0.29 by project closing – failing to achieve the (revised) target of 0.08. This was however fully
achieved for customers in the Special Economic Zone served by the Hagtanak station. Average interruption
frequency for this location was brough down to zero, from an annual baseline of 0.2 and target of 0.05. It
should be noted, as pointed out by the ICR (p.9), that the achievement of both these indicators was partially
dependent upon investments in the distribution sector, which was operated by the private sector (and
supported separately by IFC) and hence beyond the direct control of the project. A lack of progress in the
distribution sector negatively affected the results for the interruption frequency indicators – which should be
kept in mind.

The ICR similarly (p.10) draws attention to the fact that the system average interruption frequency index
(SAIFI) data showed that total network reliability including transmission and distribution, deteriorated from
2013 to 2018 (SAIFI increasing from 4.28 to 8.29), but improved thereafter, once infrastructure financed by
the project came online (SAIFI decreasing steadily to 6.19 by 2023). While outages attributable to HVEN’s
infrastructure were not separately measured, the average interruption frequency resulting from infrastructure
owned by power companies other than ENA (which included outages attributable to HVEN’s infrastructure),
declined by 50 percent from an average of 0.24 in 2013-17 to 0.12 in 2018-23.

The average number of customers served in the project area, which had been introduced as a supplemental
indicator during the 2015 restructuring, came to 161,364 persons, against a revised target of 362,000. This
indicator however had no real bearing on the reliability objective and can be ignored for this purpose. The
number of affected customers was moreover already taken into account in the SAIFI data, on account of the
methodology used in calculating this indicator.

Based on the above results, and the fact that alternative measures of the development objective suggested
an improvement in the reliability of the power system after 2018 (ICR, p. 11), achievement of this objective is
rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To increase the capacity of the power transmission network”

Rationale
The theory of change applicable to this objective is the same as for Objective 1. Relevant activities to meet
this objective included investments to rehabilitate overhead transmission lines (OTL), thereby increase the
transmission capacity of the targeted section of the transmission lines. Activities were also aimed at
strengthening the institutional capacity of HVEN, through training and various forms of implementation
support (no indicators were included for measurement of performance of these activities).


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



                            Outputs

                            Outputs listed under PDO1 were equally relevant to PDO2, hence are not listed again.

                            Outcomes

                            The capacity of the targeted section of the transmission lines was increased from a baseline of 250 MW to
                            380 MW, fully achieving the target.

                            The capacity of two of the substations being rehabilitated (Hagtenak and Charantsavan-3; the capacity of the
                            other substations remaining unchanged) increased from a baseline of 428 MW to 605 MW – i.e. by 87
                            percent - by project closing, mostly achieving the target of 630 MW.

                            Based on the above, the efficacy of PDO2 is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project substantially achieved its two objectives. Considerable progress was
                            achieved in terms of improving the reliability and the capacity of the transmission network in Armenia, despite
                            some shortcomings. As such, overall project efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency

   The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project at appraisal was estimated at 16.7 percent, as per the
   PAD, with a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$47.8 million at a discount rate of 10 percent. The ICR recalculated
   these estimates, to adjust for minor changes in the disbursement schedule, coming up with slightly lower revised
   estimates of EIRR (as at appraisal) of 14 percent and NPV of US$35 million. The EIRR at closing (post-
   restructurings) was estimated at 15 percent, with NPV estimated at US$28.51 million – i.e. in the broad ball-
   park.



                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



Operational/Administrative Efficiency

The project underwent several restructurings coupled with extensions of closing date. Moreover, as pointed out
by the ICR (p.13), substantial delays plagued implementation, leading to an eventual 9-year implementation
period for the original loan, overlapping an 8-year period for the AF. As such, the overall implementation period
was 12 years from approval. According to the ICR, while some of the delays may have been on account of
factors beyond the control of either HVEN or World Bank, some of them could well have been prevented through
better planning, more efficient implementation, adequate support to the client and better sequencing of
interventions. For instance, changes in government direction with regard to implementation modalities severely
affected the implementation of Charentsavan-3, when HVEN decided in early 2017 to terminate the
implementation contract for the substation, in an attempt to implement the construction using its own staff. This
proved to be a failure, and HVEN was forced to revert to the original approach, requiring extensive and time-
consuming contract renegotiations, concluded only in April 2021. Ironically, the international contractor was by
then in dire financial straits (unrelated to the project) and had to withdraw from the project in 2023. Other issues
included fiscal constraints impacting project implementation by slowing down disbursement of consultant
payments, especially for counterpart funds. Delays with land acquisition and RAP completion reports also
contributed to delays in implementing the rehabilitation of the OTLs under the project, reflecting HVEN’s lack of
experience with transmission projects (and with World Bank projects).

Economic efficiency, based on original appraisal estimates and the ICR’s project closing estimates, was
substantial at best. More importantly, Operational and Administrative efficiency was clearly modest, based on
substantial delays and overestimation of costs, leading to inefficient use of resources. Based on this, the
project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  16.70
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               15.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives were highly relevant to the objectives of Armenia’s power transmission
sector. Its overall efficacy is rated Substantial, the project having achieved many of its key development



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



objectives. Its efficiency is rated Modest, based on Operational/Administrative efficiency considerations. As
such, its overall outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key risks to development outcome for:

(a) Capacity Objective: Achievement of this objective was robust (ICR, p.21). Installed capacity is unlikely to
be lost except in the case of civil conflict or a similar unforeseen event, the likelihood of which is low. As
such the associated risk can be considered Low.


(b) Reliability Objective: While the project’s contribution to HV network reliability is robust, reliability can be
influenced by various other network factors. It will be necessary to sustain the investment program for
network rehabilitation and introduce upgrades, as required, the risk of which could be influenced by
macroeconomic conditions and the government’s sector policies. Since much of the financing for the
network investment program will need to come from private and commercial sources, the associated risk can
be considered substantial. However, fiduciary and environmental risks affecting reliability are low, since
most of the works have been completed; hence, the risk that network reliability will not be sustained can be
considered Moderate.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The initial design of the project was generally adequate, but the Borrower’s lack of experience with
  complex transmission and World Bank projects proved to be an important constraint to efficient
  implementation. The project itself was the first large transmission project implemented by HVEN, as no
  transmission lines had been constructed in Armenia since the 1980s. The project’s design had to
  incorporate significant technical assistance to address this lack of experience on the part of the Borrower
  and build capacity. The project’s subsequent restructurings, for the AF and beyond, proved to be
  suboptimal (ICR, p.20), as some substations could only be rehabilitated sequentially, which led to delays
  in implementation. An additional problem arising was that there was a significant overestimation of
  project costs, which the ICR attributes partly to the Borrower’s inexperience, but also to inadequate
  advice provided by the Bank itself. Some of the excess funds could be reallocated, but - on account of
  the sequencing problems, resulting in two of the substations not being completed in time – some
  US$11.67 million of funds had to be cancelled prior to closing.

  Based on the above, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory, given these design shortcomings.


                                                                                                        Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project received adequate implementation support from the World Bank but the sequencing of
 investments during the Additional Financing and the utilization of resources, which was less than efficient,
 could have been handled more proactively. The Bank team conducted six supervision missions in the field
 from approval until 2018 and eight missions from 2021 to closing, supplemented by virtual missions and
 local field support between 2019 to 2021, making up a total of 23 missions during the 12-year
 implementation period. The Bank’s implementation support contributed to building up the borrower’s
 capacity. Financial control and audit issues were closely monitored during six annual FM missions;
 similarly, the Environment & Social (E&S) team closely supervised compliance with E&S safeguards
 requirements. Technical support was provided to the Borrower for the TA in Component 2. The Bank
 team also provided significant support during the implementation period of the AF and the subsequent
 restructurings. The Zovuni and Charentsavan-3 substations would have to be completed after project
 closing, but – as per guidelines - the Bank would continue to provide implementation support to ensure
 E&S compliance. That said, the quality of supervision would have been improved by more effectively
 addressing challenges related to procurement delays and underutilization of funds. More creative
 approaches to the implementation delays may well have been to the benefit of the project and mitigated the
 substantial time overruns.

 Based on the above, Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design and arrangements were generally adequate. The PDOs were clearly stated and appropriately
 reflected in the results framework. Most indicators – to measure outputs and outcomes of individual
 objectives were realistic and measurable, as were the intermediate indicators. The M&E process became
 the responsibility of the Project Management Board and HVEN following project approval, with HVEN being
 responsible for collecting PDO-level outcome information. Responsibility for resettlement and land
 acquisition monitoring lay with the contractor supervised by a World Bank Social Development Specialist.

 With the Additional Financing and subsequent restructurings, several new PDO and intermediate indicators
 were added to the results framework, and hence to the M&E framework. As indicated above, one

                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



 important outcome indicator, added during the AF restructuring, to measure the Average Interruption
 Frequency in the project area, was not well designed as it could not be met without commensurate
 downstream distribution network investments by the private distribution company. This meant that there
 was an insufficiently clear causal chain of attribution between the project activities and the results of the
 indicator, representing a shortcoming in M&E design.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (p.18), M&E implementation was generally timely and regular. Evidence from the
  ISRs and Aide Memoires suggested consistent monitoring and reporting of issues, with regular reports
  and updates on procurement, the ESMP, and financial and audit matters. However, the ICR indicates
  that the SAIFI indicator (#4) and related indicator (#6) relating to SAIFI in the Special Economic Zone
  were not adequately monitored during implementation.



c. M&E Utilization
  Data monitored during implementation was used during the six restructurings that the project underwent,
  to inform the reallocation of savings, contract management, support for E&S risk management and
  resolution of RAP implementation issues, including guidance on remedial measures as identified in the
  post-RAP Follow-up Survey.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category B, as per the PAD (the ICR does not clarify the E&S status of the
   project). However, the TTL clarified in subsequent discussion that the following policies were triggered:
   Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11). The ICR indicates (p.18) that Environment & Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and site-specific
   Environment & Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared and approved by the World Bank,
   posted on the HVEN website and publicly consulted. Semi-annual E&S monitoring reports on safeguards
   performance at the substation sites and along the OTLs were regularly submitted to the Bank and had
   shown gradual improvement in quality. Awareness training was also periodically conducted for the
   contractor workforce, with special emphasis on hazardous waste management during civil works.

   Compliance with social safeguards was closely monitored and rated Satisfactory at closing. All Compliance
   Reports acknowledged that the implementation of Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs)
   complied with the Project Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Republic of Armenia legislation and initial
   resettlement plans. According to these reports 80 to 95 percent of the affected households were satisfied
   with different processes of ARAP implementation, including land valuation, overall size of compensation,
   payment process, etc. A post-ARAP survey social impact assessment carried out on behalf of the World

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



  Bank documented positive impacts on households’ quality of life, as a result of the compensation received
  and a resultant improvement in housing conditions, education and healthcare. Finally, a Grievance redress
  Mechanism (GRM) was also established.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  At appraisal, procurement risk was rated substantial. With capacity-building support from the Bank, all
  procurements were completed, though some contract management issues did arise. HVEN was
  responsible for procurement activities under the project, despite having very little experience in World Bank
  procurement policies and procedures. However, HVEN was supported by competent consultancies in
  preparing bidding documents, conducting the bidding process, negotiations and signing of contracts. The
  ICR notes (p.19) that the use of Bank procurement guidelines yielded significant competition and low
  prices for the project’s two components and subcomponents. On the other hand, the project faced
  challenges during contract implementation, giving rise to several procurement-related issues, including
  delayed or missing updates, and contracts frequently expiring before completion with extensions granted
  too slowly.

  The ICR notes (p.19) that Financial Management (FM) arrangements were satisfactory to the World Bank
  in terms of staffing, planning, accounting, financial reporting, external audits and funds flow throughout the
  implementation period. HVEN also had an acceptable internal control system in place. Although some
  problems arose on account of shortages and turnover of FM staff, the project’s rating for FM compliance
  was Satisfactory in the ISRs, with a risk rating of Moderate. The TTL clarified, in subsequent discussion,
  that all financial covenants were complied with during implementation. The project’s interim unaudited
  Financial Reports, including the latest IFRs for semester 2 and Q4 of 2023, were received on timely basis
  and were overall acceptable to the Bank. The TTL clarified that there was one qualified audit opinion (for
  year ending December 31,2022); all others were unqualified.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The project made an institutional strengthening contribution to HVEN’s ability to manage IFI-supported
  projects. Initially, HVEN faced several capacity shortfalls, including unfamiliarity with World Bank-funded
  projects, inexperience with managing large contracts and inexperience with resettlement issues. To
  mitigate these, HVEN engaged a project team, with an international consultant engaged for implementation
  and contract management support. The project’s TA component supported software for integration of the
  power sector into regional markets and helped in developing legal and regulatory frameworks for wind
  power projects. All of these efforts helped HVEN significantly upgrade its institutional capacity and will
  stand it in good stead for implementing future IFI-supported operations.



d. Other
   ---



                                                                                                   Page 12 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons drawn from the ICR:

1. Investments in transmission grid strengthening need to be accompanied by tariff and
other reforms. Transmission grid investments are often considered public goods to be financed by
concessional borrowing. However, there can be a significant disparity between the economic and
financial viability of the transmission network. Tariff reforms are often necessary to ensure the
commercial viability of these investments. This is borne out by the economic and financial analysis
of the project, which showed a wide disparity between the economic and financial rates of returned
estimated by the ICR (Annex 4, p.38), with the EIRR – based on an imputed ‘willingness to pay’ of
consumers at roughly four times the current tariff – calculated at 15 percent, against an FIRR, based
on actual tariffs, of only 5 percent.

2. When bundling several individual infrastructure investments into one project, sequencing
of the investments becomes critical. In the project, the restructurings of 2014 and 2017
introduced substation investments that could only be implemented in phases, for technical
reasons. As a result, procurement of the last of these substations could only be started in 2020. In
hindsight, this could have been avoided with closer attention paid during preparation of the
restructurings to the alignment of disbursement projections, procurement and technical planning.

3. The use of reputable engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contractors and
owner’s engineer firms for project implementation and supervision can enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of projects involving design, procurement and construction
activity, irrespective of the implementing agency’s technical capabilities. The project
demonstrated that the advantages of maintaining an arms-length relationship can help ensure clear
accountability for project execution. The owner’s engineer can provide more objectivity to protect
the borrower’s interests. During the project’s implementation, when attempts were made to proceed
without external contractors or a supervising engineer, this led to unfavorable outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                 Page 13 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ELECTRICITY SUPPLY RELIABILITY (P116748)



  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, candid review and internally consistent, and provides a fair amount of detail on
background and implementation issues. The achievement of objectives is adequately analyzed. The Bank’s
performance is adequately assessed, as is the M&E system. Overall, the narrative appears to support the
ratings and available evidence. One area where more details might have been useful is compliance with
environmental and safeguards issues, where the ICR does not clarify the project’s safeguards category (this
had to be obtained from the PAD) or the Bank’s safeguards policies that were triggered. Similarly, on fiduciary
compliance, the discussion on Financial Management compliance in the ICR does not make note of the
timeliness of project external audits and whether the external auditors’ opinions were qualified in any way.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
