     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024274

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P132515                                     PE Support to the Subnational Transport

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                        Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85620                                  31-Mar-2021                                           34,273,312.66

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Dec-2015                                 31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                        Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              34,273,312.66                                                0.00

 Actual                                          34,273,312.66                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Vibecke Dixon               Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 6), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was
   “to (i) facilitate sustainable road access of the Borrower’s rural populations to services; (ii) reduce transport
   costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors; and (iii) strengthen decentralized road management”.
   The PDO in the PAD (para 18, page 6) was nearly identical, only changing “the Borrower” for “Peru”; “The
   Project development objectives are to (a) facilitate sustainable road access of Peru’s rural populations to
   services, (b) reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors, and (c) strengthen


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



   decentralized road management”. For the purpose of the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO will be parsed as
   follows:

         1. To facilitate sustainable access of Peru’s rural populations to services
         2. To reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors
         3. To strengthen decentralized road management



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The Subnational Transport Support Program (Programa de Apoyo al Transporte Subnacional, PATS) was
   designed to support the Peruvian Government’s trade and social inclusion agenda. The purpose of the
   PATS was to invest in rural roads that link the poorest and most remote districts in the country, and support
   physical, institutional, and regulatory investments to improve transport on selected roads feeding into
   logistics corridors. The PATS built on previous programs and introduced a stronger focus on road safety,
   socio-environmental compliance, and gender. Beyond the provision of reliable infrastructure, PATS was
   also expected to benefit the population by strengthening the technical capabilities of local governments
   (LGs) and road infrastructure institutions, including investment planning, while supporting the
   decentralization agenda.

   The PATS was designed as a US$600 million investment supported by US$500 million from the GoP and
   two loans of US$50 million each, one from the World Bank and the other from the IDB.

   The project had four components. The description of the components in the PAD encompassed the full
   investment of US$600 million, while noting the World Bank contribution under each of them, as follows:

   Component 1: Infrastructure for Integration and Social Inclusion (estimated total cost at appraisal:
   US$405.8 million, of which World Bank financing; US$35 million; actual cost US$18.37 million). This
   component included a focus on road safety, social and environmental compliance and climate change
   adaptation. For both subcomponents, the loan financed technical design and detailed engineering studies
   as well as execution of civil works. There were two subcomponents:

         i. Subcomponent 1.1: Infrastructure for Social Inclusion (estimated total cost at appraisal: US$169.7
             million, of with World Bank financing was US$27.7 million, actual cost US$18.3 million). This
             subcomponent was to improve 1,100 km of rural roads to promote accessibility and social inclusion
             of the poorest areas of the country.
         ii. Subcomponent 1.2: Integration of the Feeder Network into Selected Logistic Corridors (estimated
             total cost at appraisal: US$236.1 million, of which World Bank financing: US$7.3 million, actual cost


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



       US$0.24 million).
       This subcomponent was to improve 1,100 km of rural roads linked to five selected logistic corridors.

Component 2: Rural Road Infrastructure Maintenance (estimated total cost at appraisal: US$151.9
million, of which World Bank financing US$10 million, actual cost: US$10.12 million). This component
was to provide support for the efficient and sustainable decentralized maintenance of the rural road
network, through a) technical design for periodic and routine maintenance contracts; b) centralized and
decentralized execution of civil works for periodic and routine maintenance of about 5,000 km of rural roads;
and c) supervision of related civil works.

Component 3: Decentralized Road Management (estimated total cost at appraisal: US$26.7 million,
of which World Bank financing US$4.65 million, actual cost US$5.78 million). Component activities
included institutional strengthening of the Rural Roads Agency Provías Decentralizado (PVD) and
subnational level institutions in road transport management, capacity building program for microenterprises
to carry out routine maintenance; the design and implementation of a Local and Logistics Development
Window; and program M&E including implementation of an information and reporting system.

Component 4: Project Management (estimated total cost at appraisal; US$15.7 million, of which
World Bank financing US$0.35 million, actual cost US$0 million). This component was to cover the
project’s incremental administrative costs, including staff, audits, information dissemination, program
activities related to training, and operational support through consulting services. The only activity to be
financed by the World Bank under this component was an external audit and the cost was to be shared with
IDB.

Restructurings

The project underwent 5 restructurings (the ICR does not specify whether these were level 1 or level 2
restructurings), with the following key revisions:

R1 March 10th, 2021; Change in Results Framework, in Components and Cost, in Loan Closing Date, in
Safeguard Policies Triggered, in Legal Covenants, in Institutional Arrangements and in Implementations
Schedule.

R2 June 30th, 2021; Change in Results Framework, in Components and Cost, in Institutional
Arrangements, in Implementations Schedule and Reallocation between Disbursement Categories. This
restructuring reduced the measured and reported scope to what the World Bank was effectively financing in
the Project.

R3 April 4th, 2022; Change in Components and Cost, in Loan Closing Date, in Procurement and in
Implementation Schedule.

R4 February 24th, 2023; Change in Loan Closing Date.

R5 May 24th, 2023; Change in Results Framework, in Components and Cost, in Safeguard Policies
Triggered, in Implementation Schedule, Cancellation of Financing and Reallocation between Disbursements
Categories. This restructuring reduced some of the indicator targets further.

The Results Framework (RF) in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) originally encompassed the whole
PATS Program scope, relative to the US$600 million investment, despite the World Bank contributing to

                                                                                                Page 3 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



only 8.3 percent of the total investment. The PATS aimed to rehabilitate/improve 2,200 km of rural roads;
maintain, either through periodic or routine maintenance, 5,000 km of roads; and deepen the
decentralization agenda. It became clear in 2021, however, that each financier was implementing its project
independently, and the World Bank carried out a restructuring in 2021 that split the World Bank investments
(US$50 m) from the overall PATS. As a result, while the original Project Development Objective (PDO) was
maintained, the 2021 restructuring reduced the Project scope to what the World Bank was effectively
financing.

Revised components
The component descriptions were revised in the second restructuring, as follows:

Component 1: Infrastructure for Integration and Social Inclusion (R2 revised cost: US$36.28 million,
R3 revised cost US$35.46 million, R5 revised cost US$ 21.20 million, actual cost US$18.37 million)

     i. Subcomponent 1.1: centralized execution of civil works for rehabilitation and improvement selected
        works for this subcomponent, including road safety materials and related road users training.
    ii. Subcomponent 1.2: Improving the transitability of rural roads linked to and/or feeding into logistic
        corridors as described in the MOP, through (i) centralized technical design and detailed engineering
        studies for roads rehabilitation and improvement; (ii) implementation of safeguards mitigation
        measures as needed for the civil works in this subcomponent.

Component 2: Rural Road Infrastructure Maintenance (R2 revised cost US$10 million, R3 revised
cost US$10.08 million, R5 revised cost US$10.5 million, actual cost US$10.12 million)
Provision of support for the efficient and sustainable maintenance of the rural road network, through:

     i. technical design for periodic and routine maintenance contracts;
    ii. centralized execution of civil works for periodic maintenance selected works; and
   iii. supervision of related civil works.

Component 3: Decentralized Road Management (R2 revised cost US$3.72 million, R3 revised cost
US$4.46 million, R5 revised cost US$5.5 million, actual cost US$5.78 million)
Provision of support for the efficient and sustainable decentralized transport management agenda, through:

     i. the strengthening of the capacity at the subnational (Regions and Municipalities) in road transport
          management;
    ii.   the institutional strengthening of PVD;
   iii.   the development and implementation of a capacity building program for routine maintenance;
   iv.    the design and implementation of a Local Development Window; and
    v.     Program monitoring and evaluation.

Component 4: This component for Project Management was dropped. World Bank resources under this
component were initially envisioned to cover only the financial audit.

The indicators and indicator targets were also changed and reduced;

      The original PDO indicator “Share of rural population with access to an all-season road” (target
          51.5%) was replaced by “People with access to an all-season road financed by the project” (target
          30,220. This target was further reduced in the 5th restructuring (R5) to 24,730 people).

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



        The original PDO indicator “Reduced truck transit time from production to distribution on feeder
         roads integrated to logistics corridors” (target 25%) was replaced by “Change in the vehicle travel
         time on rural roads financed by the project (target 50%).
        The original PDO indicator “Vehicle operating cost for trucks” (target US$0.42 from a baseline of
         US$0.79) was replaced with “Vehicle operating cost for trucks on rural roads with access to logistics
         corridors financed by the project (target US$0.48, revised baseline US$0.59). This revised indicator
         selectively measures successful instances of project-financed logistics corridors and ignores cases
         where access to project-financed logistics corridors failed or was negligible.
        The Original PDO indicator “Roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads”
         (target 60%, from a baseline of 55%) was replaced by “Percentage of local governments with a fair
         or good institutional capacity in road management (target: 30%). This revised indicator is vague and
         replaced an original indicator that was specific and measurable.

  A detailed overview of corresponding changes in component costs is provided in table 3 on page 12 of the
  ICR.



  Split evaluation
  A double split evaluation will be done based on the changes introduced in the 2nd and 5th restructurings, as
  only these two restructurings entailed significant changes to the Results Framework and reductions in
  targets.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost
  The planned total project cost was US$600 million, of which the IBRD contribution was planned to be
  US$50 million. Actual IBRD cost was US$34.72 million. The final total cost of the project is not reported, as
  the ICR only reports on the WB share of the project. The Project and component financing shares were
  adjusted as shown above in the description of the revised components. Further, the R5 cancelled US$12.8
  million of the World Bank loan (25.6 percent), and US$2.9 million was reimbursed after the closing date.

  Financing
  The project was cofinanced with the Government of Peru (GoP) and the Inter-American Development Bank
  (IBD), where the GoP’s share was US$500 million, and the IDB and WB would contribute with US$50
  million each.

  Borrower Contribution
  Borrower contribution at appraisal was US$500 million.

  Dates
  The project was approved on December 11th, 2015 and effective on July 8th, 2016. The Mid-Term-Review
  date was April 8th, 2019. The original closing date was March 31st, 2021 and the actual closing date was
  December 31st, 2023, i.e., 33 months’ extension (2 years and 9 months). The project was restructured 5
  times, on the following dates: March 10th, 2021, June 30th, 2021, April 4th, 2022, February 24th, 2023 and
  May 24th, 2023.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

At appraisal in 2015, despite a decade of strong economic performance, there were still persistent
disparities between rural and urban areas in Peru. Between 2005 and 2014, the poverty rate was reduced
from 55.6 to 22.7 percent, but the rural poverty rate in 2014 was more than 30 percentage points higher
than in urban areas, at 46 percent.

In 2011, the Government of Peru (GoP) launched an ambitious plan to overcome social inequalities. Its
main objectives were to improve access to services, reduce extreme poverty, improve environmental
monitoring, and enhance the connectivity of rural areas.

Alignment with Government priorities

The PDO was well aligned with the GoP’s Strategic Sector Plan 2012-2016 (SSP), which was launched by
the Ministry of Transport and communications (MTC) with the aim to establish logistic platforms and
corridors to facilitate trade and to promote social inclusion. The PDO was fully aligned with the
Government’s strategy to (a) extend the rural roads network, (b) expand and modernize road corridors, (c)
consolidate and modernize sector institutions, and (d) provide services and promote innovation and
standardization of processes through enhanced capacity building within the sector.

The PDO was also well aligned with Government priorities at closure. Peru’s Strategic Plan for National
Development 2050 emphasizes the need to reduce inequalities and territorial disparities, and Peru’s
National Infrastructure Plan for Competitiveness and Sustainability (2022–2025) focuses on the need to
enhance the logistics sector through investments in the secondary road network. The implementation of
PATS still continues and still has a strong focus on social inclusion. The design of the project also brought
the concept of strengthening the logistic corridors taking into consideration the role that the tertiary network
plays in the development of value chains.

Alignment with World Bank strategies

The project spanned three World Bank Country Portfolio Strategy (CPS)/Country Portfolio Framework
(CPF) cycles, and remained relevant to the World Bank’s CPS/CPF strategies throughout implementation
including at closure.

At appraisal, the PDO was well aligned to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for Peru
FY12-16, in particular results area 2.2 concerning better transport and infrastructure to reduce inequality,
under Strategic Objective 2: “Connecting the poor to services and markets”.

The PDO remained relevant to the CPF FY17–FY21 under its Pillar 1:” Productivity for Growth”, and its
Objective 1: “Improve connectivity at critical corridors of the territory”.



                                                                                                      Page 6 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



               At closure, the PDO was well aligned to the CPF (FY23–FY27) Objective 3: “Enhance the delivery of public
               services” under the High-Level Outcome 2 of “Improved access to quality public services”. In addition, PDO
               3, “To strengthen decentralized road management” remained relevant to the objective set under Objective
               4: “Strengthen institutional effectiveness at national and subnational levels”.

               Previous World Bank Experience

               The PATS, like previous rural road programs in Peru over the past 20 years, benefited from World
               Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) support in its design and financing. The World Bank
               had a long-term collaboration with the Government of Peru in the transport sector, which allowed for the
               development of innovative pilots that were progressively expanded over time, such as pairing of road
               improvement with rural development activities, the promotion of decentralization, more in-depth citizen
               engagement, community-based rural road maintenance, and the advance of the micro-enterprise model,
               with a strong focus on gender.

               Level of PDO

               The three PDOs were pitched at a intermediate outcome level (facilitate access to services and reduce
               transport costs, strengthen decentralized road management). The Theory of Change (ToC) and the
               narrative in the PAD highlighted that the expected higher level objectives would include improved
               agricultural livelihoods, increased agricultural income, increased competitiveness and improved economy.

               Summary

               The PDOs were well aligned with both national and World Bank strategies and priorities throughout the
               project period, including at closure. The Relevance is therefore rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To facilitate sustainable access of Peru’s rural populations to services

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The PAD did not include an explicit Theory of Change (ToC), as that was not a requirement at the time. The
                             ICR provides a reconstructed ToC. The project’s inputs such as technical design and detailed engineering
                             studies for roads rehabilitation; rehabilitation and improvement of rural road for social inclusion; rehabilitation

                                                                                                                                   Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



and improvement of rural road connected to logistics corridors; technical design for periodic and routine
maintenance contracts; works for routine maintenance; and civil works for periodic maintenance were
expected to lead to outputs such as improved rural roads for social inclusion in the poorest rural areas, and
rural roads under routine and periodic maintenance, both with road safety, gender and E&S considerations.
These outputs were in turn expected to lead to the outcome level result of Peru’s rural population’s
sustainable road access to services.

The critical assumptions included a) all parties’ financing would be readily available; b) the implementing
agency’s capacity and personnel would be maintained throughout the project; c) political stability would be
maintained; and that d) no major climate-induced disaster would occur in the project areas.

The ToC is clear and convincing and does not contain any logical gaps.



Outputs

The following reflect the original output indicators with the original target values. Since these were replaced at
the second restructuring, there is no data on achievements against these targets. Output level targets under
this objective were thus not achieved.

      Direct project beneficiaries, target 1.1 million
            o Of which females, target 51%
      Rural roads rehabilitated, target 2,200 km (The cumulative length of all roads reopened to motorized
       traffic, rehabilitated, or upgraded under the project).
      Length of roads under routine and periodic maintenance, target 5,000 km



Outcomes

The following reflect the original outcome indicators with the original target values. Since these were replaced
at the second restructuring, there is limited data on achievements against these targets. Outcome level
targets under this objective were thus not achieved.

      Share of rural population with access to an all-season road, target 51.5%
       (Proportion of rural people in the program area who live within 2 km (20-minute walk) of an all-season
       road)
      Reduced truck transit time from production to distribution centers on feeder roads integrated to
       logistics corridors, target 25%.
       (At appraisal it took 2 hours to drive an average distance of 25 km or about 13 km/h (2015). Improved
       road condition was expected to reduce time by a minimum of 30 minutes, that is, improving the
       distance coverage to about 17 km/h).
      Roads in good and fair condition as a share of total classified roads, target 60%.
       (The percentage of the total classified rural road network in the program area that is in good and fair
       condition depending on the road surface and the level of roughness).



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



There is insufficient information to report on the original targets, i.e., achievements against these targets are
not documented and the rating of this objective is therefore Negligible.




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To facilitate sustainable access of Peru’s rural populations to services

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change

The revisions to the indicators and targets did not affect the ToC.

Outputs

      57.96 km roads rehabilitated financed by the project, not achieving the R2 target of 172 km.
       The target was significantly reduced from the original 2,200 km. The original target values reflected
       the targets for the whole program, while the reduced targets reflected only the WB-financed part of the
       program.
      190 km under periodic maintenance financed by the project, achieving the R2 target of 190 km.
       The target was significantly reduced from the original 5,000 km. The original target values reflected
       the targets for the whole program, while the reduced targets reflected only the WB-financed part of the
       program.

Outcomes

The ICR reported the following achievements at outcome level:

      20,070 people with access to an all-season road financed by the project, almost achieving the R2
       target of 20,220 people.
      Vehicle travel time was reduced with 49.9%, achieving the R2 target of 50%.
      There were 124,340 direct and indirect project beneficiaries of roads financed by the project, not
       achieving the R2 target of 152,520 beneficiaries.
            o 49.89% of which were female, almost achieving the R2 target of 51%
      65% of beneficiaries felt that the project investments reflected their needs, almost achieving the R2
       target of 70% beneficiary satisfaction.

While the project did achieve the R2 target for roads under periodic maintenance and managed to reduce
travel time by almost half (nearly achieving the R2 target), it was far from achieving R2 targets for kilometers



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



of roads rehabilitated, and did not fully reach the R2 targeted beneficiary numbers. Achievement of Objective
1 Revision 1, to facilitate access of Peru’s rural population to services is therefore rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To facilitate sustainable access of Peru’s rural populations to services

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change

The revisions to the indicators and targets did not affect the ToC.

The results achieved under Objective 1 Revision 1 are also valid under this revision. The achievements
compared to indicators with reduced targets (R5) were as follows:



Outputs

      57.96 km roads rehabilitated financed by the project, not achieving the R5 target of 102.57 km.



Outcomes

      There were 20,070 people with access to an all-season road financed by the project, not achieving
       the R5 target of 24,730 people.
      There were 124,340 direct and indirect project beneficiaries of roads financed by the project, almost
       achieving the R5 target of 128,780 beneficiaries.
            o 49.89% of which were female, almost achieving the R5 target of 49.97%



Taking into consideration the results achieved under R2 which are also valid for R5, the project did achieve
the target for roads under periodic maintenance and managed to reduce travel time by almost half (nearly
achieving the target), it was far from achieving R5 targets for kilometers of roads rehabilitated, and did not
fully reach the R5 targeted beneficiary numbers. Achievement of Objective 1 Revision 2, to facilitate access of
Peru’s rural population to services is therefore rated Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors

Rationale
Theory of Change

The project’s inputs such as technical design and detailed engineering studies for roads rehabilitation;
rehabilitation and improvement of rural road for social inclusion; rehabilitation and improvement of rural road
connected to logistics corridors; technical design for periodic and routine maintenance contracts; works for
routine maintenance; and civil works for periodic maintenance were expected to lead to outputs such as
improved rural roads for social inclusion in the poorest rural areas, improved feeder rural roads connecting
with logistic corridors, rural roads under routine and periodic maintenance, all three with improved road
safety, gender and E&S considerations; technical studies for rural road rehabilitation, and improved level of
service maintenance contracts. These outputs were in turn expected to lead to the outcome of reduced
transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors.

The critical assumptions are the same as those listed under the original objective 1.

The ToC is clear and convincing and contains no logical gaps.



Outputs

No output indicator was identified under this objective.



Outcomes

The following reflects the original outcome indicator with the original target value. Since this was replaced at
the second restructuring, there is no data on achievement against this target. The outcome level target under
this objective was thus not achieved.

      Vehicle operating costs for trucks, target 0.42 US$ (baseline 0.79 US$)
       (The baseline and target vehicle operating costs were based on information provided in the PATS
       economic analysis. It is calculated as the weighted average for two-axle trucks moving on the rural
       roads linked to logistics corridors.)

There is insufficient information to report on the original targets, i.e., achievements against these targets are
not documented and the rating of this objective is therefore Negligible.


                                                                                                    Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors

Revised Rationale


Theory of Change

The revisions to the indicators and targets did not affect the ToC.



Outputs

Vehicle operating cost for trucks on rural roads with access to logistics corridors financed by the project
increased from the baseline of US$0.59 to US$0.85, not achieving the R2 target of US$0.48.

Outcomes

No outcome indicator was identified under this revised objective.

The target was not achieved, as vehicle cost increased instead of decreased under the project. Hence the
achievement of the objective is negligible.



Revised Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To reduce transport costs on rural roads linked to priority logistics corridors

Revised Rationale
The indicator related to this objective was not revised in R5, achievement is therefore the same as under the
2nd restructuring, i.e., negligible.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen decentralized road management

Rationale
Theory of Change

Inputs such as institutional strengthening of the Rural Roads Agency PVD, capacity building for regional and
provincial governments, design and implementation of Local and Logistics Development Windows (LLDW);
and M&E and implementation of information and reporting system were expected to lead to outputs such as
projects developed and approved under LLDWs; stronger capacity of provincial governments to execute
multiyear road programs; and microenterprises certified to perform routine maintenance services. These
outputs were in turn expected to lead to the outcome of strengthened decentralized road management.

The critical assumptions are the same as those listed under the original objective 1.

The ToC is clear and convincing and contains no logical gaps.



Outputs

The following reflect the original output indicators with the original target values. Since these were replaced at
the second restructuring, there is limited data on achievements against these targets. Outcome level targets
under this objective were thus not achieved.

      Number of projects approved under LLDWs, target 24 (Component 3)
       (24 provinces with their local economic development plan elaborated and approved, i.e., 12 Local
       Development Windows and 12 Logistic Development Windows)
      Percentage of Province Governments included in the program that have executed 80% of the
       multiyear road program, target 80% (From the 37 provinces included in the PATS, Component 3).
      Number of microenterprises certified to perform maintenance services, target 200
       (Number of microenterprises trained and certified for maintenance services in a program designed
       with universities).

Outcomes

No outcome indicator was identified for this objective.

There is insufficient information to report on achievements against the original targets, i.e., achievements
against these targets are not documented and the rating of this objective is therefore Negligible.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To strengthen decentralized road management

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change

The revisions to the indicators and targets did not affect the ToC.



Outputs

      24 Local Economic Development Plans (PDEL) were delivered to Local Governments financed by the
       project, achieving the R2 target of 24.
      15 Participatory Provincial Road Plans (PVPP) implemented under the program and financed by the
       project, almost achieving the R2 target of 16.

Outcomes

59% of local governments had fair or good institutional capacity in road management, exceeding the R2
target of 30%.

The project achieved and almost achieved the R2 output targets under this objective, and exceeded the R2
outcome target of percentage of local governments with fair or good institutional capacity in road
management, thus substantially achieving the objective of strengthened decentralized road management



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To strengthen decentralized road management

Revised Rationale
None of the indicators related to this objective was revised in R5. Achievement is therefore the same as
under the 2nd restructuring. Achievement of this objective is thus Substantial.



Revised Rating


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            All three original objectives were negligibly achieved, as the indicators were replaced in the second
                            restructuring and thus no relevant data was available at closure to compare achievements to original indicator
                            targets. Original overall efficacy is thus Negligible.

                            Some of the project difficulties were due to delays in budget allocation from the Ministry of Economic and
                            Finance (MEF) which caused implementation delays. Furthermore, procurement processes started late, only
                            two years into implementation. There was a need for constant training of staff due to very high turnover which
                            also made it difficult to accumulate knowledge and experience within the PIU. This also led to several
                            unsuccessful bidding processes. It furthermore turned out to be difficult to identify contractors/consultants
                            who would comply with the requirements established.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                                Insufficient evidence
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Under Revision 1 (i.e., R2), the first objective to facilitate access of Peru’s rural population to services was
                            rated Modest due to low achievement. The second objective to reduce transport costs was rated negligible as
                            vehicle costs increased under the project, and the third objective to strengthen decentralized road
                            management was rated Substantial as the project almost achieved, achieved and exceeded the R2 targets
                            under this objective. With Modest, Negligible and Substantial ratings of the three objectives, the Overall
                            Efficacy rating for Revision 1 is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR2_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
                            Under Revision 2 (i.e., R5), the first objective to facilitate access of Peru’s rural population to services was
                            rated Modest because while the project did achieve the target for roads under periodic maintenance and
                            managed to reduce travel time by almost half (nearly achieving the target), it was far from achieving R5
                            targets for kilometers of roads rehabilitated, and did not fully reach the R5 targeted beneficiary numbers. The
                            second objective to reduce transport costs was rated negligible as vehicle costs increased under the project,
                            and the third objective to strengthen decentralized road management was rated Substantial as there were no

                                                                                                                              Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



  further revisions to the related indicator targets, so the achievements and rating remain the same as for
  Revision 1, i.e., Substantial. With Modest, Negligible and Substantial ratings of the three objectives, the
  Overall Efficacy of Revision 2 is Modest.



  Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating                         Primary Reason
  Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency

The ex post economic analysis of the Project done for the ICR replicated the analysis done during preparation.

The economic analysis at appraisal encompassed the whole project and the results showed that over 10 years,
the net present value (NPV) at a 9 percent discount rate was estimated to be US$271.4 million and the related
internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated to be 16.1 percent (PAD p 14 and PAD Annex 6). This was estimated
for the whole project, and not only for the WB financed part of the project. Hence, a new economic analysis was
done at the second restructuring with estimations covering only the WB financed part of the program. Pre-and
post- comparison of the figures will thus take the R2 values as pre-project values.

The Project used cost-benefit analysis (CBA) for the economic analysis of the original Program activities focused
on Components 1 and 2, which covered 95 percent of the overall investment, and 90 percent of the World Bank
loan. The economic analysis done at the second restructuring estimated an internal rate of return (IRR) at 16.1
percent and the net present value (NPV) at a 9 percent discount rate, to be US$11.9 million.

At completion, an ex-post analysis was conducted for the roads completed, using the Roads Economic Decision
Model Version 4.00 (RED). Data (roadworks cost and maintenance cost, traffic volume) were provided by the
implementing agency reports based on the most updated information available at the time of completion. The
Project’s discounted net worth at completion had an estimated internal rate of return (IRR) of 14.4 percent and
the net present value (NPV) at a 9 percent discount rate of US$7.7 million, as outlined in Table 9 on page of the
ICR. The ICR states (p 20) that the changes in NPV and IRR values at completion stage could be attributed to
changes in traffic volume and assumptions on vehicle operation costs.

This shows a modest economic efficiency.

Administrative efficiency

The project experienced an almost two-year delay between the development and approval of the methodology
for road selection and the completion of the portfolio of interventions. The methodology, in particular, was
affected by the changes in management within the Rural Roads Agency (PVD). The project’s efficiency was
negatively affected by the lack of clarity on the responsibilities of co-financiers and on the processes of approval,
mainly regarding the safeguard instruments. One of the key results of R2 was that the processes for approval
and no-objection were clarified, as, for example, issues with safeguards, as well as aspects of procurement and
financial management, were dealt with the corresponding co-financier. However, R2 only occurred in 2021, after



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



the Project had been going on for almost five years. The three project extensions to the closing date allowed a
larger share of disbursement, but by R2, 70 percent of the total amount had already been disbursed.

Efficiency is rated Modest due to the project’s marginal economic efficiency and the delays and substantial
shortcomings in administrative efficiency


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High, the Original Efficacy is Negligible, while the R2 and R5 Efficacy both are rated Modest,
and Efficiency is rated Modest. This gives an overall Outcome rating of Unsatisfactory.

                            Original Objective            2nd Restructuring (R2)   5th Restructuring (R5)
Relevance                                                             High
Objective 1                 Negligible                    Modest                   Modest
Objective 2                 Negligible                    Negligible               Negligible
Objective 3                 Negligible                    Substantial              Substantial
Efficacy                    Negligible                    Modest                   Modest
Efficiency                                                            Modest
                                                          Moderately               Moderately
Outcome rating              Unsatisfactory
                                                          Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Rating value                2                             3                        3
Disbursements US$           23.85                         7.62                     2.8
Share of disbursement       0.70                          0.22                     0.08
Weighted value of
                            1.40                          0.66                     0.24
outcome rating
Overall outcome rating      1.40+0.66+0.24=2.3, rounded down to 2 = Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




The overall outcome rating is thus Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political Risk: The project’s implementation period was characterized by a climate of political instability in
Peru, with widespread public demonstrations and corruption scandals revealed at different Government
levels. There is a risk that the political instability may continue and thus potentially affect the government’s
commitment to ensuring sustained development outcomes of this project.

Environmental Risk: Some of the Project areas, including those where World Bank interventions were
financed, suffered regular landslides and heavy rains that prevented works from advancing or being
completed. The frequent naturally induced impacts also led to the need to amend the works contracts, to
allow the contractors to deal with the aftermath. In most cases, civil works contractors had to stop operations
for approximately four months a year due to the rainy season. There is thus a significant environmental risk
to the sustainability of the project outcomes.

Sustainability Risk: During the collection of data for the ICR, it became apparent that some of the roads
were already deteriorating and that no plan for maintenance of the roads had been put in place. There is thus
a significant risk to the sustainability of the project outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the design of the project drew on lessons learned and insights gained from decades of efforts in
  the rural road sector, partnership with the IDB, and support to the GoP and the Project was fully aligned
  with the priorities of the World Bank and the GoP in terms of investments in infrastructure in the rural
  roads sector, a significant shortcoming was the misalignment between the Results Framework covering
  the entire program and the project interventions which were restricted to specific works. The design
  lacked the means to incentivize actions beyond the World Bank financing to achieve the PDO.

  A clearly defined set of roads to include into the project was not set at entry. Changes in government and
  lack of coordination between the relevant institutions generated delays in the selection of roads.

  The PAD specified that the World Bank and IDB would supervise the overall Program’s safeguards but
  the level of responsibility for each safeguards’ team regarding supervision and approval of documents
  was not defined. This ambiguity led to an excessive workload and delayed response time from the World
  Bank, which affected project progress.


                                                                                                       Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



  Despite the frequent climate-induced hazards affecting the rural road network in Peru, the project did not
  include disaster risk management mechanisms or specific measures to enhance the infrastructure’s
  resilience in its design. This omission is another a significant shortcoming, as the project missed the
  opportunity to ensure the long-term sustainability of the road network and to facilitate a strategy to make
  rural road infrastructure more resilient to climate and natural induced hazards. Issues of climate-induced
  hazards were addressed through thorough technical assistance during implementation. The related
  recommendations were not implemented, however, because it encompassed an increase in the cost of
  the roads.

  Due to these significant shortcomings in design, quality at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Task Team conducted 13 Supervision Missions during the 7 years of the project’s life, i.e., two
 supervision missions annually except from in 2022, when only one mission was conducted. The World
 Bank provided continuous and adequate support and training to the client throughout the implementation.

 When the need was identified, the World Bank involved high-level specialists like engineers
 and procurement-, environmental-, and social specialists.

 There was significant turnover of staff which affected the implementation and supervision of the activities.
 Issues related to World Bank safeguards were a recurrent source of delay and misunderstandings despite
 significant support and training.

 The Task Team missed the opportunity to revise the PDO based on the information that no works were
 carried out under Subcomponent 1.2. and to more accurately reflect the Development Objectives of the
 World-Bank financed project. PDO 2 was thus not achieved and based on the available information on the
 actual nature of the roads, this non-achievement was foreseeable. Other changes during restructurings,
 such as extending the closing date, revising the indicators and reducing the target values, were relevant.

 During the data collection to measure the PDO indicators at closing, it became apparent that roads
 completed under the project had not received adequate maintenance, and that their condition was
 suboptimal. The PAD envisioned that roads financed through the project should have received routine
 maintenance, and the World Bank requested PVD, during missions, to develop a strategy for maintenance.
 This was not developed during the course of the project.

 The lengthy process to develop and approve technical road documents was also a cause of delay.

 Due to these significant shortcomings, the Quality of Supervision is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While the M&E design at appraisal was relatively simple, it was designed to track the results of the overall
 program and did not focus on the WB financed part of the operation. This was also reflected in the Results
 Framework (RF). The indicators included in the PAD were expected to be enriched with additional
 indicators collected as part of the Program’s M&E, including indicators to be collected through a planned
 Impact Evaluation (IE). The M&E office of the Rural Roads Agency (PVD) was to be responsible for the
 monitoring and to capture all the indicators for each co-financier, and to establish additional indicators
 during implementation. The original PDO indicators followed relevant best practices at the time to measure
 the outcomes of the Project. At the time of appraisal, measuring the Rural Access Index and the Vehicle
 Operating Cost was the standard in rural roads projects. However, it is now understood that such indicators
 must be better customized to be practical. For the indicator on VOC, PVD lacked the tools to measure input
 data and this added a layer of difficulty when evaluating project outcomes at closing.



b. M&E Implementation
  The original M&E design was not able to track the outputs and outcomes related to the World Bank part
  of the operation as all the original indicators and targets in the Results Framework took the whole Project
  into account. The indicators were revised and targets reduced in the Second Restructuring (R2) to more
  accurately reflect the expected outcomes from the World Bank financed part of the operation. The targets
  were further reduced in the Fifth Restructuring (R5).

  The implementing agency did not report on indicator progress prior to the MTR in 2019. This absence of
  data posed a challenge for enhancing the indicators during R2, as the task team lacked concrete
  evidence to assess the effectiveness of the indicators and to set realistic targets.

  The implementing agency, PVD, started the planning for collecting data on the final outcomes at least six
  months before the closing date of the Project. There were, however, some issues with the hiring of
  consultants which were exacerbated by unclarities regarding the methodologies to collect data and
  measure the indicators. The indicator on decentralization lagged by at least one year and the latest
  information available was from 2022, and the indicator on citizen engagement was vague and subject to
  a variety of interpretations. The data collection of PDO indicators revealed that PVD lacked the
  equipment and resources to collect the information more regularly. PVD reported on the progress of the
  intermediate indicators through the progress reports submitted every six months and in virtual meetings.
  The RF lacked relevant indicators to appropriately measure the expected outcomes of the project such as
  for example indicators that measure sustainability, i.e., the condition of the roads completed or the
  incorporation of these roads into a routine maintenance scheme. Having such indicators would have



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



  been beneficial, as visual evidence and interviews confirmed, according to the ICR (page 26) that some
  roads were already deteriorating at the time of the ICR.

  The planned Impact Evaluation did not materialize beyond a baseline study which was only finalized in
  June 2022.



c. M&E Utilization
  The RF’s intermediate outcome indicators were used by both the World Bank and the implementing
  agency to assess the project progress, especially after the revisions to the RF in R2 and R5, where the
  revised indicators mostly focused on specific outputs that were easily measurable. However, the
  indicator on citizen engagement was insufficiently utilized, as it was not a regular practice of PVD to
  collect this type of information.

  M&E Quality is rated Modest as there were significant shortcomings to the M&E design and
  implementation



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as category B, as it was not expected to have significant or irreversible impacts
   or risks, and it triggered the following safeguard policies; Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural
   Habitats (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples
   (OP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).

   In compliance with OP 4.01, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) were conducted for each
   subproject.

   An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was established, leading to the development of an
   Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) for subprojects involving indigenous communities.

   Additionally, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed for the entire Project, to cover OP
   4.12, and was followed by the preparation of several Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for each subproject.

   Compliance with safeguards policies was hindered by the client’s high staff turnover (PVD had more than
   10 Executive Directors over the course of 2021–22, and the PIU Coordinator was sometimes changed
   along with the Executive Director), the low quality of reports produced by consultants, and the limited
   understanding of the World Bank safeguards. The quality of the studies required for compliance with OP
   4.10 and OP 4.12 was subpar, and the need for frequent revisions caused substantial delays. Additionally,
   there was initial resistance from PVD to comply with the World Bank safeguards, due to the gaps with the
   national regulation, for example, on resettlement compensation, which contributed to further complications


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



  and postponements in Project execution. Moreover, some of the concepts in the approved terms of
  reference for the safeguard documents were sometimes interpreted in different manners, by the PIU or the
  consultants, which contributed to constant revisions and delays.

  The project closed with a Post-Closure Action Plan (PCAP). Works expanding beyond the project closing
  date, due to either poor contractor performance or climatic conditions, led to the current requirement for a
  PCAP for three subprojects. Two sites have unresolved issues related to OPs 4.10 and 4.12, and one site
  has pending matters concerning OP 4.12.

  The project implementation was thus not in compliance with the WB safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  The financial management risk was considered to be Moderate at approval, as the implementing agency
  had qualified and experienced staff in working with World Bank-funded projects, and as the World Bank
  financing was only to be used for activities at a centralized level. During implementation, there was an
  issue with budget allocation from the Ministry of Economic and Finance (MEF). This caused a five-month
  delay which prevented the initiation of any procurement process, including the hiring of consultants to
  strengthen the PIU.

  Overall, expenses were consistently documented, and interim financial reports (IFRs) were mostly
  submitted on time. The audits predominantly had clean opinions and were also submitted to the World
  Bank in a timely manner.



  Procurement

  Procurement processes financed with World Bank funding started only two years after the signing of the
  LA. The Implementing Agency recorded the information on Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP) throughout the Project; however, it needed constant reminder from the World Bank to
  update the system. There for a need for constant training of staff due to very high turnover which also
  made it difficult to accumulate knowledge and experience within the PIU. This also led to several
  unsuccessful bidding processes.

  It furthermore turned out to be difficult to identify contractors/consultants who would comply with the
  requirements established.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None


                                                                                                   Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                     With 77% of the funding
                                                                                     disbursed prior to restructuring
                                Moderately                                           when development outcome was
Outcome                                                  Unsatisfactory
                                Unsatisfactory                                       negligible, the overall outcome
                                                                                     rating is Unsatisfactory. (See
                                                                                     split rating table in Section 6).
                                Moderately               Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are based on the ones presented in the ICR, with some adjustment to
language:

If the project’s objective and PDO indicators are not well aligned to the activities financed by
the World Bank and to what the Project can effectively leverage, there is a risk that the
project will a) not be able to achieve the set targets (as they are irrelevant to the project) and
b) will not be able to measure the outcomes, as was the case here. In the present case, the
project was an Investment Project Financing (IPF) of limited amount aimed at supporting a much
wider program, but the World Bank had limited leverage on program activities that were not directly
connected to what it was financing. This resulted in a restructuring that substantially revised the
M&E framework.

A robust analysis that considers the implementing agency capacity and the contributions of
World Bank technical and cross-support teams could ground expectations better and may
contribute to higher readiness for implementation for infrastructure projects. The lack of an
established methodology and identified interventions were the main source of implementation delays
of this project. It made the Project vulnerable to political influence and hindered its readiness for
implementation. To improve this, a transparent and participatory process for road selection, with
clearly defined criteria based on objective attributes can be established at appraisal. This could
ensure that interventions are identified and earmarked in a timely manner, reducing the risk of
delays.



                                                                                                       Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)



If a focus on climate change resilience is not ensured in the project design and
implementation, there is a high probability that project roads may not be maintained and may
deteriorate quickly. This is particularly important in countries like Peru that are highly vulnerable to
frequent and intense climate-induced hazards and have difficult landscapes. Future project designs
may focus on promoting and innovating in rural road maintenance schemes, enhancing the
resilience of rural road infrastructure, and incorporating mechanisms for effective disaster risk
management to ensure long-term sustainability of the network. Routine maintenance planning and
funds may be included in the project design to ensure sustainability of the investments.

Developing road-specific safeguard documents for the first round of investments at
preparation may contribute to smoother safeguards processes in the cases where there are
gaps between the World Bank safeguards and national law. Such discrepancies may cause
confusion and delay implementation if a strategy to solve the controversies is not developed. This
Project suffered several delays due to the implementation of the safeguards and the discrepancy
between World Bank and national laws. Additionally, having a clear and documented process for
approving subproject-required safeguard documents and terms of reference can help streamline the
review and approval.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written and presents a good analysis including assessing the quality of evidence. Due to the
weak M&E system though, there is lacking evidence to demonstrate significant outcomes from the project. The
ICR is clear and candid with regards to the project’s challenges and shortcomings and provides a
comprehensive narrative when elaborating on what did and did not work well. The report is internally consistent
and generally follows the OPCS guidelines. One shortcoming is the excessive length of the report with its 31
pages, which is nearly double the recommended length stated in the guidelines.

The quality of the ICR is thus rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PE Support to the Subnational Transport (P132515)




                                                                                 Page 25 of 25
