     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024313

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                             Operation Name
 P174246                                  SA Covid-19 Response DPO

 Country                                  Practice Area (Lead)
 South Africa                             Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



 Non-Programmatic DPF

 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-93320                               30-Jun-2023                                         750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Jan-2022                              30-Jun-2023

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            750,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             750,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                         750,000,000.00                                            0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Rashmi Shankar            Jennifer L. Keller            Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

As stated in the Program Document (PAD, p. 5) and the Implementation Completion Report (ICR, p. ii),
the Program Development Objective (PDO) of the South Africa COVID-19 Response DPO was to "protect the
poor and vulnerable from the adverse socio-economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, and to pave the
way for a resilient sustainable recovery.”


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



This ICR Review will evaluate this program using the following objectives:

      PDO1: To protect the poor and modernize social welfare.
      PDO2: To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The operation had two pillars aligning to the two objectives.

Pillar 1, to protect the poor and modernize social welfare, comprised measures to (a) mitigate the adverse
socio-economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis on vulnerable households, individuals, and workers, (b)
discourage layoffs, hence retain jobs, by subsidizing wages of temporarily furloughed formal sector workers
through cash payments, (c) introduce digital technology to enhance the coverage, transparency, targeting and
efficiency of a poverty-targeted COVID-19 response cash-transfer program, and (d) support the health
response to the COVID-19 pandemic by leveraging digital platforms to enhance the vaccination effort in South
Africa.

Pillar 2, to accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery, comprised measures to (a) establish a Deposit
Insurance Scheme to protect vulnerable depositors in South African banks, (b) approve the National Climate
Change Bill, which provides a coordinated and clearly defined architecture for South Africa’s response to the
impacts of climate change, as well as the country’s contribution to GHG emissions, (c) approve the updated
first National Defined Contribution (NDC), which will more closely align South Africa with the Paris Climate
Agreement, and (d) increase competitive embedded power generation towards achieving more reliable,
cheaper and cleaner energy.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The DPO was approved on January 20, 2022, and became effective on March 1, 2022. The original planned
financing of $750 million in IBRD funds was fully disbursed, with no discrepancies between approval and
disbursement. The DPO was closed on June 30, 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Both pillars of the DPO were highly relevant for two main reasons: (1) the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic
 in South Africa, which further aggravated the country’s highly unequal socio-economic landscape; (2)
 consistency with the Government’s Program, which consisted of a crisis response package and the Economic
 Reconstruction and Recovery Plan to support a resilient and sustainable recovery.

 As of early December 2021, South Africa had the highest number of infections on the continent, with almost 3
 million cases of COVID-19 infections and 90,000 deaths. The number of people with compromised immunity
 due to the high prevalence of HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency virus/ acquired immunodeficiency
 syndrome) made South Africa more vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



The socio-economic impact of the crisis was severe despite the 2020 relief package introduced by the
government. Before the pandemic, South Africa had inequality levels among the highest in the world, with a
Gini coefficient of 0.65 in 2014. Poverty was estimated at 19.7 percent in 2020 based on the international
poverty line ($1.9 a day in 2011 PPP), out of a total population of 58.8 million. Due to the pandemic,
unemployment increased from 29 percent at the start of the pandemic to 34 percent by July 2021, with youth
unemployment reaching nearly 50 percent. During the initial months of the pandemic, 2.2 million South
Africans lost their jobs (out of a total workforce of 17.6 million as estimated by Statistica 2024) and, by the end
of 2020, less than 40 percent of these jobs had been recovered. If the COVID-19 shock had not been
mitigated by social protection and government relief grant programs, an additional 2.8 million people would
have been at risk of falling into poverty in 2020 (PAD, p. 6). The National Income Dynamics Survey –
Coronavirus Rapid Mobile Survey ( NIDS-CRAM) Wave 1 results suggested that up to a third of income
earners were likely to have lost their income between February and April 2020, with a disproportionate impact
on the most disadvantaged, translating into heightened vulnerabilities, notably to hunger. It was estimated that
in the absence of the Government of South Africa’s relief program, the extreme poverty rate for vulnerable
households could have almost tripled (ICR, p. 4). Life expectancy was estimated to have declined from 65.4
years in 2020 to 61.7 years in 2021.

Both pillars of the DPO are consistent with the two elements of the government’s program: crisis response and
the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan (ERRP), which aimed for a resilient and sustainable
recovery from the crisis. The government’s immediate response to the crisis was to put in place an economic
relief package equivalent to 10 percent of GDP, on top of which it added complementary measures in 2021.
These measures had three main components: protecting lives, protecting the poor, and protecting livelihoods.
The government also launched the ERRP in 2020, which sets a path for further structural reforms. The ERRP
has two aims, namely: (i) to deal with immediate actions toward economic recovery amid the COVID-19
pandemic; and (ii) to rebuild and grow the economy ensuring sustainability, resilience, and inclusion. Finally,
the government program also prioritized modernizing social welfare by fully digitalizing the application,
approval, payment, and monitoring of grants, both to preserve service delivery through the pandemic
lockdowns and make the system more efficient, transparent, and accountable in the longer run.

The DPO was the first budget support operation (and fifth lending project) to be undertaken in the country
since re-engagement in 1995. It built on a significant body of analytical work, since the engagement with the
country since 1995 was knowledge based, with the DPO representing an important opportunity to increase
program focus on financing. It was anchored in the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2021), which
identified climate shocks and the high carbon intensity of the economy as a key binding constraint to growth,
and the Country Partnership Framework (CPF, FY2022-26). The CPF was focused on stimulating investment
and job creation and addressing key longstanding structural constraints to sustainable and inclusive economic
growth and development. The DPO was also consistent with the World Bank (WB)’s COVID-19 Crisis
Response Approach Paper and the Green, Resilient, and Inclusive Development (GRID) approach.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

The South Africa Covid-19 Response DPO consisted of eight prior actions (PAs), with each of the two
objectives supported by four measures.



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for South Africa COVID-19 DPO

PDO1: To protect the poor and modernize social welfare
PA1: To protect vulnerable households from the economic impact of the COVID-19 crisis and to support
informal sector workers, the Borrower, through its Department of Social Development, has issued directions
through Government Notice No. 681, which: (a) reintroduce the COVID-19 Social Relief of Distress (SRD)
Program that provides grants to unemployed and informal sector workers who are not eligible for
unemployment insurance benefits; and (b) expand the SRD Program to include unemployed caregivers who
receive child support grants on behalf of children.
PA2: To keep people, especially low-wage workers, connected to their jobs and ready to work when firms re-
open, the Borrower, through its Department of Employment and Labor, has issued directions through
Government Notice No. 637 , which: (a) enhance the targeting of the COVID-19 Temporary Employer-
Employee Relief Scheme (TERS) allowing furloughed workers in hardest hit industries; and (b) allow
targeted works to receive cash payments directly to their bank accounts, in response to the national
lockdown during the third wave of COVID-19 infections.
PA3: To improve the transparency, targeting, and efficiency of social grant programs, the Borrower, through
its Department of Social Development, has issued directions through Government Notice No. 681, which
introduces the use of electronic means to allow for digital application procedures and automated
crosschecking to verify eligibility.
PA4: To improve equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines, the Borrower, through its National Department of
Health, has launched the South African Covid-19 Programme Registration. The programme introduces the
use of an Electronic Vaccination Data System (EVDS) (compliant with the applicable data protection and
privacy legislation) in the rolling-out of the Borrower’s COVID-19 vaccination program, setting the stage for
future health emergencies, as further evidenced in the COVID-19 Implementation Guide and Toolkit.
PDO2: To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery
PA5: To increase the resilience of the financial sector, the Borrower, through its National Assembly, has
approved the Financial Sector Law Amendment Bill, which establishes a resolution regime and enables
provisions for the Corporation of Deposit Insurance.
PA6: To enable the development of an effective climate change response and the long-term, just transition to
a climate-resilient and lower-carbon society, the Borrower, through its Cabinet, has approved the National
Climate Change Bill and its submission to Parliament.
PA7: To more closely align South Africa with the Paris Climate Agreement, the Borrower, through its
Cabinet, has approved the updated First Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which sets more
ambitious greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation targets for 2025 and 2030.
PA8: To increase competition and power generation capacity in the energy sector, the Borrower, through its
Department of Mineral Resources and Energy, has amended Schedule 2 to the Electricity Regulation Act
through Government Notice No. 737, which exempts from licensing embedded generation with a nominal
installed capacity below 100 megawatts as per Schedule 2 to the Electricity Regulation Act.

PDO1: To protect the poor and modernize social welfare.

PA1: PA1 directly supported the government’s emergency relief program, which leveraged the social
assistance system -- assessed as robust in terms of targeting and minimization of leakages by various WBG
diagnostics. The action combined top-ups of existing benefits with the introduction of temporary Social Relief of
Distress (SRD 350) grants for additional beneficiaries affected by the pandemic. The top-ups were on regular
social security benefits for 17 million senior citizens, persons with disabilities, and children and caregivers. The

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



bulk of regular assistance was for children and their caregivers. South Africa has an extensive post-apartheid
social assistance program, with carefully maintained registries. There are various ongoing SRD programs,
which allow the government to provide temporary funding in response to shocks or an urgent need – such as a
natural disaster. SRD 350 was specifically designed for COVID response since regular assistance does not
cover informal workers or persons without children who are not entitled to any other benefits. This was critical
given that South Africa was hit hard by the pandemic, in part because of widespread prevalence of AIDS.
COVID variants originated in South Africa, and depending on geographic location, the population was subject to
lockdowns of varying rigor.

When the third wave of the COVID-19 pandemic hit, followed by the near total lockdown in July 2021, the
government relied fully on a re-introduction of the SRD 350, rather than top-ups on existing benefits. SRD 350
was originally proposed to end by March 2022). At a later stage, it also specifically targeted caregivers who
received the Child Support Grant on behalf of children, 98 percent of whom were female, after data suggested
that not enough women were receiving COVID relief.

The SRD grants over the May 2020 to April 2021 period were to over six million affected informal sector
workers and unemployed prime-aged individuals who were not eligible for other social grants or the
Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF). Overall, in the final round of SRD grants, 55 percent of recipients were
female, and 9.4 million grants were approved. The rapid roll-out of the program over a two-month period (April-
May) relied on digital technology to quickly build a social registry with stringent eligibility criteria, virtual
application and registration processes, and electronic cash payments and was aimed at mitigating the poverty
increase due to the pandemic through targeting of informal workers who were not receiving any other welfare
support. The high quality of existing registries and of regular checking across registries ensured that
beneficiaries were eligible for social assistance. While the exit has been delayed, this is mainly because of
persistent post-pandemic unemployment and continued widespread joblessness, which led to the SRD being
rolled over repeatedly. PA1 directly and credibly supported achievement of Objective 1 by reducing the adverse
impact of the pandemic on poverty rates. Relevance of PA1: Satisfactory (S).

PA2: This PA supported the continued employment of workers in sectors affected the most by the COVID-19
lockdowns. The pandemic and associated economic downturn led to significant disruption in business with
lockdowns at different phases affecting especially workers in entertainment, restaurants, hotels, and tourism.
PA2 was designed to mitigate job losses by avoiding a severance of the employer-employee relationship.
Support to firms to furlough (rather than lay off) workers during the 2008 global financial crisis in Europe was
found to facilitate the recovery period. The South African COVID-19 response strategy operated under a similar
approach so firms that received the payment under Temporary Employer-Employee Relief (TERS) were not
permitted to dismiss their workers. Workers who were dismissed from their jobs were eligible to receive the
standard unemployment insurance payment, which paid below the TERS for low-income workers. The program
launched a transparency mechanism following employee complaints—all firm recipients were named through
an online website and employees were paid directly in their bank accounts–and developed grievance
procedures, including independent investigators, to follow up on employee and employer complaints. PA2
directly and credibly supported the achievement of Objective 1 by reducing lay-offs of workers affected by
COVID restrictions. Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3: PA3 aimed to support the digitization of social protection to ensure service provision during the pandemic,
improve governance and transparency, and ease both the application process and monitoring of funds. The
directive allowed for digital technologies to be utilized for the identification of beneficiaries, payment distribution,
cross checking across databases, and monitoring to minimize leakages. The digitization was implemented
quickly at the onset of the pandemic as lockdowns were initiated and utilized for the roll-out of the SRD grant.

                                                                                                         Page 5 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) continued to improve the system, broadening the channels
though which applications can be submitted and payments received, and instituting monthly reassessments of
eligibility. The digital footprint reduced the time and cost of application, monitoring application status, and the
appeal process as well, allowing for just-in-time cross-checks against live databases that determine eligibility.
The new system was used to quickly roll-out payments when the third wave of COVID hit and could be
leveraged to support regular social security payments as well. The system processed 100 percent of COVID
related grants and was able to detect over 4 million ineligible applicants who were already in receipt of
unemployment insurance. The modernization of the social welfare system supported objective 1 by ensuring
that COVID grants could be distributed despite the lockdowns and improving targeting and reducing leakages.
Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS)

PA4: PA4 supported the modernization of the health system and facilitated tracking of vaccines, which would
facilitate COVID vaccine expansion. The government implemented a nationwide vaccination program, aiming to
inoculate 67 percent of its population to achieve herd immunity. As of November 2021, 10.2 million people (17
percent of the population) were fully vaccinated. The COVID-19 pandemic occurred in a health system that was
already suffering from an excess burden of preventable illness and premature death. The February 2021 shift
toward a new electronic vaccine data system (EVDS) was a critical element in the country’s transformation to a
digital health system and was designed to: (i) capture the relevant metrics of all South African residents who will
be vaccinated; (ii) ensure vaccinees are contactable and alerted to optimize adherence to the vaccination
regime; and (iii) complete the certification process such that vaccine certificates are easy to obtain for those
vaccinated and authorities that may require the certification. The PA supported the modernization of the health
system and facilitated tracking of vaccines, which would facilitate COVID vaccine expansions. Relevance of
PA4: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery.

PA5: PA5 supported the approval of the Financial Sector Law Amendment Bill 2020 (FSLAB), though not its
enactment. Upon enactment, the deposit insurance scheme was implemented by the newly established
Corporation for Deposit insurance (CODI), which became effective in April 2023, nearly a year after the DPO
was approved. The FSLAB established South Africa’s first comprehensive explicit Deposit Insurance Scheme to
protect depositors in line with international standards and aimed to strengthen the resolution framework for all
banks, as well as non-bank systemically important financial institutions, while operationalizing CODI. The Bill
enabled South Africa to meet the basic international standards endorsed by G-20 countries following the 2008
global financial crisis and outlined in the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) Key Attributes of Effective Resolution
Regimes for Financial Institutions. Multiple assessments were undertaken of the financial sector in the years
leading up to the DPO. In 2014, a Financial System Stability Assessment (FSSA) indicated strong commitment
to adhering to the highest standards for banking supervision and regulation, as well as a high level of
compliance with international standards for banking supervision. The FSB conducted a peer review of South
Africa in 2020, which found good progress in developing the frameworks for bank resolution and deposit
insurance. South Africa underwent a Financial Stability Assessment Program (FSAP) update as well, at the
time of DPO design. This PA helped protect vulnerable depositors, a critical element of the financial safety net
in any country and supported financial stability through the approval of the FSLAB. The PA contributed towards
a resilient recovery through its support to financial stability. Relevance of PA5: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA6: In recognition of the challenges posed by climate change to South Africa’s development goals, the
Cabinet, on September 14, 2021, approved the National Climate Change Bill for submission to Parliament. The
objective of the Bill was to enable the development of an effective climate change response and a long-term
just transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy and society. The Bill provided a legal and

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



 institutional framework to ensure that climate change policy is implemented within the country’s sustainable
 development and national development goals. It established a legislative structure to coordinate and integrate
 this response and reinforces South Africa’s international climate commitments and obligations, including the
 NDC to the Paris Climate Agreement. It also had provisions for specific actions related to coordination and
 integration, adaptation, and resilience, and GHG mitigation. The support to climate commitments is consistent
 with both the SCD and the CPF where climate shocks and the high carbon intensity of growth are identified as
 binding constraints on growth. The Bill mainly aimed at institutionalization of the Climate Change Strategy but
 multiple steps not supported by the DPO would have been necessary to even complete the legislative process
 and establish and operationalize the institutional frameworks necessary for achieving targets. Relevance of
 PA6: Moderately Satisfactory (MS)

 PA7: As a signatory to the Paris Climate Agreement South Africa registers their Nationally Determined
 Contribution (NDC) with the UNFCCC every five years. The NDC details the specific mitigation and adaptation
 actions that the country intends to pursue. South Africa published its first NDC in October 2015. This PA
 supported Cabinet approval of an update to the NDC, which includes an increase in the level of its GHC
 mitigation, on September 14, 2021, which has been deposited with the UNFCCC. South Africa emits on
 average 482 MtCO₂e annually. The high carbon intensity of production has been highlighted in analytical work
 as a constraint on growth, along with frequent electricity shortages. The public utility dominated the sector and
 is heavily coal reliant. The country’s GHG emissions profile is dominated by emissions from the energy sector
 and, specifically, from coal-fired power generation, which account for about 44 percent of the total. The
 Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) 2019 therefore set out the decommissioning of about 12 GW of old and
 inefficient coal-fired power plants by 2030. This was equal to 74 percent of South Africa’s total electricity
 capacity. The PA was complemented by trust-funded technical assistance (TA) from the WB through ESMAP to
 support the decommissioning of 6 GW of coal fired plant capacity. While this is an important engagement from
 the perspective of South Africa contributing to the reduction of emissions on a fair share basis, the country was
 obliged to revise its NDP. The IRP entails closure of coal fired plants and is in essence the implementation of
 the actions consistent with the revised NDC. The PA directly support PDO2 in conjugation with the IRP.
 Relevance of PA7: Satisfactory (S)

 PA8: PA8 raises the limit for license exemption for new embedded generation (EG) from 1 MW to 100 MW.
 Before the limit was raised, smaller investment, more consistent with the needs of industry, was constrained by
 red tape. The easing of the limits was expected to encourage private investment, increase competition and the
 security of electricity supply, and shift energy mix towards renewables, given that solar and wind are the least
 cost options in the country. The mining industry is a typical and core beneficiary sector of this policy and at the
 time of DPO approval had already indicated its commitment to installing up to 2,000 MW of solar PV at mining
 sites to meet some of its electricity demand and secure its production. The license exempt EG facilities would
 still have to comply with the requirements as set out in the National Environmental Management Act. The PA
 was designed to support renewables investment, promote competition, and reduce reliance on South Africa’s
 dominant, vertically integrated power supply SOE. Relevance of PA8: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)




Rationale

Table 2: Results indicators (RIs) by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement

                                                      Baseline Target            As % of RI:
                               Associated RI: Relev                       Actual
 Results Indicator                                                               targeted Achievement
                               PAs        ance                            (year)
                                                    (year)     (year)            change rating
 PDO1: To protect the poor and modernize social welfare
 RI1: Number of people who
                                                                       10.3       More
 receive SRD grants in                              6 (March 9.4 (June
                                PA1      MS                            (March     than         [High]
 response to the COVID-19                           2021)      2022)
                                                                       2022)      100%
 crisis, in million
 RI2: Number of workers who                                    3.62    4.98       More
                                                    3.5 (March
 received benefits from the     PA2      MS                    (June   (June      than         [High]
                                                    2021)
 UIF-TERS, in million.                                         2022)   2022)      100%
 RI3: Total value of SRD
 grants disbursed using digital                                        27.5       More
                                                    19 (March 26 (June
 application and verification   PA3      S                             (March     than         High
                                                    2021)      2022)
 procedures, in billion South                                          2022)      100%
 African Rand.
 RI4: Number of people fully                                   26.5    19.3
                                                    0 (Feb.
 vaccinated and registered on PA4        S                     (Dec.   (Dec.      72%          Substantial
                                                    2021)
 EVDS, in million.                                             2022)   2022)
 PDO2: To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery
                                                                                               Substantial
                                                                         0 (Dec. Not
                                                                         2022) met/no          (exceeded,
 RI5: Eligible deposits insured,                      0 (Nov.   80 (Dec.
                                 PA5      S                                        progress    but with
 in percentage                                        2021)     2022)
                                                                         97 (April by target   significant
                                                                         2024) date            delay of over
                                                                                               a year)
 RI6: Department of Forestry,
 Fisheries, and Environment
 (DFFE) presents Sectoral
 Emissions Targets for 5 key
                                                      0 (Nov.   5 (June   0 (June Not
 carbon-intensive sectors:    PA6         U                                              Negligible
                                                      2021)     2023)     2023) achieved
 Energy, Transport, Trade and
 Industry), Agriculture; and
 Water and Sanitation to the
 respective line ministries.
 RI7: Avoided CO₂ emissions
                                                                 900,000 847,000
 as a result of the shut-down                         0 (October
                              PA7         S                      (June   (June 94%             Substantial
 of coal-fired power                                  2021)
                                                                 2023)   2023)
 production, in tons


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



                                                                                                [High], based
                                                                              1253
                                                                                       84% by on additional
                                                                              (Dec.
RI8: Embedded Generation                                                               target   information
                                                                    1500      2022)
Capacity under 100 MW                                                                  date,    that target
                               PA8          MS          1500        (Dec.
registered under NERSA, in                                                             exceeded exceeded
                                                                    2022)     5138
MW                                                                                     a year   less than a
                                                                              (Sep.
                                                                                       later    year after
                                                                              2023)
                                                                                                original date

Note: (i) Achievement ratings in [ ] reflect an MS or lower RI Relevance rating, resulting in a downgraded
assessment of RI achievement for purposes of determining the efficacy rating in Section 5.

PDO1: To protect the poor and modernize social welfare.

RI1 aimed to capture the number of persons who received SRD grants under the government’s crisis
response, as supported by PA1. While the RI captured directly and credibly the impact of one aspect of
PA1’s support to the program, it does not distinguish caregiver beneficiaries, though a part of the rationale
of the support was to better target women affected by the pandemic. The PAD highlights that the digital
system and the 2022 Census were used to ensure targeting and reduce leakages and double-dipping.
Based on the TTL interviews, it appears that targeting relied on the existing social registries which were
rapidly digitalized. Existing registries target, based on an income criterion, families with children, the
elderly, and persons with disabilities. Data is not presented clearly in either the PAD or the ICR and the
text in the PAD is not always internally consistent. RI1 mostly captures the impact of PA1 on PDO1.
Relevance of RI1: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI2 aims to capture the impact of the TERS on preserving employment through the furlough scheme,
supported by PA2. It directly captures the impact of one aspect of PA2 on Objective 1. However, it does
not track the improved targeting of the TERS by priority sector. The target was exceeded, but RI2 does
not fully capture the impact of PA2 on PDO1. Relevance of RI2: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI3 aims to capture the impact of the modernization of the social welfare system through tracking of the
number of grants fully processed – from application stage to direct deposit in beneficiary account –
through the new digitalized set up. RI3 fully captures the impact of PA3 on PDO1. It utilizes data
processed transparently and through non-discretionary systems to establish baseline and actual
achievement. It would have been helpful to leverage the digital system to capture the gender dimension of
the grants distributed. Relevance of RI3: Satisfactory (S).

RI4 aims to capture the impact of the new EVDS system supported under PA4, which registers and tracks
registered persons (22.5 million South Africans over the age of 12). RI4 fully captures the impact of the
system but is an output of the implementation of the system. PA4 itself supports improved access to and
monitoring of vaccines. Relevance of RI4: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery.

RI5 aims to capture the impact of PA5, which supported the deposit insurance law approval process. The
enactment of the law was delayed. The RI adequately captures support to the objective of improved




                                                                                                    Page 9 of 15
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



               resilience, which was the expected impact of the operationalization of CODI on insured deposits.
               Relevance of RI5: Satisfactory (S).

               RI6 aims to capture the impact of PA6, the partial approval of the National Climate Change Law, on
               PDO2, namely the sustainability of recovery. However, the RI does not capture actual impact on Objective
               2, rather it tracks the establishment of sector level targets. Relevance of RI6: Unsatisfactory (U).

               RI7 aims to capture the impact of PA7, reduced emissions due to the establishment of a revised NDC,
               whose implementation was supported by the country’s Integrated Resource Plan (IRP) which entailed
               closing coal fired plants, responsible for 80 percent of South Africa’s electricity supply. The RI measures
               the actual impact on emissions of the closure of the coal fired stations, and therefore directly and credibly
               captures the impact of PA7 on PDO2. Relevance of RI7: Satisfactory (S).

               RI8 aims to capture the impact of PA8, the higher limit on embedded generation plants that do not require
               licensing except for environmental safeguards, with a view to meeting South Africa’s energy deficit
               through higher usage of lower cost solar and wind plants. It directly measures the impact of the measure
               on increased power generation, but it does not track the increased reliance on renewables. RI8 captures,
               to a large extent, the impact of PA8 on PDO2. Relevance of RI8: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



   Rating

   Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To protect the poor and modernize social welfare.

                Rationale
                RI1: PA1’s support for the reintroduction of the SRD program and its expansion to caregivers and informal
                workers not in receipt of unemployment insurance led to an additional 4.3 million beneficiaries receiving
                assistance, which was 100 percent of the target. The relevance of RI1 is rated moderately satisfactory, hence
                the achievement rating of high is downgraded to substantial. Achievement rating: Substantial.

                RI2: PA2’s support for TERS, which provided grants to furloughed workers in targeted sectors, severely
                affected by COVID-19, led to an overall increase in assistance to an additional 1.5 million workers, which was
                over 100 percent of the target. The relevance rating of RI2 is rated moderately satisfactory, hence the
                achievement rating is downgraded to substantial. Achievement rating: Substantial.

                RI3: PA3’s support for the modernization and digitalization of social welfare led to all COVID-related benefits
                being processed online. The target was exceeded. The PA and RI were both relevant and efficacy rating is
                High. Achievement rating: High.




                                                                                                                   Page 10 of 15
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



                      RI4: PA4’s support for the digitized registration of vaccine recipients and automated reminders supported
                      improved tracking of vaccines. 72 percent of the target was realized. The PA and RI were rated as relevant.
                      Achievement rating: Substantial.

                      With one efficacy rating of High, and none below Substantial, the efficacy rating for PDO1 is assessed as
                      Satisfactory.



                      Rating

                      Satisfactory

                      OBJECTIVE 2
                      Objective
                      To accelerate a resilient and sustainable recovery.

                      Rationale
                      RI5: PA5’s support for the approval process of the deposit insurance law led to the enactment of the law. The
                      target for share of depositors insured was not met by the expected date due to implementation delays.
                      However, the target was exceeded by the ICR. The PA and RI were both relevant. Achievement rating:
                      Substantial.

                      RI6: PA6’s support for the National Climate Change Law at an early stage of the approval process did not
                      result in any impact yet, i.e. by the time of the ICR. Neither the PA nor the RI had relevance ratings of MS or
                      higher and outcomes were not achieved. Achievement rating: Negligible.

                      RI7: PA7’s support for the revised NDC, and complementary TA for implementation, led to the closure of coal
                      fired plants and led to a decline in CO2 emissions of 847,000 tons, which was 94 percent of the target. Both
                      PA and RI were relevant. Achievement rating: Substantial.

                      RI8: PA8’s support for enhanced competition and an improved energy mix in the direction of more
                      renewables led to an additional installation of over 5000 MW of embedded generation capacity. Both PA and
                      RI were relevant. Achievement rating: High.

                      With most efficacy ratings as substantial or high and one negligible, the efficacy rating for PDO2 is
                      assessed as Moderately Satisfactory



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

                                                                                                                        Page 11 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)




With the efficacy rating for PDO1 assessed as satisfactory and the efficacy rating for PDO2 assessed as
moderately satisfactory, the overall efficacy rating is assessed as Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated Satisfactory and the overall efficacy rating assessed as Satisfactory, the
outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Sluggish recovery, poor health outcomes, and high unemployment rates posed a strain on social safety nets
and made it difficult for the government to close the temporary schemes initiated during the pandemic.

In some instances, the PAs required additional steps for reaching outcomes. For example, the
operationalization of CODI was not supported by the DPO, nor was the enactment of the Deposit Insurance
Law or the National Climate Change Law. However, the DPO laid a basis for the follow up DPO series.


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design

 Rationale


The PAs were relevant to both objectives. PAs built on strong analytical underpinnings, including a well-
received and widely consulted SCD and various sector studies, both internal and external, particularly on
health and social protection, climate, and financial sector. The large body of analytical work and
consultative approach, especially important in South Africa where this was the first DPO since re-
engagement in 1995, supported relevant PAs.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



Overall, the pillars were well designed and balanced COVID relief and structural measures toward a
resilient recovery. The PAs under PDO1 supported service delivery through the lockdowns, emergency
relief to workers and the poor, improved digitalization, and modernization of social and health services for
stronger monitoring and better governance. The PAs under PDO2 were designed to support financial
stability, healthy growth in bank deposits, sustainability, and improved energy supply and mix.

Operational design reflected good coordination with development partners and the IMF. The WB and the
Africa Development Bank (AfDB) had held joint discussions with the National Treasury and other technical
counterparts to develop a common policy matrix in 2020. These consultations informed program design,
including environmental and social aspects of this DPO.

PAs and RIs could have better captured targeting, both of the disadvantaged and of women.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The WB supported the achievement of the program’s objectives through TA and continued coordination with
development partners. There were several ongoing or subsequent projects that supported the implementation
of the program and the supervision of the achievements. TA to enhance social assistance efficiency and
effectiveness built on modernization tools supported by the program. The COVID-19 vaccine financing
supported the supervision of the implementation of the COVID-19 vaccine strategy. The CODI benefited from
continued TA. The decommissioning of the Komati power plant was supported by the Eskom Just Transition
project, complemented with TA through the Programmatic ASA for the Energy Sector in South Africa
(P172682). Further progress towards a better integration of digital process in social protection is supported
through the project “Strengthening social protection systems in South Africa (P181224)” (ICR, p. 26).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With Bank performance at design and implementation both assessed as satisfactory, overall Bank
performance is rated as Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)



Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The DPL contributed to mitigating the impoverishing effects of COVID-19. There was discernible improvement in
COVID-19 relief efforts supported. Social safety nets were strengthened and digitized with measurable impact.



b. Environmental

There was measurable reduction in emissions as a result of actions supported by the DPO. Early evidence
suggests improvements in the energy mix as expected.



c. Gender

No identified impacts.



d. Other

No other impacts observed.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was of good quality. It presented a theory of change for the DPO. It adequately presented the rationale
for assigned ratings and complementary evidence on progress towards targets set for RIs. In some instances,
the rationale laid out was not consistent with the PA. For example, the establishment of an electronic registry
for vaccination data supported improved monitoring of vaccinees but not higher rates of vaccination, which was
the constraint that the PAD highlighted. Similarly, the ICR did not assess whether the RIs captured the full
impact of the PAs on the objectives for RI1 and RI2. The ICRR agrees with the overall ratings of the ICR for
substantive reasons.




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SA Covid-19 Response DPO (P174246)




a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents several broad lessons from the engagement on this DPO, some of which would apply to any
operational engagement. This review concurs with one key lesson.

      In contexts with limited familiarity with policy-based lending engagement, a consultative
       approach coupled with analytical work and technical outreach is important. There was limited trust
       in the principle of policy-based financing, which was seen as conditionality based. There was also limited
       buy-in for some reforms. Extensive consultations, outreach, and being able to build on a large body of
       evidence was useful in creating ownership for the reforms within South Africa and within the government.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
