     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024309

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P146936                                     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88110                                  30-Dec-2022                                          31,404,536.08

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Dec-2017                                 31-Mar-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            40,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             35,420,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                         31,404,536.08                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl              Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p. i) and the Financing Agreement of December 28,
   2017 (p. 5) the objective of the project was “to increase tourism related benefits for local communities in
   targeted destinations”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Destination Planning and Governance (appraisal estimate US$2.59 million, actual
   US$1.75 million): This component was to finance i) participatory formulation of destination‐level tourism
   development plans for selected destinations; ii) support to the refinement of branding and promotion
   strategies for target destinations; iii) support to public‐private dialogue and the strengthening of public,
   private and community institutions involved in the tourism sector for coordinated destination planning,
   management and investments; iv) improvement of the state visitor information system; and v) training of
   individuals and groups employed in the tourism sector.

   Component 2: Tourist Products Development and Management (appraisal estimate US$25.05
   million, revised amount US$20.47 million, actual US$20.29 million): This component was to finance i)
   enhancement of public areas and the surroundings of current main attractions; ii) provision of interpretation
   and information through visitors centers and signage; iii) rehabilitation of destination‐level products and
   diversification of activities beyond monuments sightseeing; iv) provision of facilities and services for tourists
   and local communities alike, such as drinking water, shaded rest areas, toilets; and v) improvement of
   access to main sites and tourist products and their adjacent communities.

   Component 3: Support to Local Economic Development (appraisal estimate US$9.26 million, actual
   US$7.77 million): This component was to finance i) mapping of local productive and creative industries and
   support to business development and tourism service providers with the highest pro‐poor impacts; ii)
   provision of training, information, tools and infrastructure for business development, production and
   marketing within the tourism value chain; iii) enhancement and diversification of skills; and iv) promotion of
   locally produced goods linked to tourism products.

   Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$3.10 million, actual US$1.60 million): This
   component was to finance i) establishment and operation of a State Project Coordination Unit (SPCU) at the
   state Directorate of Tourism in Lucknow and the hiring of relevant technical specialists as Technical Support
   Units (TSUs) to support the Development Authorities in implementation; ii) development of a project
   monitoring and information system; and iii) project communication.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost: The project was estimated to cost US$57.1 million. Actual cost was US$44.9 million.

   Financing Amount: The project was financed by an IBRD loan in the amount of US$40.0 million of which
   US$31.4 million was disbursed. During the first project restructuring US$4.58 million was cancelled since
   some project activities were dropped.




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$14.1 million. Actual contribution was US$13.5
   million.

   Dates: The project was restructured twice:

         On December 22, 2021, the project was restructured to: i) cancel US$4.58 million due to the
          dropping of five sub-projects, reorganizing of remaining sub-projects, and adding new activities into
          four packages under component 2: and ii) modify the Results Framework and drop two intermediate
          outcome indicators, increase the targets of three intermediate outcome indicators, and reduce the
          target of two intermediate outcome indicators.
         On December 19, 2022, the project was restructured to extend the closing date by 15 months from
          December 30, 2022, to March 31, 2024, to allow for the completion of project activities which had
          been delayed due to the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 5), despite India experiencing high growth in
international and domestic tourism, it had been unable to take advantage of the power of the tourism sector
to achieve the goals of inclusive growth and poverty reduction. The economic benefits from tourism had
unevenly trickled down to local communities or to the assets and locations that draw millions of visitors and
pilgrims in the first place. Uttar Pradesh, one of India’s biggest cultural and tourist destinations has some of
the country’s most iconic assets such as the Taj Mahal in Agra, one of the most ancient living cities in the
world, Varanasi, located on the banks of the sacred Ganges, and to two of the world’s four most important
Buddhist sites, Sarnath and Kushinagar.

However, Uttar Pradesh remained a low-income state and India’s third poorest state (37.7 percent poverty
rate) with a low literacy rate, especially among women, and a high infant mortality rate. Agra and the Braj
region, which were two of the prime tourist and pilgrimage destinations of India and UP, had some of the
state’s highest poverty rates. Agra’s most iconic heritage asset and India’s primary tourism destination, the
Taj Mahal, was surrounded by more than 20 slums with crumbling infrastructure and a severe lack of
services. In the Braj region, Mathura, the largest city and pilgrimage attraction, lacked the most basic urban
infrastructure and services, condemning residents to the lowest living standards.

As a result of ineffective approaches and practices, the tourist destinations of Agra and the Braj region,
among others in Uttar Pradesh, were not able to use their unique cultural and natural assets as
endogenous sources of inclusive growth and poverty reduction through pro‐poor tourism development. Key
challenges included: i) lack of a shared vision and consensual strategy among stakeholders for the
coordinated development and promotion of asset‐rich destinations, leaving many touristic areas to
degradation; ii) lack of adequate destination planning, management and institutional capacity, threatening
assets and isolating local communities while reducing visitor satisfaction and retention; and iii) ineffective
and non‐participatory policy approaches, excluding communities from the benefits of tourism.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported the four main objectives
of Swadesh Darshan 2.0 (India’s major tourism scheme) which aimed to: i) enhance the contribution

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



               of tourism to local economies; ii) create jobs including self-employment for local communities; iii) enhance
               the skills of local youth in tourism and hospitality; and iv) preserve and enhance local cultural and natural
               resources. Furthermore, the objective was in line with India’s 12th Five‐Year Plan, which aimed for faster,
               sustainable and more inclusive growth within a pro‐poor perspective. In addition, the project supported Uttar
               Pradesh’s 2022 Industrial Investment and Employment Promotion Policy which aims to create one million
               jobs in the tourism and hospital sectors as well as develop focus tourist destinations that include Sarnath
               and Kushinagar.

               Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the World Bank’s
               most recent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (FY18-22, extended to 2025) and its objective 1.2
               “improve living conditions and sustainable cities” (under focus area 1 “resource efficient growth”) as well as
               objective 2.5 “enable more quality jobs for women” (under focus area 2 “enhancing competitiveness and
               enabling job creation”).

               The World Bank was asked to assist the government through this project due to its extensive experience in
               inclusive tourism development, urban revitalization, and heritage stewardship.

               The objective of the project was pitched at the outcome level to address a critical development problem.

               Therefore, the relevance of the objective is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase tourism related benefits for local communities in targeted destinations.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as providing
                             training and conducting a technical assessment for the state Directorate of Tourism for capacity building in
                             pro-poor tourism, investing in an integrated package of basic services in project areas including water and
                             sewerage connections, toilets, streetlights, roads/drains, sidewalks, greenery as well as developing
                             comprehensive business development support to local crafts people including self-help group organizations
                             and training in hospitality and business literacy were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to
                             include the capacity for inclusive tourism development of the state Directorate of Tourism being enhanced,
                             cleaner, safer and more attractive tourist areas being regenerated, products and services for tourists being
                             improved, and craftspeople/ women entrepreneurs being supported. These outputs were to result in the
                             outcome of increased tourism related benefits for local communities.


                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.

The ICR defined “tourism related benefits for local communities” as: i) improved distribution of tourism-related
benefits to local communities; ii) improved quality of basic services for local communities and tourists; and iii)
enhanced local economic development and social empowerment. However, the project did not measure
“distribution” of tourism related benefits but only an increase in average daily tourist expenditure and duration
of stay. Therefore, instead, this review will define the first benefit as “increase in tourism-related benefits
among local communities”.

According to the ICR (para. 29) twelve studies were conducted during project preparation to identify priority
areas in each targeted destination to maximize pro-poor impacts: i) Agra: Shah Jahan Park to provide the city
with a green asset that connects its most visited monuments, the Taj Mahal and Agra Fort. Also, two craft
hubs were targeted, the Tajganj (low income crafts neighborhood adjacent to the Taj Mahal), and Kachhpura
(last authentic leather shoe making village in the city overlooking the Taj Mahal); ii) The Braj Region:
Vrindavan, a city where Krishna spent his childhood and thousand temples were devoted to him); iii) The
Buddhist Circuit: Sarnath and Kushinagar (two of the four most sacred pilgrimage places for Buddhists).

Increase in tourism-related benefits among local communities:

Outputs:

      The number of domestic visitors in project destinations increased from 43,600,000 in June 2014 to
       59,689,960 in March 2024, exceeding the original target of 47.3 million visitors and the revised target
       of 27 million domestic visitors.
      The average stay across all targeted destinations increased from 0.25 days in June 2014 to 1.58 days
       in March 2024, exceeding the target of 0.5 day.

The following outputs were reported in the ICR but not included in the Results Framework and hence did not
have any target values:

      In Sarnath, the project financed the regeneration of its core area by transforming it into a green
       promenade that links the two main monuments (Buddhist stupas) and archeological sites by
       constructing shaded walking paths, street vending zones, and plazas with local restaurants and public
       toilets. Furthermore, the project upgraded the two main access roads (1,800meters) to the
       archeological sites and the state museum. In Kushinagar, the project rehabilitated the most visited
       section of the Hirnyawati riverfront and last forest plot near the two main Buddhist stupas.
      In Agra, the project financed the preparation and implementation of a green regeneration plan for the
       Shah Jahan Park including upgrading pathways (3.086 meters), creating dedicated bicycle lanes
       (2.900 meters) along lakes and meadows, installing new benches, lighting, trash bins, playground and
       parking.
      In the Braj Region, the project financed a network of craft centers in selected artisan villages to
       provide tourists access to local craftspeople and locally made products.

Outcomes:

      The average daily tourist expenditure through day tourists in project destinations increased from
       US$6.80 in June 2014 to US$15.60 in March 2024, exceeding the target of US$10.20.

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)




      The average daily tourist expenditure for overnight tourists increased from US$13.80 in June 2014 to
       US$74.51 between 2022 and 2024, exceeding the target of US$20.70. According to the World Bank
       team (November 13, 2024) during the last two years of project implementation, the state government,
       through local NGOs, conducted 16,026 surveys that covered 73,453 domestic tourists across all
       project areas. In Agra and the Braj Region, the surveys were conducted monthly from July 2022 to
       June 2023. In Sarnath and Kushinagar, the surveys were conducted from April 2023 to March 2024.
       The survey periods (and results) differ between Agra-The Braj and Sarnath- Kushinagar because the
       subprojects in Sarnath and Kushinagar started and were completed later, since the project followed a
       cascading implementation strategy. However, according to the ICR the number of visitors at the
       selected project destinations cannot be solely attributed to the project, since the data collected by the
       state was not disaggregated by subproject area

Improved quality of basic services for local communities and tourists in targeted destinations.

Outputs:

      Three subproject areas (Banke Bihari Temple area in the Braj region, Shah Jahan park in Agra and
       Kachhpura village in Agra) were declared Open Defecation Free (ODF), achieving the target of three
       areas.

The following outputs were reported in the ICR but not included in the Results Framework and hence did not
have any target values:

      In Agra, the project financed the rehabilitation of 103 streets (4,184 meters), installed a sewerage
       system with household connections and street drainage (7,050 meters), improved street lighting and
       created community green spaces.
      In Mathura, the project rehabilitated all 22 streets leading to the temple (8,608 meters), installed new
       drains (13,736 meters), installed underground cabling (13,738 meters), sewerage connections,
       landscaping, and streetlights.
      In Sarnath, the project financed the rehabilitation of underground cabling and streetlights, as well as
       sewerage (7,575 meters), last mile connectivity between the ward and Varanasi city through
       upgrading pavements and drains (6,300 meters).

Outcome:

      2,919 households in subproject areas had improved conditions such as access to basic services,
       exceeding the original target of 500 households as well as the revised target of 2,000 households.
       According to the World Bank team (November 13, 2024) these improved conditions included: i)
       access to individual toilets; ii) improvement of water supply system; iii) improvement of solid waste
       collection facilities; iv) improvement of drainage systems; v) improvement of sewer connections; vi)
       installation of underground electricity cabling; vii) improvement of streetlights; viii) rehabilitation of
       community places, and ix) improvement of roads/streets/walkways. Households benefited from
       multiple improvements as a package.
      The urban living conditions of 15,861 people were improved, exceeding the original target of 500
       people and the revised target of 8,000 people. According to the World Bank team (November 13,
       2024) this indicator measured the same results as the indicator above.


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



Enhanced local economic development and social empowerment.

Outputs:

      2,861 jobs were created within the tourism value chain, exceeding the original target of 200 jobs and
       the revised target of 2,500 jobs.
      7,007 local entrepreneurs or small businesses in project destinations were supported with improved
       business development capacities, infrastructure and/or tools, exceeding the original target of 300
       entrepreneurs or small businesses and the revised target of 2,500 entrepreneurs or small businesses.
      9,824 community consultations were held in project destinations, exceeding the original target of 200
       community consultations and the revised target of 4,000 community consultations.
      5,725 people (of which 4,369 were women) were organized into 561 Self-Help Groups (SHGs) to
       incentivize craftspeople to lend and borrow internally to improve their production or pay for receiving
       financial assistance during an emergency. This output was not included in the Results Framework and
       lacked a target.

Outcomes:

      3,895 local entrepreneurs, including 1,921 women, reported increased income after project
       completion. The original target of 2,000 entrepreneurs and the revised target of 3,895 were achieved.

The following outcomes were reported in the ICR but not included in the Results Framework and hence
lacked target values:

      In Agra, the monthly average income of local entrepreneurs increased by 164 percent, in the Braj
       Region by 78 percent, in Sarnath by 36 percent, and in Kushinagar by 19 percent.
      In Agra, the monthly average income generated for new jobs that were created was US$210, in the
       Braj Region it was US$51.45, in Sarnath it was US$16.10, and in Kushinagar it was US$7.6.
      80 percent of 590 surveyed beneficiaries reported significant improvements in their social status and
       household conditions including: i) increased involvement in decision making and less exposure to
       violence; ii) children having better educational outcomes; iii) increased ownership of household
       appliances; iv) greater affordability and awareness of medical facilities, health, and hygiene issues;
       and v) enhanced business development capacities.

The project was able to build capacity for inclusive tourism development within the Directorate of Tourism,
regenerate cleaner, safer and more attractive tourist areas as well as improve products and services for
tourists while also supporting local craftspeople and women entrepreneurs. While the project was able to
achieve its targets, some of the achievements may not be solely attributable to the project given other
interventions by the government. Overall, the achievements of the project were Substantial with minor
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project was able to deliver several key outcomes such as improving households’ access to basic
                            services, as well as increasing incomes and capacity of local entrepreneurs. The project contributed
                            towards changing the state government approach to tourism development from its previous focus on investing
                            in beautification of sites and services for international tourists to now investing in providing basic services and
                            supporting job creation/income generation for local communities and poor pilgrims. While the project was able
                            to achieve its targets, some of the achievements may not be solely attributable to the project given other
                            interventions by the government. Overall, the achievements of the project were Substantial with minor
                            shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   Both, the PAD and the ICR conducted a benefit-cost analysis.

   The PAD (p. 15) defined the benefits as: i) increasing dispersal of visitors to different tourist attractions with
   subsequent increases in the amount of time they spend in the destinations. In Agra, for instance, the analysis
   considered an expected increase in the proportion of Taj Mahal visitors visiting some of the other main
   attractions of the city (Agra Fort, and Itmad‐ud‐Daulah); ii) increasing the proportion of visitors staying overnight
   at the destination. For the Braj Region, it was expected that the project was to increase the duration of stay of
   overnight visitors by half a day in the moderate case and one day in the high case. It was also expected that by
   extending their visits to stay overnight, average local expenditure per tourist in a destination would increase; and
   iii) increasing average tourist/pilgrim out of pocket expenditure per day. These benefits seem appropriately
   assessed.

   The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) in the moderate case and high case scenarios was 37.8 percent and 80.2
   percent, respectively. Applying a discount rate of 10 percent, the Net Present Value (NPV) was US$74 million in
   the moderate case scenario and US$210 million in the high case scenario, indicating that the project was a
   worthwhile investment.

   The ICR (p. 28) also conducted a benefit-cost analysis including the following benefits: i) economic revenue
   from tourism; ii) livelihood interventions; iii) improved basic services; and. iv) benefits from convergence. The
   analysis estimated an Economic IRR (EIRR) at 66.9 percent for the moderate case scenario and 70 percent for
   the high case scenario. The EIRR at completion was higher due to higher benefits than originally anticipated.

   Operational efficiency:



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



The project’s implementation period was extended by 15 months due to delays related to the COVID-19
pandemic and several changes in the Tourism Director General which significantly impacted contract approvals
and payments. Also, year around religious and cultural events resulted in delays in the completion of project
works which were not taken into account when planning project implementation (ICR, para. 69).

Overall, the project’s efficiency was Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?           Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  0
 Appraisal                                                0
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  0
 ICR Estimate                                             0
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High given its alignment with the most recent Country Partnership Framework
(FY18-22, extended to 2025). Efficacy was rated Substantial with minor shortcomings and Efficiency were
Substantial. The overall outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/financial risk: The government remains committed to the project’s objective as
demonstrated through the government’s adoption of a pro-poor approach in its new Tourism Policy 2024.
Also, the government launched a package of new tourism projects in the amount of US$340 million in March
2024 aiming to upscale this project’s focus on urban regeneration of underserved tourist areas and to create
jobs and incomes for vulnerable groups and traditional craftspeople (ICR, para. 25).




                                                                                                  Page 9 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



Sustainability risk: According to the ICR (para. 84) there is a risk of insufficient funding streams for the
additional costs associated with operating and maintaining the current investments especially physical
infrastructure built under the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 79) the World Bank team conducted extensive consultations with local
  communities and civil society organizations to ensure that they participated in the decision-making
  process. Also, the World Bank worked with critical partner organizations such as the United Nations
  World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) and The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
  Organization (UNESCO) as well as several government agencies to improve inter-governmental
  coordination. According to the PAD (p. 9) the project design was built on several lessons learned from
  World Bank projects implemented in other countries. These lessons included: i) tourism is an
  often‐overlooked means for poverty reduction; ii) pro‐poor tourism is an approach which, when applied
  effectively can contribute to improve local communities from tourism development; iii) an area‐based
  pro‐poor intervention relies on particularly high-quality destination planning and development; and iv)
  collaboration and coordination are critical for achieving pro‐poor benefits.

  According to the PAD (p.14) the World Bank team identified several risks such as technical design and
  weak institutional capacity as Substantial. The World Bank mitigated these risks by applying a phased
  and learning‐by‐doing approach and by providing strong technical support to implementing entities during
  preparation. However, the mitigation measures were not sufficient and the project experienced
  procurement issues due to low capacity (see section 10b for more details). Also, the World Bank team did
  not identify the risk of year around religious and cultural events, which resulted in delays in the
  completion of project works.

  The Results Framework had some shortcomings such as PDO and intermediate outcome indicators
  measuring results that could not be solely attributed to project activities and indicators not being
  disaggregated between the three project areas. Also, some of the end targets were not sufficiently
  ambitious and had already been achieved before the Mid-Term Review (see section 9a for more details).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 81) the World Bank team conducted 13 implementation support missions.
 Furthermore, the project provided support throughout project implementation to build capacity in the
 different government agencies involved in project implementation. The project benefitted from the same
 Task Team Leader (TTL) managing the project from appraisal to closing, allowing for continuity.


                                                                                                      Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



 However, even though the project’s Results Framework was restructured, several indicators would have
 benefitted from being revised to allow for better assessment of the project’s achievement.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly specified and the theory of change and how key activities and
 outputs were to result in the intended outcomes was sound and reflected in the project’s Results
 Framework. Furthermore, the M&E arrangements were robust, and roles and responsibilities were clearly
 defined for the SPCU as well as the NGOs. The project developed a Management Information System
 (MIS) to assess progress towards the project’s targets.

 While the PDO indicators encompassed all outcomes of the objective, there were some shortcomings. For
 example, PDO indicator 2 (“increase in average daily tourist expenditure in project destinations”) was not
 measuring results that could be solely attributed to project activities; ii) the indicators were not
 disaggregated between the three project areas; iii) the indicator targets were not sufficiently ambitious
 resulting in the need to increase the targets during the 2021 restructuring.

 According to the PAD (p. 12) the state Directorate of Tourism was to be responsible for the project’s M&E
 activities.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 16) the state Directorate of Tourism hired an M&E specialist who was
  responsible for establishing a Management Information System and aggregating all data collected by
  NGOs. The project conducted an extensive survey on tourism data (tourist expenditure and duration of
  stay). Also, an endline beneficiary impact assessment was conducted at project closing. However, even
  though the Results Framework was revised during the 2021 restructuring, the shortcomings stated above
  such as indicators measuring the results of all project areas together rather than separately were not
  addressed, not allowing for a specific assessment of the project’s achievements on each project area.

  According to the World Bank team (November 13, 2024) the M&E data were found to be of reliable
  quality.




                                                                                                 Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 74) the project’s M&E was used to track implementation progress on an
  ongoing basis to identify bottlenecks and risks resulting in two project restructurings of which one of
  them included the raising of project targets.

  The overall M&E quality is rated as Substantial with some design shortcomings,



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
   Resources). According to the ICR (para. 76) the project hired an environmental and social expert in the
   PMU and hired two NGOs to prepare Environmental Social Management Plans (ESMPs). Those ESMPs
   were implemented during construction and included mitigation measures such as monitoring of various
   environmental parameters including noise, tree preservation, use of personal protective equipment by labor,
   equal wages for women as well as maintenance of incidence registers at sites. A few projects impacted
   families in Sarnath who were relocated as per resettlement plans. When the project closed, the project’s
   safeguard compliance was rated Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:

   According to the ICR (para. 78) the project’s Financial Management performance was Satisfactory
   throughout implementation. The project used the government treasury systems and benefitted from well
   qualified accounting staff at the SPCU who provided efficient oversight and control. The project submitted
   Interim Unaudited Financial Reports on a quarterly basis as well as disbursement claims and audit reports
   in a timely manner. According to the World Bank team (November 13, 2024) the external auditor’s opinions
   were unqualified. The only shortcoming the project experienced in terms of Financial Management was
   related to the state government’s delay in releasing funds to the project during the first two years of
   implementation.

   Procurement:

   SPCU was responsible for the project’s procurement activities. According to the ICR (para. 77) agreed
   procurement procedures such as using NIC’s e-procurement portal and the World Bank’s Systematic
   Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) were generally followed. However, the project experienced
   several procurement related issues such as lack of capacity of procurement specialists who were hired by


                                                                                                    Page 12 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



   the Directorate. The procurement specialists were not able to adequately resolve contract management
   issues according to the World Bank’s procedures which resulted in delays in closing contracts, as well as
   in payments of contractors and consultants. Due to these persistent shortcomings, the project’s
   procurement performance was downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory in August 2023. According to the
   World Bank team (November 13, 2024) the procurement issues were addressed through: i) preparation of
   a month-wise disbursement plan with clear and realistic targets; ii) weekly meetings with the heads of the
   consultancy firms and daily meetings with their ground-level staff to ensure adequate staffing/workers; and
   iii) expedited procurement of toolkits and training for craftspeople in Sarnath and Kushinagar. The Bank’s
   Procurement Specialist also provided hands-on advisory technical support to the new Procurement
   Specialist at the State Project Coordination Unit to bring them up to speed.

   In February 2024, the project’s procurement performance was upgraded to Moderately Satisfactory which
   remained the rating until project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   NA



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                                                                               High relevance of objective, and
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Satisfactory              Substantial efficacy and
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               efficiency.
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                                                                               While acknowledging the
                                                                               shortcomings in M&E design,
                                                                               they are not significant enough
                                                                               for a Modest rating. The M&E
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Substantial
                                                                               system were generally robust
                                                                               and provided sufficient evidence
                                                                               for a Substantial rating of
                                                                               Efficacy.
Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)



The ICR (p. 19) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG:

        Working closely with local communities and key stakeholders during project
         preparation and implementation can positively impact the project’s ownership and
         sustainability but keeping implementation time in mind is key to ensure efficiency.
         This project had a highly participatory approach with local communities and key agencies.
         However, this process prolonged preparation and reduced implementation time due to a
         lacking clear commitment to a timeframe for each phase.
        Pro-poor tourism may work well when the location attracts a large number of tourists.
         In this project, Agra the Braj region and Sarnath were well established destinations where a
         large number of tourists came to visit. Identifying opportunities of products and services that
         local social enterprises could provide to tourists was easier than in Kushinagar which did not
         have as many tourists visiting.
        Decentralization of decision-making can make project implementation smoother. This
         project supported state authorities to decentralize power which allowed to address
         institutional risks like frequent changes in leadership, slow decision-making, and lengthy
         approval processes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation, was internally consistent
and sufficiently outcome driven. Also, the ICR included an economic analysis and useful lessons learned that
can be applied to future projects in this area. However, the ICR would have benefitted from stating which World
Bank safeguard policies were triggered. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 14 of 15
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
UP Pro-Poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)




                                                                                 Page 15 of 15
