     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



                                                                                       Report Number: ICRR0024310

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P158298                                       Strengthening Critical Infrastructure

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 Tajikistan                                    Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                              Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60890,IDA-D2050                           31-Dec-2023                                         50,328,637.35

 Bank Approval Date                            Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jul-2017                                   31-Mar-2024

                                               IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                               50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                            50,328,637.35                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Katharina Ferl               Vibecke Dixon                  Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.ii) and the Financing Agreement of August 15, 2017 (p.
   5) the objective of the project was “to strengthen the Recipient's disaster risk management capacities,
   enhance the resilience of its critical infrastructure against natural hazards, and improve its capacity to respond
   to disasters”.

   The objective will be parsed as follows:


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



          i. to strengthen the Recipient's disaster risk management capacities;
         ii. enhance the resilience of its critical infrastructure against natural hazards;
        iii. improve its capacity to respond to disasters.

   The ICR noted that the third objective was linked to the CERC component.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included four components:

   Component 1: Strengthening Disaster Risk Management Capacity (appraisal estimate US$4.0
   million, actual US$5.8 million): This component was to finance the following sub-components:

   Subcomponent 1.1. Modernizing the Crisis Management Centers and Systems for Improved Disaster
   Preparedness: This subcomponent was to finance: i) building or renovating a facility to host the national
   Crisis Management Center (CMC); ii) purchasing of required information and communication technology
   equipment to be installed within the national CMC; iii) purchasing of mobile command and communication
   vehicles for the improved crisis management systems at the regional/local levels; iv) preparing an
   operations manual for the CMCs and systems; and v) trainings for relevant staff and operators of the CMC
   and users of mobile command and communication vehicles.

   Subcomponent 1.2. Seismic Hazard Assessment for Improved Disaster Risk Identification: This
   subcomponent was to finance the purchase of necessary equipment, such as seismic stations, seismic
   sensors, analytical software for the Institute for Geology Earthquake Engineering and Seismology (IoGEES)
   to conduct probabilistic seismic hazard assessment of the territory of Tajikistan and seismic micro zoning for
   Dushanbe and its surrounding area.

   Subcomponent 1.3. Preparation of a Financial Protection Strategy for Mitigating Fiscal Shocks Caused by
   Natural Disasters: This subcomponent was to finance detailed fiscal risk diagnostics and assessments and
   preparation of a financial protection strategy covering ways for Tajikistan to mitigate fiscal shocks caused by
   disasters.

   Component 2: Making Critical Infrastructure Resilient against Natural Hazards (appraisal estimate
   US$38.0 million, actual US$42.28 million): This component was to finance the following sub-components:

   Subcomponent 2.1. Strengthening of Bridges: This subcomponent was to finance the reconstruction of
   bridges in the districts of GBAO (Gorno-Badakhshan Autonomous Oblast).

   Subcomponent 2.2. Strengthening of Flood Protection and Riverbank Erosion–Protection Infrastructure:
   This subcomponent was to finance strengthening of selected flood protection infrastructure in the Khatlon
   Oblast. Also, capital works for flood protection were to include the reconstruction and strengthening of

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



  damaged river embankments, flood protection dikes, and infrastructure for the prevention of riverbank
  erosion.

  Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response Component (appraisal estimate US$6.0 million,
  actual zero): This component was to enhance Tajikistan’s capacity to respond to disasters. An emergency
  eligible for financing was to be an event that has caused, or was likely to imminently cause, a major adverse
  economic and/or social impact to the Borrower, associated with a disaster.

  Component 4: Project Management (appraisal estimate US$2.0 million, actual US$2.2 million): This
  component was to finance support incremental operating costs for the implementing agencies, the Ministry
  of Finance (MoF), the Ministry of Transport (MoT), and Agency of Land Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI)
  for implementing the project.

  As per the Financing Agreement, each of the disbursement categories was not exclusively linked to a single
  project component, but rather covered activities across multiple components. For instance, Category 1
  financed activities under Component 1 (referred in the Financing Agreement as Part A of the project), as
  well as the operating costs of the MoF PIU (which are part of Component 4). Categories 2 and 3 together
  financed activities under Component 2, along with the operating costs of the MoT PIG and ALRI PMU
  (which were also part of Component 4). Finally, Category 5 compensated for the activities implemented
  under the PPA, related to the preparation of all project components. During the project restructuring in
  October 2019 funds were reallocated between the disbursement categories and US$6 million that had
  previously been allocated for CERC (Component 3) were reallocated to finance activities under
  Components 1, 2, and 4.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$50.0 million. Actual cost was US$50.32 million due to
  exchange rate fluctuations between SDR and US$. The total project cost remained unchanged and was not
  revised.

  Financing: The project was financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$25.0 million (of which US$25.5
  million was disbursed - due to exchange rate fluctuations) and an IDA grant in the amount of US$25.0
  million (of which US$24.7 million was disbursed).

  Borrower Contribution: It was not planned for the Borrower to make any contribution.

  Dates: The project was restructured twice:

        On October 31, 2019, the project was restructured to reallocate funds to address financial gaps
         emerging under various sub-components, including: i) higher than initially anticipated National Crisis
         Management Center (NCMC) costs, determined based on detailed designs with consideration of
         enhanced safety and increased floor area needs; ii) cost overruns for bridge construction based on
         the works’ bidding outcomes and increased costs associated with technical supervision during
         construction; and iii) financing a new flood protection site in Vose district due to a priority request
         from the government, given the site’s emergency condition and its importance for protecting
         adjacent economic and social assets.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



         On December 12, 2023, the project was restructured to extend the project’s closing date by three
          months from December 31, 2023, to March 31, 2024, to allow for the completion of project activities,
          which had been delayed due to unresponsive bids for the NCMC construction, a selected
          contractor’s inability to finalize works as well as the first round of tendering cancelled for the
          Information Communication Technology (ICT) equipment and Mobile Command and Communication
          Vehicle (MCCV).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 4) at the time of appraisal, Tajikistan was the
most vulnerable country to climate change in Europe and Central Asia. Due to its special terrain, geological
and hydrological features, Tajikistan was prone to many natural hazards, such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides, mudflows, avalanches, droughts, and heavy snowfalls.

Climate change was expected to increase the frequency of these events. In the past, natural disasters,
particularly floods, earthquakes, and landslides, remained a persistent obstacle to sustainable
development. Already at the time of appraisal, Tajikistan’s infrastructure was gradually deteriorating from
insufficient maintenance and repeated exposure to natural hazards. Among many other needs, systematic
investments in disaster risk reduction were necessary across various sectors in the country. The
government had already been upgrading infrastructure such as irrigation, road networks, and energy
infrastructure. Furthermore, the objective of the project was in line with the National Strategy for Adaptation
to Climate Change until 2030 which focuses on climate adaptation investments to enhance the resilience of
the most vulnerable populations as well as to enhance the resilience of transport infrastructure against
climate impacts and natural disasters. In addition, the project was also in line with the National Disaster
Risk Reduction Strategy for 2019-2030 which aims to improve the country’s disaster preparedness and
response mechanism.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported Tajikistan’s National
Development Strategy (NDS) -2030, which, under pillar 4, emphasizes the importance of mitigating the
impact of acute environmental risks and enhancing resilience and ability to prevent natural disasters. Also,
the Mid-Term Program of the NDS 2021-2025 focuses on improving disaster preparedness through
strengthening new and existing critical infrastructure to withstand natural disasters as well as building crisis
management centers. Furthermore, the objective of the project was in line with the National Strategy for
Adaptation to Climate Change until 2030 which focuses on climate adaptation investments to enhance the
resilience of the most vulnerable populations as well as enhance the resilience of transport infrastructure
against climate impacts and natural disasters. In addition, the project was also in line with the National
Disaster Risk Reduction Strategy for 2019-2030 which aims to improve the country’s disaster preparedness
and response mechanism.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the most recent
World Bank Country Partnership Framework (FY2019-2023 – extended to FY24) which aimed to strengthen
infrastructure in vulnerable communities and disaster preparedness. Furthermore, the objective of the
project was aligned with the World Bank Climate Change Action Plan (2021-2025) which aims to support


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



               green, resilient, and inclusive development as well as the World Bank Scorecard FY24-30 and its focus on
               improving climate adaptation and enhancing resilience to climate related risks.

               Given the World Bank’s experience in building resilience, the government requested the World Bank’s
               assistance. The objective addressed a critical development problem and was pitched at the outcome
               level. Overall, the relevance of the objective was High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen Tajikistan’s disaster risk management capacities.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as constructing
                             the National Crisis Management Center (NCMC), preparing an operational manual for the NCMC, conducting
                             training on emergency management systems, procuring equipment as well as conducting probabilistic
                             seismic hazard assessment of the country and seismic microzoning for Dushanbe and developing a financial
                             protection strategy were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include an operational manual for
                             the NCMC being prepared, the NCMC being constructed and fully equipped, staff being trained on
                             emergency systems. These outputs were to result in the outcome of Tajikistan’s disaster risk management
                             capacities being strengthened.

                             The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.

                             Outputs:

                                         The NCMC building was constructed, furnished, equipped with ICT equipment, and a mobile
                                          command and communication vehicle (MCCV) was purchased. The MCCV serves as the first locally
                                          based crisis management center. Furthermore, capacity trainings were conducted for 21 CoESCD
                                          staff and certificates of transfers and acceptance between the MoF PIU and CoESCD were signed
                                          and endorsed by all relevant parties. Therefore, the target of the crisis management centers and
                                          systems becoming operational was achieved.
                                         Seismic hazard maps were updated, and the understanding of seismic hazard was improved through
                                          the National Probabilistic Seismic Hazard Assessment (PSHA) and the Dushanbe microzoning.
                                         Operational procedures for crisis management center and systems were prepared, achieving the
                                          target of preparing such procedures.



                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)




      A Financial Protection Strategy (until 2037) was developed to facilitate response and recovery in the
       event of an emergency, as targeted. The strategy was officially endorsed through a government
       degree in October 2022. Key reform areas included: i) improve existing financial instruments and
       introducing new ones; ii) enhance disaster insurance; iii) provide incentives for disaster risk reduction
       investments; iv) strengthen the financing management capacity of government staff; v) improve capital
       investment planning and linkages between midterm and annual budgets; vi) streamline and expedite
       the process of developing budgets and capital investment plans; and v) enhance transparency,
       reporting and internal control over post-disaster spending.
      Essential hardware and analytical software for the Institute of Geology Earthquake Engineering and
       Seismology (IoGEES) was installed. This output did not have a target.

Outcomes:

Some of the outcomes as noted above included meeting the target of the crisis management centers and
systems becoming operational, as well as endorsement of the Financial Protection Strategy though a
government decree in October 2022. The ICR notes that having been just recently put into operation, the
NCMC and MCCV have not yet been tested in real-life emergency; however, their operational capabilities
were validated through a practical table-top emergency response drill conducted in March 2024.

Overall, the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the resilience of Tajikistan’s critical infrastructure against natural hazards.

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project inputs/activities such as reconstructing
bridges, flood protection and riverbank erosion prevention infrastructure based on risk informed designs as
well as installing and dispatching heavy machinery for emergency response and maintenance of
infrastructure assets were to result in several outputs. These outputs were to include bridges, flood protection
and riverbank prevention infrastructure being reconstructed, and designs informed by multi-hazard disaster
and climate change risks, and heavy machinery for the Ministry of Transport (MoT) and Agency of Land
Reclamation and Irrigation (ALRI) being installed and dispatched based on operational plan. These outputs
were to result in the outcome of enhanced resilience of Tajikistan’s critical infrastructure against natural
hazards.

The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.



Outputs:


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)




      17 bridges were reconstructed based on designs considering multi-hazard disaster and climate
       change risks, surpassing the target of 15 bridges.
      Heavy machinery for the MoT was installed and dispatched based on the operational plan, achieving
       the target of machinery being installed and dispatched. Also, heavy machinery for ALRI was installed
       and dispatched based on the operational plan, the target of machinery being installed and dispatched
       was achieved. This machinery included: three front loaders, two bulldozers, two-wheel excavators,
       one crawler excavator with hydraulic hammer, two crawler excavators, two motor graders, two dump
       trucks, two manipulators, one prime mover with trailer, one tandem drum vibratory roller, one mobile
       mini laboratory, one mobile hydraulic drilling rig, one crawler excavators, and one motor grader.
      Five target sites in the Kulyab, Vose, and Kabadiyan districts of the Khatlon province (along the most
       vulnerable river sections) were completed with designs informed by multi-hazard disaster and climate
       change risks. The target of target sites having more resilient flood protection and/or riverbank erosion
       prevention infrastructure through disaster risk-informed designing was achieved.

Outcomes:

      660,515 people benefitted from reduced disaster risks through more resilient flood protection and
       riverbank erosion prevention infrastructure, exceeding the target of 556,900 people. The project’s
       flood protection and/or riverbank erosion prevention infrastructure protected strategic assets such as
       Kulyab International Airport as well as an asphalt-concrete plant from being flooded. Also, 3,468
       hectares of agricultural land, as well as other local infrastructure, were protected.

Outputs that were applicable to all objectives included:

      100 percent of grievances raised by stakeholders were addressed and closed, exceeding the target of
       95 percent.
      The project benefitted 764,415 beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 646,000 beneficiaries. Of those
       beneficiaries, 48.6 percent were female, not achieving the target of 51 percent.
      747 jobs were created. For those jobs, 73.9 percent of people were hired locally, exceeding the target
       of 20 percent. Of those locally hired jobs, 12.3 percent were female, not achieving the target of 51
       percent.

The project was able to reconstruct bridges, flood protection and riverbank prevention infrastructure.
Furthermore, designs based on risk informed designs, and heavy machinery for the MoT and ALRI were
installed and dispatched based on an operational plan. These achievements resulted in the outcome of
enhancing the resilience of Tajikistan’s critical infrastructure against natural hazards. Therefore, achievement
of this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve Tajikistan’s capacity to respond to disasters.

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)




                            Rationale
                            Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that inputs/activities such as financing of an
                            emergency that has caused, or was likely to imminently cause, a major adverse economic and/or social
                            impact to the Borrower, associated with a disaster. This was to result in the outcome of Tajikistan’s improved
                            capacity to respond to disasters.

                            The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.

                            Since the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) was never activated, the project did not
                            include any CERC related activities.



                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of both objectives was Substantial resulting in an overall efficacy rating of Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   The PAD (p. 17) conducted a benefit cost analysis assessing the rate of return on capital investments for
   Component 1, for improving CMCs and systems, and Component 2, for strengthening critical infrastructure for
   the transportation and flood protection sectors. The team developed a probabilistic model which assessed the
   project’s economic performance, using relevant modeling techniques (such as DRM annual average loss
   calculations based on return period of hazards) and assessment of exposure, vulnerability, and Highway
   Development and Management 4) to evaluate the improvement of road network connectivity. The probabilistic
   modelling involved running thousands of iterations of a given model across all possible ranged of uncertain
   inputs and therefore accounted for informational gaps. Applying a discount rate of 5 percent, the analysis
   calculated a mean Net Present Value (NPV) of US$102.1 million and a benefit cost ratio of 2.51. The mean
   Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was 10.5 percent.

   The ICR (para 45) applied the same method as the PAD and used data available at project completion. The
   analysis calculated a mean NPV of US$103.5 million and a mean IRR of 11.4 percent. These analyses indicate

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



that the project was a worthwhile investment. The results at completion are slightly higher since the project
ended up reconstructing 17 bridges instead of 15 bridges as originally planned.

Operational efficiency:

The project’s implementation period was extended once by three months as a result of procurement issues and
the need to rebid several contracts including NCMC, ICT, and MCCV (see section 10b for more details).
Furthermore, a river-bank protection site in Shaartuz district had to be removed from the project since the costs
were higher than originally estimated. However, it was replaced by a priority flood protection site in Kaftarkhona,
Vose district.

Given the project’s economic as well as operational efficiency, the project’s overall efficiency is rated
Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                   10.50
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                                11.40
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



The relevance of the objective was High. Efficacy and Efficiency were Substantial. The overall outcome rating
is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                        Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



The project’s risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Government commitment: Lack of government commitment is regarded a low risk, as the government
continues to be committed to the project's objective as demonstrated through the implementation of a World
Bank follow-on project, the Preparedness and Resilience to Disasters Project (PREPARED) which aims to
further strengthen the government’s DRM and climate change adaptation capacities, while continuing to
support the reconstruction of critical infrastructure with a focus on resilience. Furthermore, according to the
ICR (para. 78) CoESCD demonstrated its commitment to the development objective in a letter to the MoF
(March 2024) in which it stated that it will be conducting annual practical emergency drills based on the
NCMC operations manual to sustain emergency response skills of staff at NCMC and other relevant
agencies.

Technical: There is a risk that the technical DRM capacity built under the project may not be maintained.
While the project was able to build DRM capacity in the country, it will be critical to maintain this capacity and
continuously provide training to current and future CoESCD staff. Also, according to the ICR (para. 78)
interagency collaboration to optimize the utilization of NCMC as well as increase the use of the MCCV will be
key.

Financial: There is a risk that there may not be sufficient financial and human resources for O&M activities.
The sustainability of infrastructure constructed under the project will depend on the severity of future
disasters as well as operation and maintenance (O&M) activities. Ensuring adequate financial and human
resources for O&M activities will be critical for the sustainability of project assets. According to the ICR (para.
79) the Strategy for Financial Protection against Natural Disasters until 2023 could be a useful tool to ensure
the availability of essential funds by ensuring that resources dedicated to O&M of project assets will not be
touched in case of future emergencies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (para. 57) the World Bank team consulted with key stake holders during project
  preparation. The project design was also informed by in-depth analytical work such as natural hazard
  assessments to inform the design of bridges and flood protection infrastructure. Furthermore, a capacity
  and needs assessment was conducted of the CoESCD since it was the main coordinating agency for
  crisis management and DRM in the country. The project received a Project Preparation Advance (PPA)
  grant to conduct various activities such as feasibility studies and designs for flood protection and bridge
  rehabilitation, as well as to prepare social safeguard documents.

  According to the PAD (para. 51), the World Bank team identified several risks to project implementation
  and rated the following as Substantial: i) political and governance risks due to the country’s limited DRM
  capacity and the risks that the government would shift its resources, in case of another disaster in favor
  of immediate relief and response rather than continued support for project activities intended to support
  institutional development; ii) macroeconomic risks due to an ongoing volatility in the macroeconomic
  environment were likely to exert growing fiscal pressures and increase constraints on the government’s

                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



  spending priorities; iii) sector strategies and policies risks due to an unclear division of responsibilities
  within the DRM sector; iv) institutional capacity risks due to the need to build additional capacity for
  project implementation in the three different implementing agencies; v) environmental and social risks
  related to possible delays in civil works or land acquisition carried out without following the Resettlement
  Action Plan; and vi) fiduciary risks since the project’s complex design included three different
  implementing agencies. The World Bank team mitigated these risks by building capacity within the
  different implementing agencies in key areas such as procurement and financial management, allocating
  resources to the CERC in case of limited government resources being available as well as coordinating
  between the different entities involved in project implementation. Overall, the mitigation measures were
  adequate, and the project only required a three-months’ extension of its implementation period due to
  procurement related issues.

  The project’s Results Framework had some shortcomings such as few PDO indicators being formulated
  on the output level rather than the outcome level or measuring the same aspect under PDO indicators 1
  and 3 (see section 9a for more details).

  The World Bank team consulted with key stake holders, conducted in-depth analysis in key areas as well
  as identified risks and developed adequate mitigation measures. There were minor shortcomings in the
  Results Framework. Overall, the Quality at Entry is rated as Satisfactory.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the World Bank/ICR team (November 21, 2024) the World Bank team conducted semi-annual
 supervision missions (a total of 14) as well as additional technical level visits conducted by various
 engineers and safeguards team members in between the official supervision missions, to help advance
 and support technical level topics. Furthermore, throughout the implementation, the team engaged with
 different stakeholders. The team submitted regular Implementation Status and Results (ISRs) reports
 identifying implementation bottlenecks and providing time-bound action plans that had been agreed on with
 the counterparts.

 The ICR (para. 63) stated that the World Bank provided all three implementing agencies with extensive
 support in various areas including enhancing technical specifications for goods and consultant services,
 procurement packages and documents, evaluation of deliverables submitted by consultants, as well as
 providing on-site monitoring of works and services. However, the project would have benefitted from
 addressing the shortcomings in the Results Framework. Also, the project had four different Task Team
 Leaders (TTLs) over its life span resulting in frequent changes which might have affected implementation.

 The World Bank team provided capacity building support to all of the implementing agencies and
 conducted regular supervision missions. However, the project would have benefitted from revising



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



 shortcomings in the Results Framework and less frequent changes in TTLs. Overall, Bank Supervision is
 rated Satisfactory.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the ICR (para. 67) the project’s Results Framework was developed in cooperation with the
 government. The project’s theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to lead to intended
 outcomes was sound and reflected in the Results Framework. Furthermore, the Results Framework
 defined the frequency of data collection, which instruments were to be used and who was to be responsible
 for data collection.

 However, the Results Framework had some minor shortcomings. PDO indicator 3 “bridges reconstructed
 based on designs considering multi-hazard disaster and climate change risks” was formulated on the
 output level and PDO indicator 2 “understanding of seismic hazard is improved” were formulated on the
 intermediate outcome level. Also, several output indicators measure the same results as PDO indicators 1
 and 3.

 According to the PAD (para. 47) the MoF PIU was to be responsible for monitoring and reporting of the
 indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 68) the MoF PIU monitored and reported all indicators and ensured that the
  other two implementing agencies submitted their inputs. Also, the MoF PIU developed semi-annual
  project progress reports and submitted them on a timely manner to the World Bank. In addition, the ALRI
  and MOT submitted their own technical records including monthly supervision reports. The World Bank
  team provided training to the MoT and ALRI to strengthen their M&E capacity.

  However, the project could have benefitted from revising the Results Framework during project
  implementation and making the PDO indicators more outcome oriented.

  According to the World Bank team (November 21, 2024) the M&E data were found to be reliable and of
  good quality. Also, M&E functions and processes are being sustained following the project closing and



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



  have been satisfactorily utilized and continued to be applied under the ongoing follow-on project
  PREPARED.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 69) the project’s M&E data were used to assess implementation progress,
  identify bottlenecks and inform decision-making such as extending the project’s implementation period
  by three months to finalize the installation, commissioning and capacity building activities related to the
  NCMC equipment.

  While the M&E design had some minor shortcomings, it was generally sound and collected and
  monitored adequate data to track the project’s implementation progress.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   Environmental Assessment, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams, and
   OP/BP 7.50 Project on International Waterways. According to the ICR (para. 72) the project developed an
   Environmental Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework and later site‐specific
   Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and Management Plans (ESMPs) during subprojects
   implementation. In addition, two site‐specific Resettlement Action Plans were developed for the
   rehabilitation of 17 bridges. Compensations were paid to all individuals and households who were
   negatively affected by the project.

   During the COVID‐19 pandemic, the Implementing Agencies developed action plans to prevent the
   spreading of the virus. These action plans were included in bidding documents and contracts.

   According to the ICR (para. 72) the project’s Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) faced several
   implementation challenges including missing GRM logbooks and contact details at some construction sites.
   The World Bank addressed these issues by conducting regular site visits. By project closing, all 14
   grievances were resolved.

   The project’s safeguard compliance was rated satisfactory throughout implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management:


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



  According to the ICR (para. 73) the project’s Financial Management (FM) was rated Satisfactory
  throughout implementation. The Project Implementing Unit (PIU) at the MoF was responsible for the
  project’s overall FM while the MoT was responsible for the FM of subcomponent 2.1 and ALRI was
  responsible for the FM of subcomponent 2.2. To comply with the project’s effectiveness condition, the PIU
  at the MoF developed an FM Manual which defined all FM arrangements and controls in all three
  implementing agencies.

  Quarterly reports were submitted in a timely manner to the World Bank. Furthermore, the project did not
  encounter any issues related to the disbursement of the loan/grant proceeds, and designated accounts
  were replenished in a timely manner. Finally, according to the World Bank team (November 21, 2024) the
  external auditor’s opinions were unqualified.

  Procurement:

  Each implementing agency was responsible for the procurement of their activities. According to the ICR
  (para. 74) the MoF and ALRI had designated procurement specialists while the MoT PIG did not have one
  from April 2020 onwards since remaining procurement was limited. The World Bank team provided
  procurement training to all implementing agencies. For example, PIG staff was trained in processing of
  records in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges Program (STEP).

  The ICR (para. 74) stated that during ex-post reviews the World Bank team identified procurement issues
  related to the bidding processes and contract management. The implementing agencies were advised to
  improve due diligence on submitted bids, including assessing firm qualifications as well as compliance with
  bid validity periods. Furthermore, the World Bank recommended to complete all pending actions in STEP
  to facilitate adequate monitoring of agreed timelines.

  According to the ICR (para.) 61, the project experienced procurement related implementation delays as the
  initial tendering process for the NCMC construction in spring 2020 was unsuccessful due to unresponsive
  bids. The rebid process in the summer of 2020 prolonged the evaluation approval process. While the
  contract was awarded and construction activities started in February 2021, the contractor was not able to
  comply with the construction schedule resulting in the cancellation of contract with penalties in spring 2022.
  To finish the incomplete work, bid documents had to be adjusted and the remaining works had to be
  retendered. In addition, the project also faced challenges in regard to the procurement of ICT equipment
  and MCCV with the first round of tendering being cancelled due to high bid prices and submission of non-
  conforming documentation by the bidders. These delays resulted in the need to extend the project’s
  implementation period by three months.

  Despite these procurement challenges, the project’s procurement rating was Satisfactory throughout
  project implementation, indicating that the rating might not have been sufficiently critical.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                             ICR                  IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                             Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                    Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                      Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                      ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 21-22) included several lessons learned that were adapted by IEG:

        Designing DRM projects around the key DRM pillars can allow for comprehensive
         strengthening against natural hazards. This project design focused on disaster risk
         identification, preparedness and response as well as financial protection against disasters
         and improving the resilience of critical infrastructure allowing a simultaneous strengthening of
         the DRM pillars and therefore allowing for a comprehensive approach that strengthens the
         country’s overall DRM capacity.
        Having financing resources available to allow for essential preparatory activities
         during project preparation can positively impact project implementation. In this project,
         the Project Preparation Advance (PPA) financed the conducting of feasibility studies,
         designing bridge rehabilitation and river embankment reconstruction in detail, preparing
         Terms of Reference as well as environmental and social safeguard documents during project
         preparation allowing for a smooth implementation start.
        Citizen engagement can ensure support from local communities and beneficiaries and
         positively impact the sustainability of project outcomes. This project conducted outreach
         activities during project preparation and implementation to ensure the engagement of local
         communities in project related decision making. Also, the project was able to achieve high
         local labor force participation in the rehabilitation/construction of bridges and flood protection
         infrastructure, which also fostered local ownership.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                       Page 15 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Strengthening Critical Infrastructure (P158298)



The ICR provided and adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR included an
adequate efficiency analysis and useful lessons learned that can be applied to future projects in this area. Also,
the ICR was internally consistent. However, the ICR would have benefitted from being more concise. Overall,
the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
