     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024293

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines            Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 0                                          0

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P165220                                    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-64170                                 31-Dec-2019                                        30,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 05-Jun-2019                               31-Dec-2019
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                             30,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                         30,000,000.00                                            0.00




P169956_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 St. Vincent and the Grenadines            Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P169956                                   SVG 2nd Fiscal Reform & Resilience DPC ( P169956 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                     Total Financing (USD)
  IDA-64170,IDA-67030,IDA-67040,IDA-          30-Jun-2023                                              90000000.00
  69370

  Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
  25-Jun-2020                                 30-Jun-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                             90,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Revised Commitment                              90,000,000.00                                                  0.00

  Actual                                          90,000,000.00                                                  0.00



 Prepared by                   Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 Donna Kaidou Jeffrey          Vandana Chandra              Donna Kaidou Jeffrey              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program document (PAD1) of the First Fiscal Reform and Resilience Development Policy Credit (DPF1)
stated the Program Development Objective (PDO) as: "to support the Government of St. Vincent and the
Grenadines (GoSVG) in: (i) strengthening fiscal policy and public financial management; and (ii) strengthening
climate resilience and adaptation.") (PAD p. v,12).

DPF2 expanded the PDO to include immediate economic relief and support for pandemic response and
rephrased the PDO as: "to support the GoSVG in: (i) responding to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the
vulnerable; (ii) strengthening fiscal resilience; and (iii) enhancing climate and disaster resilience," (PAD2 p. v, 20).

For the purpose of this ICRR, the PDO against which outcomes will be assessed are taken to be:

      PDO1: To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic to protect the vulnerable.
      PDO2: To strengthen fiscal resilience.
      PDO3: To enhance climate and disaster resilience.

The Financing Agreement (FA) did not include a PDO statement.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas


                                                                                                        Page 2 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



DPF1 had two Pillars. A third pillar was added in DPF2 to recognize and support the GoSVG’s efforts to protect
the vulnerable during the COVID-19 pandemic (ICR, p. 6-7). Key changes to the pillars include:

      The new pillar (responding to COVID-19 to protect the vulnerable) became the first pillar under DPC2.
      The first pillar from DPC1 became Pillar 2 in DPC2. The targets for two results indicators (RIs) under this
       pillar were revised to reflect the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the port modernization project.
      Pillar 2 from DPC1 was converted to Pillar 3 in DPC2 and revised to reflect activities related to the Cat
       DDO financing instrument. Under this pillar, six RIs were revised, one RI was dropped, and a new RI was
       added to accommodate changes within the scope of associated reforms and/or impact of the pandemic.

The three pillars of the operation correspond to the sub-objectives of the PDO, as follows:

(i) Pillar 1: Responding to COVID-19 to protect the vulnerable: This pillar supported select measures and
programs instituted by the GoSVG to protect the vulnerable from the social and economic impacts of the
pandemic. The prior actions (PAs) supported financial relief directed to vulnerable groups, including households
and businesses most directly affected by the pandemic.

(ii) Pillar 2: Strengthening Fiscal Resilience: Improve fiscal sustainability by implementing policy reforms for
stronger fiscal frameworks, managing public debt, and creating fiscal buffers. The package of reforms included:
budget planning; the creation of fiscal buffers and fiscal rules; spending effectiveness and efficiency; domestic
resource mobilization; and strengthening State Owned Enterprise (SOE) oversight to tackle contingent liabilities
and transfers.

(iii) Pillar C: Enhancing Climate and Disaster Resilience: Develop resilience to climate-related and natural
disasters by supporting environmental and disaster risk management (DRM) policies. The package of reforms
included: land use planning and building codes; reduction in coastal sand mining; ocean governance and coastal
and marine spatial planning; phase out of single-use plastic bags and standards for effluent discharges;
strengthening the financial and institutional capacity of the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Conservation Fund
(SVGCF); and improving management of the fisheries and aquaculture sector.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The total financing of the series was US$120.0 million which was fully disbursed. It comprised of:

    a. An IDA credit of US$30.0 million for DPF1 which was approved on June 5, 2019, and closed as
       scheduled on June 29, 2023 (ICR, p. ii).
    b. An IDA credit of US$20.0 million for DPF2 which was approved on June 25, 2020, and disbursed as
       scheduled on July 28, 2020 (ISR, p. 1).
    c. An IDA-financed Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat DDO) of US$20 million was a part of
       DPF2. It was approved on June 25, 2020, and disbursed on April 12, 2021, following the eruption of La
       Soufriere volcano (ISR, p. 2).
    d. An IDA supplemental financing of US$50 million which was approved and disbursed as scheduled on
       June 25, 2021 (ICR, p. 2) DPF2 was a hybrid operation in the amount of US$40.0 million, consisting of
       two credits of a US$20 million Development Policy Credit and a US$20.0 million Cat DDO. Although the
       operation was originally conceived as a multi-sectoral DPF operation, these credits were combined into



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



       single operation with a modified design to respond to the pandemic to minimize the administrative
       burden on the government at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

In April 2021, the eruption of the active volcano, La Soufrière, created another emergency which prompted the
government to trigger the drawdown of the Cat DDO. Supplemental financing of US$50.0 million was approved
to meet the significant humanitarian needs as well as recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction efforts (ICR, p.
5).

The supplementary financing operation was deemed the most appropriate vehicle to provide rapid financing that
could be accessed by the GoSVG relatively quickly. However, having to simultaneously manage the demands
emanating from the COVID-19 pandemic, the GoSVG had limited capacity to implement additional reforms that
would have to accompany a new DPF series (ICR, p.5).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (SVG) is a middle-income, tourism-based, small island
 economy which is heavily reliant on its natural environment and highly vulnerable to natural disasters
 including hurricanes, and tropical storms. More than 90 percent of SVG’s physical infrastructure (e.g., roads,
 airports, telecommunication networks) lies on a narrow coastal belt less than eight meters above sea‐level
 and is highly susceptible to extreme weather event. SVG also has an active volcano which erupted in 2021.

 At the time of appraisal of DPF1, GDP growth was estimated at 2.0 percent, with medium term growth
 projected to reach 2.5 percent, driven by positive developments related to the tourism industry. The tourism
 sector accounts for approximately 25 percent of GDP and nearly 50 percent of total exports. However, the
 outlook was positive with the expectation that improvements in tourism infrastructure and connectivity with
 the newly constructed airport would contribute to moderately accelerated growth over the medium‐term. A
 fiscal deficit of 2.0 percent of GDP was recorded in 2018, with debt to GDP at 73.0 percent, (from 82.9
 percent in 2016). As a member of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU), SVG’s monetary policy is
 managed by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank. Like other ECCU members, SVG had committed to a
 public debt target of 60 percent of GDP by 2030.

 SVG’s macroeconomic policy framework was deemed adequate at appraisal. The projected improvement in
 growth over the short- and medium-term, consistently low inflation, and the GoSVG’s commitment to reduce
 debt to sustainable levels provided a sound macroeconomic outlook for the country. GoSVG had also
 embarked on a series of policy reforms to improve its fiscal position, enhance blue growth
 prospects, and strengthen climate resilience. Reforms in expenditure control and tax policy to generate
 higher revenues and create fiscal buffers, as well as in the governance of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) to
 enhance transparency and improve oversight were being undertaken. However, COVID-19 interrupted
 progress. Tourism ceased in SVG during the pandemic and growth in 2020 contracted by 5.5 percent, down
 from a pre-COVID forecast of 2.3 percent. The COVID-19 pandemic also created new fiscal pressures. The
 deficit reached 6.2 percent of GDP in 2020 driven by pandemic-related expenses and lower than expected
 revenues. GoSVG announced a fiscal package for increased health spending, employment support and
 social measures. The volcanic eruption in 2021 created a significant need for resources to respond to both
 the humanitarian needs of the disaster as well as recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction demands.
 These simultaneous shocks further constrained GoSVG’s limited capacity to implement additional reforms

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



and continue to implement the reform program which was intended to strengthen the macroeconomic
framework.

World Bank Group (WBG) and country strategies: The PDO remained relevant and well-aligned with
the 2018 Performance and Learning Review (PLR), and the WBG’s Regional Partnership Framework (RPF)
for the Eastern Caribbean States (FY22-FY25). The PDO focused on the priorities of the RPF, particularly the
high-level objective on Strengthened Resilience to Climate Change and Other Shocks, which will be achieved
by (i) enhancing environmental protection and climate change response; and (ii) improving macro-fiscal
policies, debt sustainability, and public financial management (PFM) (RPF, 2022).

The PDO was also relevant to SVG's National Economic and Social Development Plan (NESDP) 2013-2025
which aligns closely with the program’s objectives, prioritizing strong macroeconomic fundamentals, efficient
public service provision, disaster preparedness and mitigation, natural resource conservation, environmental
protection, and climate change resilience to achieve SVG’s long-term development vision (ICR, p.4). The
GoSVG had developed a Climate Change Policy and a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) to strengthen its
climate resilience. While SVG had a legal and institutional framework for managing disaster risks and had
made significant strides in enhancing its disaster readiness capabilities, its policy framework governing
disaster risk management (DRM) had a strong orientation towards disaster preparedness, response and
recovery, but put less emphasis on disaster risk prevention and ex-ante risk reduction and financing. Some of
the latter needs were supported by this operation. The DPF series was designed to support the GoSVG in
advancing actions related to enhancing fiscal and climate resilience from the NESDP in an integrated manner
and mainstream climate and disaster resilience into its broader development agenda.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Table 1: Objectives, Prior Actions (PAs) and Indicative Triggers (ITs) for the SVG Fiscal Reform and
Resilience DPF

PDO1: Responding to COVID-19 to Protect the Vulnerable
DPF1                                      DPF2
                                          PA1 (DPF2-PA1): Approval of a supplementary income
                                          program for displaced hotel and other affected workers for up
                                          to three months and including support to taxi, water taxi and
                                          tour operators affected by the cancellation of cruise ships.
                                          PA2 (DPF2-PA2): Approved a support program for small
                                          businesses and cultural workers, as well as a direct support
                                          program for farmers and individuals engaged in the fishing
                                          sector.
                                          PA3 (DPF2-PA3): The National Insurance Service has
                                          approved a pre-payment program of pension benefits to
                                          pensioners and a Temporary Unemployment Benefit (TUB)
                                          designed to provide relief to employees who have directly lost
                                          income as a result of the effects of the pandemic and the
                                          government has approved a program of Interim Assistance

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



                                                    Benefits (IAB) for vulnerable citizens who are neither
                                                    pensioners nor social welfare beneficiaries.
PDO 2: Strengthening Fiscal Resilience
PA4 (DPF1-PA1): The Recipient, through its
                                                 PA5 (DPF2-PA4: The Recipient, through its Parliament, has
Cabinet of Ministers, has required the annual
                                                 approved a Parliamentary Fiscal Responsibility Resolution
preparation of a medium‐term fiscal framework
                                                 that outlines declaratory fiscal responsibility principles, and
(MTFF), and related timetable for its
                                                 sets targets for spending, fiscal balances and public debt
preparation, that sets fiscal policy targets to
                                                 levels. [Trigger 1 in DPF1]
anchor the fiscal account on a sustainable path.
IT1-DPF1: The Recipient will approve a
Parliamentary resolution that outlines
declaratory fiscal responsibility principles and
sets targets for spending, fiscal balances and
public debt levels.
PA6 (DPF1-PA2): The Recipient, through the
                                                 PA7 (DPF2-PA5): The Recipient will adopt procurement
House of Assembly, has approved a revised
                                                 regulations in support of, and as required by, the new Public
Public Procurement Act, which is aligned with
                                                 Procurement Act. [Trigger 3 in DPF1]
international good practice.
IT3-DPF1: The Recipient will adopt
procurement regulations in support of, and as
required by, the new Public Procurement Act.
                                                 PA9 (DPF2-PA6): The Recipient, through its Parliament, has
PA8 (DPF1-PA3): The Recipient, through its
                                                 approved a revised Tax Administration Act aimed at
Minister of Finance, has submitted to the House
                                                 increasing transparency, consistency, and increasing
of Assembly, amendments to the Income Tax
                                                 domestic resource mobilization by facilitating compliance.
Act aimed at addressing transfer pricing issues.
                                                 [Trigger 4 in DPF1]
IT4-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Minister of
Finance, has submitted to the House of
Assembly, a revised Tax Administration
and Procedures Act (TAPA) aimed at increasing
transparency, consistency, and increasing
domestic resource mobilization by facilitating
compliance.
PA10 (DPF1-PA4): The Recipient, through its
Cabinet of Ministers, has issued an order
mandating quarterly and annual financial
reporting standards and requirements for State
Owned Enterprises (SOEs).
IT5-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of
Ministers, will strengthen SOE oversight by
approving a broader SOE reporting
framework, including the creation of a
Monitoring and Oversight Committee and the
definition of its composition, mandate, roles and
responsibilities. (DROPPED)


                                                                                                       Page 6 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



PDO 3: Enhancing Climate and Disaster Resilience
PA11 (DPF1-PA5): The Recipient, through its
Cabinet of Ministers, has adopted a partial ban
                                                PA12 (DPF2-PA7): The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
of coastal sand mining and has established a
                                                adopted a time-based phase out of coastal sand mining
monitoring mechanism for remaining active
                                                throughout the national territory. [Trigger 8 in DPF1]
sites to gradually implement a sand mining ban
and increase coastal resilience.
IT8-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of
Ministers has adopted a time‐based phase out
of coastal sand mining throughout the
national territory.
PA13 (DPF1-PA6): The Recipient, through its
Cabinet of Ministers, has approved the National
Oceans Policy and Strategic Action Plan, with a PA14 (DPF2-PA8): The Recipient, through its Minister of
view to enhancing benefits from the marine      Health, Wellness, and the Environment, has phased out the
environment to sustainable development, and importing, distribution and use of single-use plastic bags and
has created the National Ocean Coordinating plastic food service containers to reduce waste generation
Committee to strengthen its capacity for ocean and marine pollution. [Trigger 9 in DPF1]
governance and coastal and marine spatial
planning.
IT9-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Cabinet of
Ministers, has phased out the use of single‐use
plastic bags to reduce waste generation
and marine pollution.
PA15 (DPF1-PA7): The Recipient, through the
Board of the SVGCF has: (a) by amending its
by‐laws, strengthened SVGCF for financing and
implementing environmental management,
ecosystems conservation and climate resilience
initiatives, including projects targeting women
and girls, and (b) has signed a Partnership
Agreement with the Caribbean Biodiversity
Fund (CBF) to increase revenue generation for
SVGCF.
PA16 (DPF1-PA8): The Recipient, through its
Cabinet of Ministers, has adopted the National
Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy for improving
management, sustainable use and development
of fisheries and aquaculture resources and
related ecosystems.
IT10-DPF1: The Recipient has adopted national
regulatory standards for effluent discharges,
including minimum sewage effluent
guidelines and a monitoring program for Priority
Pollution Watch sites (PPWS).


                                                                                               Page 7 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



IT11-DPF1: The Recipient has adopted a
national aquaculture business plan, with special
activities targeting youth and women, to
promote a sustainable seafood industry and
reduce overfishing. (DROPPED)
IT2-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Parliament PA17 (DPF2-PA9): The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approves regulations for the operation of the   approved regulations for the operation of the contingencies
contingency fund.                               fund. [Trigger 2 in DPF1]
IT6-DPF1: The Recipient, through its Minister of
                                                 PA18 (DPF2-PA10): The Recipient, through its Minister, has
Physical Planning and Cabinet of Ministers, has
                                                 adopted revised Building Regulations in the Town and
adopted the revised administrative
                                                 Country Planning Act relating to the enforcement and
guidelines relating to the enforcement and
                                                 application of OECS Building Codes to strengthen resilience
application of OECS Building Codes to
                                                 to natural disasters. [Trigger 6 in DPF1]
strengthen resilience to natural disasters.
IT7-DPF1: The Recipient has complemented
the Town and Country Planning Act with
mandatory provisions on Environmental Impact
Assessment, subdivisions of land, and display
of advertisement, to strengthen land use and
development planning with a view to increasing
climate resilience and coastal protection.
(DROPPED)
                                                 PA19 (DPF2-PA11) The Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
                                                 approved the School Safety Policy to enhance physical,
                                                 environmental, and social protection levels at education
                                                 facilities.

PDO1: Responding to COVID-19 to protect the vulnerable. PDO1 was supported by three PAs to provide
targeted financial relief and support to protect vulnerable populations from the economic disruptions caused
by the COVID-19 pandemic.

PA1 supported the provision of temporary income support to employees directly engaged in the tourism
industry. Tourism, the main sector in SVG (contributed 25.0 percent of GDP and approximately 44.0 percent
of employment) was directly affected by the pandemic containment measures and travel restrictions. Closure
of the main ports of entry and the cessation of travel resulted in an abrupt end to tourism activity, affecting a
substantial proportion of the population directly engaged in the sector. The temporary direct income support
consisted of one-time payments in the case of taxi, water taxi, and tour operators and support for up to three
months to those who had lost employment in hotels and the tourism sector. This was an important
intervention to protect livelihoods. Relevance of PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA2 extended the temporary income support to groups which were indirectly affected by the sudden stop to
tourism activity, including households engaged in farming, fishing, and cultural sectors. Industries and
activities, such as agriculture, fisheries, arts, crafts, and cultural events and sites that support tourism
represented another segment of the vulnerable population. This support included additional support for the
Farmers’ Support Company; free seeds; subsidized inputs; and the provision of fishing boats and farm
animals on generous terms which also benefitted small businesses. These measures were expected to
minimize the poverty impact of the crisis by limiting income loss and closure of small businesses during the

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



pandemic so that individuals and households could maintain their consumption levels. Relevance of PA2:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3 extended the temporary income support benefits to vulnerable groups which were not captured by other
programs, particularly those not captured within the social safety net, those not benefitting from existing
social assistance programs and those outside of the tourism sector who also lost their jobs. Relevance of
PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2: Strengthening Fiscal Resilience. PDO2 was supported by 7 PAs which focused on addressing
weaknesses in public financial management (PFM) and strengthening fiscal policy.

PA4 supported strengthening fiscal policy by addressing budget planning. Prior to the DPF, SVG did not have
a formal Medium Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) process or a medium‐term expenditure framework which
adequately reflected GoSVG’s budget, priorities, macroeconomic projections, changing demographics, and
external economic conditions. PA4 addressed the lack of comprehensive, forward-looking fiscal planning and
accountability mechanisms in SVG (PD1, p.13). The MTFF was initially designed with a 3-year horizon that
established fiscal policy targets and a clear timeline for achieving them, ensuring that fiscal management
aligned with sustainable budgeting practices. The timeframe was subsequently extended to 5 years given the
COVID-19 pandemic and the port project, to better reflect and plan for the budgetary impact of those events
(DPF2, p. 22). Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA5 supported the establishment of the Fiscal Responsibility Framework (FRF), which set out declaratory
fiscal principles and established specific targets for public spending, fiscal balances, and debt levels to
enhance fiscal discipline and accountability (PD2, p.22). Enactment of the FRF was an important step
towards fiscal and debt sustainability and established the fiscal targets for primary surpluses (total
expenditures less interest payments), growth in current expenditure, limits on the wage bill and a public debt
target. The FRF includes oversight mechanisms to ensure compliance and requires the submission to
Parliament of a fiscal adjustment plan by the Minister of Finance should budget performance not comply with
FRF established targets. Relevance of PA5: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA6 sought to address longstanding challenges related to inefficiencies, delays, and lack of transparency in
public procurement processes. PA6 supported the drafting of a new Public Procurement Act in accordance
with international best practices and replaced the outdated legislation that governed procurement in SVG. An
efficient system would be expected to enable more competition, transparency, and better value for money,
generating efficiencies and fiscal savings over the medium term, in line with the PDO of strengthening fiscal
resilience. Relevance of PA6: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA7 built on PA6, with the adoption of regulations to facilitate implementation of the new public procurement
Act. The application of regulations, as stipulated by the new procurement code, ensured timely
implementation of the provisions of the new Act. The regulations included the establishment of procurement
methods appropriate to the needs of the GoSVG, underpinned by requirements for transparency in the
conduct of procurement proceedings (DPF2, p. 23). The Regulations also supported a modern organizational
structure, including a Procurement Board, and provisions for improving the transparency of procurement and
establishing the legal basis for the use of modern techniques, including framework agreements and e-
procurement (DPF1, p. 15). Relevance of PA7: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA8 supported amendments to the Income Tax Act to address transfer pricing issues with the expectation
that revenue collection would increase. SVG has a large presence of foreign companies, particularly in the


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



telecommunication and banking sectors, but the lack of effective transfer pricing tax measures is leading to
significant under‐taxation of such enterprises (DPF1, p. 15). While an important reform for strengthening
revenue sources, contribution to fiscal resilience would depend on several factors including the financial
performance of these companies, and compliance. Relevance of PA8: Satisfactory (S).

PA9 supported the enactment of a new comprehensive Tax Administration Act (TAA) (previously referred to
as the Tax Administration and Procedures Act), aimed at enhancing the Inland Revenue Department’s (IRD)
ability to administer all tax laws and ensure the efficient collection of taxes and other fees (DPF2, p. 24). The
new act clarified taxpayer responsibilities, protections and ensures time-bound settlement of taxpayer
disputes. The TAA reflects international best practices, facilitates effective tax administration, and addresses
several outstanding weaknesses (DPF2, p. 24). For example, the introduction of a unique taxpayer
identification number is expected to facilitate the routine identification of taxpayers and together with
improved access to third party information improve the effective monitoring of taxpayer obligations and
compliance. With sufficient power to serve liens, seize assets, or collect taxes from third party debtors, the
revenue authority is expected to enhance revenue collection and compliance. Relevance of
PA9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA10: Although commercial SOEs played an important role in SVG’s economy, their non-transparent
financial practices exposed GoSVG’s public finances to hidden liabilities. Significant governance
shortcomings in SOEs hindered the Ministry of Finance’s ability to monitor their financial health, oversee
performance and reduce their spending inefficiencies (DPF2, p. 24). PA10 sought to address this by
mandating quarterly and annual financial reporting standards for SOEs to enhance transparency and
governance. While the PA would contribute to improved oversight, it does not necessarily address the risks to
fiscal sustainability and does not directly contribute to the objective of fiscal resilience without addressing the
core issue of the financial viability of SOEs. The indicative trigger which would have strengthened this PA
with a broader SOE reporting framework, was subsequently dropped in DPF2. Relevance of
PA10: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PDO3: Enhancing Climate and Disaster Resilience. PDO3 had 9 PAs focused on sustainable resource
management, disaster risk management integration, and financial resilience initiatives like the contingencies
fund and Cat DDO.

PA11 supported a partial ban on coastal sand mining with a monitoring mechanism for the remaining active
sites. This PA was the first step towards a complete ban on coastal mining. Prior to this intervention, sand
mining had been uncontrolled and unregulated, leading to environmental degradation including beach
erosion. The erosion of beaches led to endangered coastal housing and infrastructure, extended salt spray
into significant acreages of productive land and led to habitat loss for certain flora and fauna. This first step
was important for encouraging beach replenishment and restoration of sand dunes to augment SVG’s natural
defenses against hurricanes and storm surges and strengthen the resilience of its coastal areas. Relevance
of PA11: Satisfactory (S).

PA12 strengthened PA11 with a time-based phase-out of coastal sand mining. Following an assessment of
the economic, social, and environmental effects of alternative interventions, the GoSVG adopted a time-
based plan to completely phase-out coastal sand mining by December 2020 (DPF2, p. 26). These reforms
were expected to: (i) reduce dependence on coastal sand mining, as imported sand increasingly replaces the
use of domestic sand; and (ii) eliminate further beach erosion at the Brighton and Diamond sites over time as
these beaches naturally restore themselves, thereby increasing the resilience of these areas to climate
change impacts (hurricane winds, storm surges) (DPF2, p. 26). Given the importance of sand to the


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



construction sector, sources of inland production and importation were identified and supplemented by
measures to facilitate and lower the cost of importation. While these measures were well intended, it was
unclear whether GoSVG had the ability to adequately monitor and control sand mining activity, and whether
SVG had the capability to start adequate domestic production of sand to meet domestic demand at such
short notice to satisfy the objective of climate and disaster resilience. Relevance of PA12: Satisfactory (S).

PA13 supported the approval of the National Oceans Policy and Strategic Action Plan and the establishment
of the National Ocean Coordinating Committee. The policy and action plan provided a framework for
integrated ocean governance which was an important reform given the significant role of the ocean in SVG’s
economy. The policy would be expected to enhance ocean governance and marine spatial planning,
supporting resilience in critical sectors like tourism and fisheries. While this policy alone would not contribute
directly to the objective of climate and disaster resilience, it would be a first step towards this objective and
would require significant fiscal resources for implementation, monitoring, and effectiveness. Relevance of
PA13: Satisfactory (S).

PA14 supported the phasing out of single-use plastic bags and food service containers. This measure was
expected to help reduce waste generation and marine pollution. Given the significance of SVG’s marine and
coastal resources for the livelihoods for fisherfolk and key resources for nature-based tourism activities,
marine litter, especially the accumulation of plastic in the ocean and coastal areas, presented several
negative implications for fisheries, marine biodiversity, and tourism. PA14 was expected to contribute to
reducing marine litter, improving health of the marine environment and increasing protection of SVG’s marine
and coastal environment (DPF2, p26). SVG imported approximately 453 tons of plastic bags annually. A
phased approach was taken, with a ban on imports of plastic bags and plastic food service containers from
March 1, 2020, and August 1, 2020, respectively, followed by a ban on the distribution, sale, and use of
plastic bags and plastic food service containers from August 1, 2020, and January 1, 2021, respectively. Prior
to this, in 2017, the GoSVG had banned imports of Styrofoam containers to reduce marine litter and improve
health of the marine environment. Taken together these measures would contribute to the objective of climate
resilience. Relevance of PA14: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA15 supported an amendment to the by-laws of the Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Conservation Fund
(SVGCF) to strengthen its financial sustainability and to facilitate a partnership agreement with the Caribbean
Biodiversity Fund (CBF). The revised by‐laws set forth sustainable sources of revenues to support
enforcement, infrastructure, monitoring needs and other activities that would contribute substantially to the
conservation, protection, and maintenance of biodiversity within SVG’s protected areas or any other area of
environmental significance (DPF1, p. 21). The SVGCF was established in 2015, with the mandate to promote
and contribute to the conservation, protection, management, and expansion of the National Protected Areas
System. However, a lack of regulations on revenue sources and the absence of a budgetary allocation from
the GoSVG hampered the ability of SVGCF to operate fully. Relevance of PA15: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA16: SVG’s fisheries faced significant challenges from overfishing and climate change. The fisheries sector
provided significant employment, with approximately 3,000 people engaged in marine coastal and deep‐sea
fisheries activities and other jobs including pre-and post-harvesting and selling (DPF1, p. 22). However, SVG
faced a sharp decline in fish stocks with a decline in the country’s annual captures by almost 70 percent
between 2007 and 2016 (from 4,788 tons to 1,467 tons). The adoption of the National Fisheries and
Aquaculture Policy (FAP) aimed to support sustainable fishing practices and promote aquaculture initiatives
to help the sector adapt to an increasingly uncertain future and declining fish stocks, while contributing to
food security (DPF1, p.22-23). This policy would also support the health of marine ecosystems which served



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 24
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



as natural barriers against disasters, enhancing overall climate resilience for SVG. Relevance of PA16:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA17 supported the approval of regulations for the operationalization of a Contingencies Fund. The
guidelines outlined the modalities for accumulation of funds, and established clear rules and criteria for
access, disbursement, use, and public reporting on contingencies fund finances to ensure transparency and
accountability in the use of funds (DPF2, p. 28). Natural disasters divert resources from key priorities,
negatively affecting economic growth and development progress. Over the last 20 years, SVG experienced
average annual losses of US$21 million from hydrometeorological events, of which the GoSVG would need
to cover about 15-25 percent to address its public sector contingent liabilities (DPF2, p. 27-28). The
Contingencies Fund would complement the Cat DDO, providing access to liquidity immediately following a
natural disaster. To resource the fund, the general VAT rate was increased by one percentage point from 15
to 16 percent and the VAT rate on tourist accommodations and other tourist related activities was increased
by one percent from 10 to 11 percent to directly resource the contingencies fund. In addition, Cabinet
approved the Climate Resilience Levy Act which contributed to the capitalization of the Contingencies Fund
by making a provision for US$3 to be collected per night per visitor staying in a hotel for up to 30 days (DPF2,
p. 28). This reform was an important component in building climate and disaster resilience. Relevance of
PA17: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA18 supported the adoption of revised Building Regulations under the Town and Country Planning Act to
facilitate enforcement of the updated Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Building Codes.
Damages from climate-related and geophysical disasters to SVG’s physical infrastructure imposed high
reconstruction and rehabilitation costs on both the GoSVG, and private entities. The Building Regulations in
the Town and Country Planning Act provided the regulatory framework for the implementation of the OECS
Building Codes, which set forth building standards to prevent or mitigate the damage caused by natural
disasters, particularly hurricanes and earthquakes (DPF1 p. 29). The updated Codes would cater to both
private and public structures, with differentiation between sizes and uses of construction in residential
housing, and specifically tailored to the country context, on the standards required for protecting buildings
from hurricanes of categories 3 and 4 (DPF2, p. 29). This reform would contribute to strengthening the design
standards for new buildings in SVG, thereby improving their ability to withstand the impact of disasters,
particularly hurricanes and earthquakes, with the potential to contribute to building resilience if enforced.
Relevance of PA18: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA19 supported the School Safety Policy, which sought to enhance physical, environmental, and social
protection levels at educational facilities. Approximately one fifth of SVG’s educational facilities were dual
purposed and served as shelters during natural disasters, underscoring the need for ensuring their structural
soundness and having comprehensive disaster management plans in place (ICR, p. 18). This heightened the
need to ensure that the buildings were structurally sound, comprehensive disaster management plans were
in place for each institution, and contingency plans were in place to allow schooling to resume as soon as
possible following an emergency (DPF2, p. 29). The PA contributed to the standardization and
mainstreaming of climate and disaster risk management planning in SVG’s educational institutions which was
expected to contribute to improvements in construction and maintenance standards for school buildings and
the introduction of safety procedures, thereby strengthening SVG’s emergency preparedness. Relevance of
PA19: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



Rating


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



Highly Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Table 2. Results Indicators Relevance and Achievement

                                                                        Actual
                                                              Actual change in Most
                                                                                           RI
                      Associated RI                           value as RI relative recent
RI description                             Baseline Target                                 achievement
                      PA(s)      relevance                    of target to         value
                                                                                           rating
                                                              date      targeted available
                                                                        change
PDO1: Responding to COVID-19 to protect the vulnerable
RI1a: Number of
                                                Target        Actual
beneficiaries from                    Baseline
                     PA1      HS                (2021):       (2021):   156%       n/a*       High
the supplementary                     (2020): 0
                                                1,400         2,190
income program
                                                Target        Actual
RI1b: Percentage                      Baseline:
                     PA1      HS                (2021):       (2021):   128%       n/a*       High
females                               0
                                                45%           57%
RI2: Number of
                                                Target        Actual
beneficiaries from                    Baseline
                     PA2      HS                (2021):       (2021):   1491%      n/a*       High
the support program.                  (2020): 0
                                                400           5,964
.
RI3: Number of
beneficiaries who
                                                Target        Actual
received                              Baseline
                     PA3      HS                (2021):       (2021):   102%       n/a*       High
prepayments, TUB                      (2020): 0
                                                3,500         3,576
benefits, and IAB
support.
PDO2: Strengthening Fiscal Resilience
                                                                        95.4

                                                                        %-
                                                                        (compared
RI4: Public debt                                                        to the
                                            Baseline Target   Actual
convergence to the                                                      Target,     85.7%
                   PA4, PA5      MS         (2017): (2020):   (2020):                         Substantial
ECCU target of 60%                                                      this RI was (2023)
                                            73.5%    84.4%    84.9%
of GDP by 2030.                                                         almost
                                                                        fully
                                                                        achieved.
                                                                        See para
                                                                        29 of ICR.)


                                                                                             Page 13 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



                                                         Target
RI5: Analysis of                                         (2020):                       Analysis
                                            Baseline
government-wide                                          Analysis Actual               completed
                                            (2017):
procurement        PA6, PA7       S                      completed (2020): 100%        but not     Substantial
                                            No
spending published                                       and       Yes                 published
                                            analysis
by MOF.                                                  published                     (No, 2023).
                                                         (Yes)
                                                         Target
                                            Baseline               Actual
RI6: Revenue from                                        (2020):                       EC$152.13
                                            (2017):                (2020):
taxes on income and PA8, PA9      MS                     EC$150            -5%         million   Modest
                                            EC$151                 EC$143
profits.                                                 million                       (2023)
                                            million                million
                                                         (revised)
RI7: Analysis of the
performance of                               Baseline    Target    Actual
                     PA10       MS                                           0%        0 (2023)     Negligible
commercial SOEs                              (2017): 0   (2020): 1 (2020): 0
published.
PDO3: Enhancing Climate and Disaster Resilience
RI8: Volume of                               Baseline              Actual
                                                         Target
domestically mined                           (2018):               (2021):             40,230 m3
                     PA11, PA12MS                        (2021): 0           16%                 Substantial
coastal sand                                 35,370                29,735              (2023)
                                                         m3
reduced.                                     m3                    m3
                                MS – data
                                availability
                                problem
                                as plastic
                                bags
                                could not                          Actual
RI9: Imported                                Baseline                                  Not
                                be                       Target    (2021):                          Modest **[ad
single‐use plastic   PA13, PA14              (2017):                         0%        available
                                separated                (2021): 0 Not                              ditional data]
bags reduced.                                453 tons                                  (2023)
                                from other                         available
                                plastic
                                imports.
                                Rating
                                MS. ICR
                                para 35.
RI10: Increase in
number of Saint
Vincent and the
                                             Baseline    Target    Actual
Grenadines           PA15       S                                            100%      2 (2023)     High
                                             (2018): 0   (2021): 2 (2021): 2
Conservation Fund’s
sustainable revenue
sources.
RI11: Number of
                                             Baseline    Target    Actual
aquaculture business PA16       MS                                           0%        0 (2023)     Modest
                                             (2018): 0   (2021): 2 (2021): 0
plans prepared.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



                                                        Target       Actual
RI12: Level of funds                           Baseline                                   EC$47
                                                        (2022):      (2022):
in the contingencies PA17          HS          (2017):                         78%        million      High
                                                        EC$50        EC$39
fund.                                          No funds                                   (2023)
                                                        million      million**
RI13: Share of permit
applications for new
                                            Baseline Target     Actual
buildings approved in                                                               100%
                      PA18        HS        (2018): (2022):     (2022): 100%                   High
compliance with the                                                                 (2023)
                                            0%       100%       100%
updated building
codes guidelines.
RI14: Number of
schools used as
emergency shelters
that have completed                         Baseline Target     Actual
                                                                                               Modest
comprehensive                               (2019): (2022):     (2022):             13% [7/54]
                      PA19        HS                                     -2%
disaster                                    11.1%    44.4%      10.4%               (2023)
management plans                            [5/45]   [20/45]    [5/48]
and submitted to the
Ministry of
Education.
*The program ended in 2021
**Recapitalized amount following complete disbursement of funds made for volcanic eruptions

*** RI achievement rating adjusted based on additional information, see efficacy section.

PDO1: Responding to the COVID-19 Pandemic to protect the vulnerable.

RI1a and RI1b was adequate to measure the number of tourism affected beneficiaries of the income support
program, including the share of women beneficiaries. The indicator was clear, and measurable. Relevance of
RI1a and RI1b: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2 adequately captured the number of beneficiaries including households engaged in farming, fishing, and
cultural sectors. The indicator was measurable. Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI3 was useful in measuring the number of beneficiaries of the extended income support program. RI3 was
simple, and a reasonable indicator to measure progress of PA3. Relevance of RI3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2: Strengthen Fiscal Resilience.

RI4 sought to measure the achievement of PAs 4 and 5, which addressed fiscal planning and responsibility.
While RI4 would have been adequate for the achievement of PDO2, strengthening fiscal resilience, it was not an
appropriate indicator for the PAs under the DPF series. At the appraisal of the DPF series in 2018, SVG was
already at high risk of debt distress. It is unlikely that instituting the MTFF and the FRF would contribute directly
to reducing the debt to GDP ratio by 4.0 percentage points in 2-years, (originally designed to fall from a baseline
of 76.4 percent of GDP (2017) to 72.0 percent (2020) without a fiscal adjustment program in place. In addition,
the debt to GDP ratio is affected by other factors such as economic growth and emergency expenditures due to
external shocks (which are common in SVG) that are not at government’s discretion as evident during the
COVID-19 pandemic and volcanic eruption. As such, at the time of appraisal of DPF2, due to the impact of

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



COVID-19, the baseline was revised to 73.5 percent (2017) and target 84.4 percent (2020). Relevance or RI4:
Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI5 focused on the operationalization of PA6 and PA7, the new Procurement Act and related regulations. RI5
was a reasonable indicator for public procurement. Although it does not capture the actual objective of
strengthening fiscal resilience, it does capture transparency and accountability as it relates to the publishing of
government-wide procurement spending by MEF. The indicator was clear and measurable. Relevance of RI5:
Satisfactory (S).

RI6 sought to measure the impact of PA8 and PA9 with regards to amendments to the Tax Administration Act.
RI6 was broadly inadequate to measure the impact of the changes to address transfer pricing and greater
compliance. In addition, other factors could potentially contribute to an increase in taxes on income and profits.
Relevance of RI6: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI7 was a simple indicator to measure the publication of the financial performance of commercial SOEs but did
not indicate the timeliness of the publications, and the means of publication. Relevance of RI7: Moderately
Satisfactory (MS).

PDO3: Enhance Climate and Disaster Resilience.

RI8 sought to monitor the progress of PA11 and PA12, as it relates to the volume of sand mined in SVG. The
indicator was not suitable for the PAs since the link between volume of sand mined and beach erosion could not
be clearly established at locations such as Dripp beach (ICR, p.21). A more useful measure may have been the
number of active sand mining sites among the four beaches identified. While RI8 does not directly measure
progress towards reducing beach erosion or the objective of climate and disaster resilience, it is a reasonable
first step. Relevance of RI8: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI9 sought to measure the progress of PA13 and PA14, as it relates to the importation of single use plastic
bags. The import data for single use plastic bags could not have been extracted from available import data due
to classification issues, hence the data for the indicator is not readily available. Relevance of RI9: Moderately
Satisfactory (MS).

RI10 measured the progress of PA15, and the number of revenue sources secured by the SVGCF. RI10 was
simple and measurable. Relevance of RI10: Satisfactory (S).

RI11 aimed to measure the impact of PA16, the Fisheries and Aquaculture Policy. The RI was clearly defined
and easily measurable, but not an adequate measure of the effectiveness of the policy. The expectation that the
policy would result in an increase in interest and the number of aquaculture business plans was too highly
pitched. Other factors would also influence the private sector’s interest in aquaculture. Further, the RI does not
measure progress towards the objective of building climate and disaster resilience. The policy does have a role
to play in encouraging PPP investments in the sector. Relevance of RI11: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI12 was directly relevant to the Contingencies Fund (PA17). RI12 measured the level of funds in the
contingencies fund, which is easily measurable and for which data would be readily available. Relevance of
RI12: Highly Satisfactory (HS).




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 24
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



  RI13 sought to measure the effectiveness of PA18 and compliance with the new building codes. The share of
  permit applications for new buildings in compliance with the updated codes is easily measurable, clear and for
  which data would be relatively easy to capture. Relevance of RI13: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

  RI14 adequately measured the progress in PA19, which mandated the preparation of these plans, as well as
  progress towards PDO3. Relevance of RI14: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Responding to COVID-19 to protect the vulnerable

               Rationale
               RI1a and RI1b: The supplementary income-support program for displaced hotel and other affected workers
               for up to three months benefitted 2,190 people, exceeding the target of 1,400. Of the total beneficiaries, 57.4
               percent were women. Achievement rating: High.

               RI2: A total of 5,964 beneficiaries received assistance from the support program for small businesses and
               cultural workers, and direct support to farmers exceeding the target of 400. The largest group of beneficiaries
               was farmers (5,000), who were not previously registered with the GoSVG before the program. Achievement
               rating: High.

               RI3: The number of beneficiaries of the Temporary Unemployment Benefit (TUB) and Interim Assistance
               Benefits (IAB) reached 3,576, exceeding the target of 3500. Sailors who were unemployed due to the
               cessation in cruises during the pandemic and were not contributing to the GoSVG’s pension programs were
               the primary beneficiaries of IAB program. Achievement rating: High.

               The rating of the achievement of Objective 1 was Highly Satisfactory, given the high achievement of the 3
               RIs.



               Rating
               Highly Satisfactory



               OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                                Page 17 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)




Objective
Strengthening fiscal resilience

Rationale
RI4: The public debt target was expected to be met under the assumption that the GoSVG’s adherence to the
fiscal rules and targets set out in the FRF would reduce the debt to GDP ratio. However, the pandemic and
subsequently the volcanic eruption had significant implications on the GoSVG’s fiscal space and adherence
to the FRF was suspended temporarily. The baseline was initially 76.4 percent but subsequently adjusted to
73.5 percent to reflect data revisions, and the target adjusted upwards from 72.0 percent to 84.4 percent to
reflect the impact of the pandemic and the port modernization project. Due to the negative impact of the
pandemic on the GoSVG’s fiscal position this target was impacted, with public debt being 84.9 percent at
end-2020. An improvement, or movement towards the 60 percent ECCU debt target would have been
considered an achievement, however, an increase in the debt to GDP ratio signifies significant debt related
vulnerabilities. This indicator is considered substantially achieved, given that the increase in debt was not
significant, and a 95.4 percent achievement given the circumstances of COVID-19 and the volcanic eruption.
Achievement rating: Substantial.

RI5: Ministry of Finance (MOF) has released analyses of GoSVG’s procurement spending since 2017, with
the most recent analysis published in 2021, achieving the target of RI5 (ICR, p.20). The ICR noted that after
program completion, analysis for procurement spending for 2022 and 2023 had been completed but not
published. Achievement rating: Substantial.

RI6: Revenue from taxes from income and profits was EC$143 million at the target date (2020), below the
target of EC$150 million. The target was adjusted downward from EC$165 million to EC$150 million to reflect
the impact of the pandemic. However, at the end of 2023, the actual revenue was EC$152.3 million, above
the baseline. Achievement rating: Modest.

RI7: The SOE performance analysis was not published at the target date of 2020. This was due to competing
demands for the GoSVG to manage the COVID-19 response and subsequent volcanic eruption, (ICR, p. 18).
Achievement rating: Negligible.

PDO2 is rated Moderately Satisfactory with the achievement of one RI rated Modest, two rated Substantial
and one rated Negligible.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhancing Climate and Disaster Resilience

Rationale

                                                                                                Page 18 of 24
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



RI8: The volume of coastal sand mining recorded at the end of 2021 was 29,735m3 which did not meet the
target of 0. The target of zero was based on the assumption that there would be a 100 percent reduction in
coastal sand mining by 2021 with the cessation of sand mining at all four beaches. Initially the GoSVG
adopted a partial ban on coastal sand mining that ceased sand mining at two beaches (DPF1). This reform
was subsequently strengthened to eliminate coastal sand mining from all four sites by 2021 through the
adoption of a time-based phase out plan under DPF2, with sand needed for construction being acquired from
inland sources such as the Rabacca River or through imports thereafter (ICR, p.21). Sand mining has
completely ceased at three of the four sites - Diamond, Brighton, and Richmond beaches since the adoption
of the phase-out plan but continues at Dripp beach due primarily to sediment deposited by the river, which
surged since the volcano eruption and not beach sand. While 29,734.7 m3 of sand was mined at Dripp in
2021, this RI is considered partially achieved because of the elimination of sand mining at three of the four
beaches (ICR, p.21). Achievement rating: Substantial.

RI9: Data on importation of single-use plastic bags was not available. GoSVG was unable to provide data on
the number of single-use plastic bags imported during the target year and in 2023 since the import data could
not be disaggregated by type of single-use plastic bags (ICR, p.21). The ICR noted that the MOF and the
Central Water and Sewerage Authority (CWSA) reported that the import and use of food containers had
completely stopped since the ban came into effect in January 2021, but plastic bags are still being imported in
small quantities and one plastic bag manufacturer continues producing them domestically (ICR, p. 21). The
ICR recognizes the progress made, particularly in completely ceasing the importation and use of food
containers, hence the rating is upgraded from Modest to Substantial. Achievement rating: Substantial.

RI10: The number of sustainable revenue sources for the SVGCF increased from 0 to 2. The two revenue
sources included the CBF and the IAF and receipts of EC$672,624 from CBF and EC$359,980 from IAF
(ICR, p.22). By end-2022, SVGCF had financed 11 projects that supported beach and coral reef restoration,
farmland soil regeneration, assessment of the marine and coastal environment following the volcanic eruption
(ICR, p. 22). Achievement rating: High.

RI11: No aquaculture business plans were prepared by the target date of 2021. Despite not having developed
any aquaculture plans, the Fisheries division shifted its focus from aquaculture more broadly to sea moss
production (ICR, p. 22). The GoSVG, in collaboration with the Nature Conservancy (TNC), had been working
together to demarcate areas for sea moss production, and developing standards for sea moss plots and a
licensing system. At the end of 2023, there were four sea moss production sites in SVG with a total of 20
producers, some of whom had formed a cooperative. While this was not a planned outcome under this series,
it emphasizes how the GoSVG appropriately adjusted its priorities on aquaculture to respond to the
challenges posed to the sector by the pandemic and the volcanic eruption. Achievement Rating: Modest.

RI12: At the target date (2022), the contingencies fund had EC$39.3 million in reserves. However, the fund
had deposits amounting to EC$30.5 million by January 2020, and as a result the target was revised to EC$50
million by 2022 in DPF2 (ICR, p.23). Despite the overall funding level of EC$39.3 million reported for 2022
being below this target, this RI is considered achieved since the amount reported is the recapitalized amount
following almost complete depletion of funds in 2021 (EC$27 million). The fund has been steadily
accumulating resources since then, with each year’s allocation exceeding that of the preceding year. In early
2024, the fund stood at EC$61.1 million (ICR, p. 23). Achievement rating: High.




                                                                                                Page 19 of 24
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



                  RI13: 100% of permit applications for new buildings approved followed the updated building code guidelines
                  at the target date (2022). The ICR noted that the Physical Planning Unit (PPU), the agency overseeing the
                  construction of private entities, has been carrying out inspections to ensure that new buildings comply with
                  the building codes once a permit is granted and has observed an improvement in the disaster resilience of
                  new buildings constructed in recent years (ICR, p.23). Achievement Rating: High

                  RI14: At the target date, 5 schools used as emergency shelters had completed DRM plans, which is
                  unchanged from the baseline in 2019 and below the target of 20 out of 45 schools. The 2022 target of 44.4
                  percent (20 out of 45) was not achieved, with no new schools submitting DRM plans. By end-2023, 54
                  schools were being used as emergency shelters of which 7 (13 percent) had submitted DRM plans to MOE
                  (ICR, p. 24). Progress on this RI was affected by virtual learning instituted by SVG’s schools during the
                  pandemic and the continuation of virtual learning following the volcanic eruption due to many schools being
                  utilized as shelters (ICR, p. 24). However, the Ministry of Education had initiated a safe school recognition
                  program with support from development partners with 16 schools, of which 14 are emergency shelters,
                  identified as pilots and were receiving support on undertaking a comprehensive safety assessment and
                  developing a safety plan (ICR, p. 24). Achievement rating: Modest.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall Efficacy rating is Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The relevance of PAs was Highly Satisfactory, efficacy was Satisfactory, and the outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Rating

                                                                                                                   Page 20 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)




Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Fiscal and macroeconomic risks remain a major threat to sustaining progress. Strengthening fiscal resilience will
require sustained reform and efforts to reduce the debt burden. However, SVG remains vulnerable to natural
disasters, and even with the contingencies fund, there is the possibility that any large disaster will derail
progress on fiscal and debt sustainability and undermine efforts towards greater climate and disaster resilience
as disaster recovery, reconstruction and rehabilitation takes precedence.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The Bank’s performance at design reflected a substantial effort to integrate lessons learned from similar
operations both within SVG and from other small island developing states (SIDS). Lessons from comparable
operations informed key design choices, such as the establishment of the contingencies fund in Grenada and
Dominica, experience of enforcing SOE monitoring in Grenada and the Safe Hospital initiative in SVG informing
the School Safety Policy (PA19).

The analytical underpinnings of the PAs and RIs were robust, grounding the theory of change in relevant and
rigorous studies. Analytical work informed many PAs, such as the Public Expenditure and Financial
Accountability (PEFA) assessment of SVG (World Bank, 2012) informing PA4 and PA5 and "Thoughts on a
Contingency Fund for SVG" (World Bank, 2018) informing PA17. While the overall design reflected relevant
diagnostic findings and was well-articulated to the country context, several RIs could have been selected with
greater care to better highlight the achievements of the DPF series. As an example, RI4 measuring the debt to
GDP ratio is known to suffer from attribution challenges, especially in small island states where natural disasters
are frequent and lead to spikes in emergency expenditures (and debt) and/or sudden drops in GDP, making it
difficult to distinguish progress in debt reduction. RI8 (volume of sand mined at the beaches) and RI9 (single use
plastic bags imported) could not be measured. As the ICR itself notes, both could have been substituted with
measures for which good data was readily available. Selecting the number of beaches where sand mining was
ceased/continued would have been a more efficient metric for RI8 as it reflected the substantial progress SVG
made in ceasing sand mining following the ban. The use of plastic containers (including single use plastic bags)
for which import data is readily available could have been a better indicator for RI9 as it would have flagged the
significant progress made in curbing the use of plastic containers and marine pollution.

The project documents (PAD) outlined the primary risks to achieving the PDOs, including macroeconomic,
institutional capacity limitations, fiduciary and environmental risks, and proposed mitigation measures to address
these. The macroeconomic risks were expected to be mitigated by engagements under the program and while
the risks remained high, SVG did manage to maintain an adequate macroeconomic policy framework throughout
program implementation despite the multiple shocks. Capacity constraints in the government were


                                                                                                    Page 21 of 24
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



acknowledged as a key risk to implementation, and the PAD identified ongoing technical support from the Bank
and collaboration with development partners to bolster capacity as part of the risk management strategy. Finally,
the PAD also highlighted the inherent risk of natural disasters and climate change, which the operation was also
designed to help manage. This materialized when the volcano erupted in 2021, for which the contingencies fund,
established through the policy framework, and the Cat DDO provided the much-needed liquidity.

Finally, the Bank collaborated and coordinated with a large number of different regional and
international partners, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF), ECCB, Organization of Eastern
Caribbean States (OECS), the Caribbean Regional Technical Assistance Centre, Caribbean Disaster
Emergency Management Agency and the Caribbean Development Bank. These consultations were instrumental
in aligning the operation’s objectives with SVG’s strategic priorities, enhancing the relevance and credibility of
the design.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Integrating the Cat-DDO into the operation reduced the administrative burden for the counterpart, allowing
GoSVG to build on the first operation’s progress while navigating the added pressures of the COVID-19
pandemic. The original PDO’s flexible design facilitated this adaptation, with some triggers from the first
operation converted to Cat-DDO PAs. This integration showed the team’s adaptiveness, attentiveness to client
capacity, and readiness to provide tailored solutions.

Implementation support was constrained by travel restrictions due to COVID-19 and only one ISR mission was
undertaken (ICR, p.27). The same restrictions also affected TA activities such that supervision and support was
provided virtually.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Overall, Bank Performance is rated Highly Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)




Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

The operation was expected to have significant social impacts by providing direct assistance to vulnerable
populations in response to COVID-19, and the contingencies fund, which disbursed to support the response to
the volcanic eruption in 2021. These interventions were expected to help alleviate the impact on the vulnerable
populations and reduce the poverty impact.



b. Environmental

The operation was expected to have significant environmental impacts, including through a phase out of coastal
sand mining and single-use plastic bags and food containers. The ICR reported that "the phase out of sand
mining on Brighton, Diamond, and Richmond beaches is enabling their gradual replenishment, which will
eventually restore their ability to act as natural defenses against storms," and that "the ban on single-use plastic
bags and food containers has significantly reduced the accumulation of plastic litter on beaches, in water bodies
and environmentally sensitive areas, improving the health of their flora and fauna," (ICR, p. 25). Other
engagements under the program are likely to have environmental impacts, such as increased financial support
to conservation and the SVGCF, efforts to improve fisheries management, enhanced ocean governance, and
improved environmental consideration in public procurement, etc. However, neither the results framework nor
the ICR were able to provide evidence on their environmental impact.



c. Gender

Job loss caused by the COVID-19 pandemic was concentrated in sectors where women are overrepresented.
Women made up 57 percent of the beneficiaries who received supplementary income through program support
(PA1) (ICR, para 25 & para30). However, there was no additional evidence provided on the impact of this
support.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale




                                                                                                     Page 23 of 24
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SVG Fiscal Reformand Resilience DPF I (P165220)



The ICR provided a coherent, clearly written narrative of the context, rationale, objectives, actions, and results of
the DPF series. It provided additional evidence of successes and setbacks in implementation, including useful
data updates. Challenges and risks were also highlighted. The ICR was consistent with the guidelines.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                   Ability of the team to adapt the
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   program to multiple shocks
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

IEG adopts the lessons in the ICR and adds one lesson emerging from the review.

Flexibility in the design of operations can be useful for Small States, particularly where capacity is low.
The WB’s ability to integrate the Cat DDO within a broader DPF operation demonstrated the level of flexibility
and learning. It also showed the ability of the team to adapt and adjust the design of the program to suit the
government’s limited capacity. Targeted technical assistance (TA) and tailored project design was essential for
achieving desired development outcomes in DPF operations.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 24
