     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024102

1. Program Information



 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 India                                     Social Protection & Jobs

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                         Approved Operations
 0                                          0

 Operation ID                               Operation Name
 P173943                                    India COVID19 Response Social Protection




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91110,IDA-66550,IDA-66560            01-Dec-2021                                       748,478,831.06

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-May-2020                               01-Dec-2021
                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                            749,960,000.00                                           0.00

 Revised Commitment                             749,960,000.00                                           0.00

 Actual                                         748,478,831.06                                           0.00




P174027_TBL
 Country                                   Practice Area (Lead)
 India                                     Social Protection & Jobs

 Operation ID                              Operation Name
 P174027                                   Social Protection for COVID response 2 ( P174027 )




                                                                                                Page 1 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
 IBRD-91110,IDA-66550,IDA-66560,IDA- 31-Dec-2022                                                  402601860.00
 68120,IDA-68130

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Dec-2020                                31-Dec-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           400,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            400,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        402,601,860.00                                                0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal       Judyth L. Twigg               Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO) of this programmatic series was “to strengthen the capability of state
and national governments in India to provide coordinated and adequate social protection to the poor and
vulnerable from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic” (Program Document, PD, p. 23). For the purpose of this
ICR Review, the objectives of the series against which outcomes will be assessed are taken to be:

    1. Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide coordinated and
       adequate social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
    2. Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers in essential
       service supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic
    3. Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including migrants and
       informal workers
    4. Supporting core reforms to address climate change

The formulation of these objectives for purposes of this Review draws from the operations' pillars (see Section 2b
below) and prior actions (PAs). Although the fourth objective on climate change was not directly related to the
PDO statement as expressed in the PD, addition of these measures as a fourth program pillar corresponded with
Country Management Unit (CMU) norms to support important climate actions through national DPOs. As such,
support for core reforms to address climate change will be taken as an implicit part of the PDO, and associated
PAs and results indicators (RIs) will be assessed accordingly.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)




b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The program originally had three pillars, as noted in the Program Document of the second operation in the
series (p. 24):

1. Leveraging pre-existing social protection measures for COVID-19 relief.

2. Protecting workers in essential service supply chains during COVID-19 pandemic.

3. Improving access and delivery for vulnerable populations.

For the second operation, a fourth pillar was added:

4. India climate action and green recovery.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The first operation (DPF 1: P173943) was financed by two International Development Associate (IDA) credits
and an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development loan totaling US$749.96 million, of which
US$748.48 million was disbursed. The operation was approved on May 14, 2020, became effective three days
later, and closed on December 1, 2021. The second operation (DPF 2: P174027) was financed by two IDA
credits totaling US$400 million, which were fully disbursed. It was approved December 15, 2020, became
effective on January 18, 2021, and closed on December 13, 2022.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Program objectives addressed critical needs, enabling the government to respond to the economic
 consequences of COVID-19 in a timely manner. The DPF series supported the government in scaling up
 its social protection response to COVID-19 while laying the foundation of an adaptive safety net system. The
 scope of financing was small relative to India’s total social protection budget; however, the DPF series was
 able to draw upon the World Bank’s extensive knowledge work and experience on social protection and
 community-driven development to help the government link its emergency COVID-19 response with a
 broader social protection and resilience agenda.

 The objectives were consistent with the India Country Partnership Framework (CPF, 2018-2022,
 extended until 2024), and the Bank’s COVID-19 response strategy. The objective reflected the CPF’s
 focus on building systems of social protection, supporting a shift away from fragmented and individual
 schemes and reducing gender-based inclusion gaps. In addition, the objectives were in line with the World
 Bank’s aim of building resilience of households and vulnerable communities to COVID shocks (ICR, p. 2).
 Program objectives were designed to balance the unprecedented economic impacts of COVID-19 (DPF 1
 Program Document, p. 5).


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



The aims of three of the four pillars of activity are adequately represented by the PDO, with the fourth
pillar added in accordance with CMU policy. The DPF1 Program Document (p. 23) provided additional
details on the PDO statement, explaining that “by ‘coordinated’ the program implies fostering an integrated
institutional framework to implement a whole-of-society and whole-of-government approach for social
protection and resilience, whereby pre-existing programs and platforms are leveraged by engaging all tiers of
government including community groups. The program also aims to ensure an ‘adequate’ package of social
protection, implying that size of the benefits transferred should compensate for losses in consumption
expenditures and prevent households from falling below the poverty line.” The fourth pillar, as noted in
section 2a, will be considered as part of the project development objectives, even though it was not explicitly
included in the PDO statement.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Note: For purposes of clarity, this ICRR has renumbered the PAs consecutively across the two operations. In
this table, the ICRR's numbering by individual DPF has also been noted.

 DPF 1                                                  DPF 2
 PDO 1: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide coordinated and
 adequate social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
 PA 1: The Borrower through Ministry of Finance,        PA 5 (DPF2/PA 1): The Borrower, through the Ministry
 Government of India has approved the Pradhan           of Home Affairs, has expanded the ability of state
 Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojna (PMGKY), an integrated       governments to provide social protection during
 COVID-19 social protection relief cash-transfer        disasters through the use of up to 50 percent of State
 package which: (a) increases benefit levels for the    Disaster Response Funds leveraging pre-existing
 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment               decentralized protocols for state governments to
 Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); (b) allocates liquid access financing to provide context-specific,
 propane gas and gas cylinders for below-poverty line adequate, and agile safety nets.
 households for three months through Pradhan Mantri
 Ujjwala Yojana (UJJWALA); (c) provides additional
 allowance for elderly, widows and disabled through
 the National Social Assistance Program (NSAP); (d)
 triggers cash transfers to women bank account
 holders under the Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana
 (PMJDY); (e) advances payments through Pradhan
 Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi (PM-KSN); and (f)
 outlines benefit levels, implementation guidelines,
 fund-flow mechanism, and governance rules for
 coordination and monitoring across multiple state
 governments and line ministries for rollout of the
 PMGKY package.

 PA 2: The Borrower through Ministry of Food and Civil
 Supplies, Government of India has approved the
 provision of free food rations for a three-month period

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



delivered under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna
Yojna (PMGKAY)’s public distribution system,
outlining benefit levels and implementation guidelines
for delivery.

PA 3: The Borrower through Ministry of Labor and
Employment, Government of India has amended the
Employees’ Provident Fund Regulations to include
pandemic as a reason to allow workers to withdraw
from their Provident Fund account a non-refundable
advance of 75 percent of the balance in the account
or three months of the wages, whichever is lower.

PA 4: Under its PMGKY, the Borrower through
Ministry of Labor and Employment, Government of
India contributes 24 percent of monthly wages for low-
wage workers (Less than 15,000 INR / month) in
Small and Medium Enterprises (Less than 100
employees) for a three-month period into their
Provident Fund account.
PDO 2: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers in essential
service supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic
PA 6 (DPF1/PA5): The Borrower through Ministry of PA 7 (DPF2/PA 2): The Borrower through Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India has Health and Family Welfare, Government of India has
established a special health insurance scheme for          extended a special health insurance scheme for
health workers providing essential care/medical            health workers providing essential care/medical
services to COVID-19 patients.                             services to COVID-19 patients for additional 90 days.
PDO 3: Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including migrants and
informal workers
PA 8 (DPF1/PA 6): The Borrower through Ministry of PA 11 (DPF2/PA 3): The Borrower, through the
Labor and Employment, Government of India has              Ministry of Labor and Employment, has approved and
issued advisories to all States’ government on how to adopted a new Social Security Code which includes
use the Building and Other Construction (Workers           the rollout of a National Social Security Board (with
Welfare Fund) to provide relief materials and cash to online and offline interface) to ensure universal
registered construction workers.                           coverage for a basic package of social protection
                                                           benefits, leveraging the Public Distribution System
PA 9 (DPF1/PA 7): The Borrower through Ministry of (PDS), PMJDY, electronic Know Your Customer
Home Affairs, Government of India has enabled the verification system (e-KYC), and Aadhar
States’ government to use finances from the State          infrastructure; with focus on achieving full coverage of
Disaster Response Funds to provide migrant workers informal workers in urban and rural areas, and a clear
relief materials and in-kind support, with flexibility for approach for decentralized implementation.
States in the modality of delivery.
                                                           PA12 (DPF2/PA 4): The Borrower through Ministry of
PA 10 (DPF1/PA 8): The Borrower through Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution,
Finance, Government of India has issued guidance           Government of India has approved and adopted
largely adopted by public sector banks to waive ATM mission-mode rollout of ’One-Nation-One Ration’
charges for all cash withdrawals to facilitate access to platform for portable access to the Public Distribution
cash and PMGKY payments.

                                                                                                      Page 5 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



                                                         System to support food rations for all migrants across
                                                         state boundaries.

                                                         PA 13 (DPF2/PA 5): The Borrower, through the
                                                         Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, has issued the
                                                         Operational Guidelines dated July 2020, for an
                                                         Affordable Rental Housing scheme for migrant Labor
                                                         and the urban poor which clearly defines rules and
                                                         implementation norms.

                                                         PA 14 (DPF2/PA 6): The Borrower through Ministry of
                                                         Home Affairs, Government of India has created a
                                                         National Migrants Information System which
                                                         establishes a database of inter-state mobility to target
                                                         and plan migrant-specific COVID-19 social assistance
                                                         support at the state and national level.

                                                         PA 15 (DPF2/PA 7): The Borrower, through the
                                                         Ministry of Labor and Employment, has: (i) expanded
                                                         the definition of ‘inter-state’ migrants to include those
                                                         who migrate without a contractor; and (ii) mandated
                                                         the creation of a decentralized portal for migrant
                                                         registration, to enable portability and universal
                                                         coverage for cash and social insurance benefits,
                                                         through the Occupational Safety, Health, and Working
                                                         Conditions Code 2020.

                                                         PA 16 (DPF2/PA 8): The Borrower, through the
                                                         Ministry of Rural Development, has established a
                                                         converged cash for employment-support program for
                                                         returning migrants in rural areas called the Garib
                                                         Kalyan Rojgar Abhiyan.

                                                    PA 17 (DPF2/PA 9): The Borrower, through Direct
                                                    Benefits Transfer Mission, Cabinet Secretariat, has
                                                    ordered the integration of Direct Benefit Transfer-
                                                    related transactions in the public financial
                                                    management System through the Unified Mobile
                                                    Application for New-age Governance mobile
                                                    application, to allow beneficiaries of social programs
                                                    to query and access information regarding electronic
                                                    transfers.
PDO 4: Supporting core reforms to address climate change.
                                                    PA 18 (DPF2/PA 10): The Borrower through the
                                                    Ministry of Jal Shakti, has issued Revised Guidelines
                                                    for Groundwater Extraction in India which (i) introduce
                                                    the concept of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) (ii)
                                                    encourage use of recycled and treated sewage water

                                                                                                      Page 6 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



                                                         by industries (iii) create provision for actions against
                                                         polluting industries (iv) mandate requirement of digital
                                                         flow meters, piezometers and digital water level
                                                         recorders (with or without telemetry depending upon
                                                         quantum of extraction) (v) mandate water audit by
                                                         industries abstracting ground water 500 m3/day or
                                                         more in safe and semi-critical and 200 m3/day or
                                                         more in critical

                                                         PA 19 (DPF2/PA 11): Incentivize the use of renewable
                                                         energy sources by waiving inter-state transmission
                                                         charges and losses.

PDO 1: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide coordinated and
adequate social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.

PA1: The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the need for critical structural reform of the Indian social protection
system, which was fragmented and largely operated in scheme-based silos. Historically, India has been
providing social protection through a large and complex set of centrally sponsored schemes. These schemes
were financed by the center and implemented by state governments. However, there were no overarching
institutional frameworks for coordinating these multiple scheme-based mechanisms (ICR, p. 1). PA 1
provided for bundling of benefits of a variety of existing national social protection platforms and programs
under one program (PMGKY) with the aim of providing near-universal coverage and robust and efficient
service delivery. This included topping up or expanding coverage of pre-existing programs, while building an
implementation framework whereby multiple schemes would work together through leadership anchored by
the central government. Through this PA, the PMGKY package was to provide additional cash assistance to
poor households and vulnerable groups already receiving benefits from five major national social protection
programs. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA2 was to ensure that poor and vulnerable had access to food supplies during lockdown, by using India’s
extensive food subsidy program (serving 800 million at the time of appraisal) to deliver timely COVID-19
relief. According to the PDF 1 Program Document, it was necessary to provide in-kind transfer of food instead
of cash because state governments in India were having difficulties with indexing the cash transfer amount to
food inflation, as there was great volatility in prices even within states. In-kind transfers were to ensure the
consumption basket would be adequate and consistent and to overcome challenges with obtaining food due
to social distancing, while avoiding triggering food price spikes through cash infusions. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA3 was to increase cash availability for workers in the organized sector during lockdown, with additional
support for low-wage workers. At appraisal, the Employees' Provident Fund (EPF) did not allow workers to
access their savings during health disasters. Through PA 3, the EPF Act was to be amended to enable
workers to withdraw savings citing "pandemics" as a reason. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA4 leveraged existing EPF accounts to provide coverage for low-income workers during the pandemic. At
appraisal, employers were expected to match contributions of the employee. However, the ability of
employees and employers in small business establishments to contribute their share was compromised by
lockdown measures. To address this liquidity gap and provide additional relief to low-wage workers and small
business establishments, through PA 4, the national government established a special scheme wherein it



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



would contribute 24 percent of the monthly wages of low-wage small and medium enterprise (SME) workers
for a three-month period into their Provident Fund accounts. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA5 enabled state governments to access State Disaster Response funds to support designing and
implementing flexible disaster-responsive social protection interventions. These funds are the primary
response funds available with each State government to tackle needs from any notified disaster. Prior to
notifications for PA1 in September 2020, these funds were not available to States for social protection in the
context of disasters, focused instead largely on providing infrastructure, temporary shelter, and relief
materials. The reform enabled states to access half the resources in State Disaster Response Funds for
social protection in disaster areas, creating rules and regulations for States to draw down on funds for social
assistance in hot-spot clusters and cater to excluded groups. (Highly Satisfactory)

PDO 2: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers in essential
service supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic

PA6’s aim was to provide health insurance for health workers providing essential care/medical services to
COVID-19 patients. The PA launched the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Package (PMGKP) for frontline
health workers, primarily targeting low-paid, temporary workers (recruited directly or through contractors) who
could not afford health insurance. The scheme was originally intended to last for three months. The insurance
scheme leveraged existing health insurance program systems managed by the government and used
existing delivery mechanisms. However, according to the ICR (p. 13), the uptake of PMGKP was limited
during DPF1 due to health workers being covered through parallel public and private sector health insurance
schemes; the PA did not adequately consider demand factors. (Satisfactory)

PA7 extended PMGKP for an additional three months, in response to continued need. (Highly Satisfactory)

PDO 3: Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including migrants and
informal workers

PA8 built income support measures for unorganized construction workers through the Building and Other
Construction Workers Welfare Funds (BOCWWF). In India, construction workers are the largest segment of
daily wage workers in the informal urban economy. The lockdowns cut off their source of livelihood and
stranded many in municipalities, where safety net coverage was historically low. PA8 supported issue of
guidelines for States and union territories to disburse direct cash transfers from the BOCWWF, which had a
US$742 million unspent balance, to about 35 million construction workers who registered at the Welfare
Board. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA9 improved access of migrant workers to COVID-19 relief and created portable benefits in a more
coordinated social protection system. According to the 2011 census, migrant workers comprised 34 percent
of the total Indian population and accounted for nearly 9 million workers migrating annually between 2011
and 2016. These workers dominated low-paying, hazardous, and informal jobs (especially construction work)
in urban areas where safety net coverage is low. PA9 supported State government flexibility to use State
Disaster Response Funds (SDRF) for immediate cash and in-kind support to the migrants irrespective of their
State of residence. This intervention was critical to providing social assistance to migrant workers who were
stranded out of their home States due to lockdowns. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA10 waived automated teller machine (ATM) charges for PMGKY cash payments in public sector or
nationalized banks, where 80 percent of PMJDY accounts (for the unbanked) were located. The PA was part
of a broader strategy to ensure timely delivery of cash support to beneficiaries through a variety of

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



pathways. Waiver of ATM fees helped reduce transaction costs for beneficiaries to access cash, thus
accelerating access to PMGKY transfers. In addition, this helped catalyze (marginal) savings for PMGKY
beneficiaries and, coupled with messaging to help prevent panic cash withdrawals, supported social
distancing to enable recovery (ICR, p.18). (Satisfactory)

PA11 aimed to reduce fragmentation of India’s social protection system and to rebalance it to better serve the
informal economy, urban areas, and social insurance support. India had an elaborate set of program
databases and platforms for immediate cash transfers in rural areas but lacked parallel platforms in urban
areas. While the pandemic necessitated short-term relief measures for vulnerable informal workers in urban
areas (PA6), a new approach was needed to enhance longer-term access to social insurance. PA3 supported
a new Social Security Code that mandated the establishment of a National Social Security Board (NSSB) to
ensure universal social protection coverage for informal workers, leveraging existing schemes and platforms
to better capture the urban poor and female-headed households. Prior to the establishment of the new Social
Security Code, there were 29 separate laws that governed labor welfare issues in India. The new code
consolidated the labor welfare regulations under these laws into one single law, while the NSSB consolidated
nearly 35 fragmented labor welfare boards with a view to improving coordination of the Indian social
protection framework. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA12 launched the "One Nation One Ration" system to enable migrants to access food supplies through Fair
Price Shops across state boundaries. This reform was important not only to tackle food security concerns
from the COVID-19 crisis, but also to put in place a response capacity that could be rapidly scaled up to
address the needs of migrant workers in any future shocks, including those from climate-related natural
disasters. The Prior Action was part of the broader goal of addressing lack of portability in social protection
benefits across state boundaries for the country's large population of intra-state migrants (PAD, p. 8). (Highly
Satisfactory).

PA13 helped the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs re-orient its focus toward safety nets by creating a
structure that ensured housing rental support for migrant workers and the urban poor. In India, housing is for
the second largest expenditure of urban households (after food), and home-based work accounts for the
largest share of employment for informal women workers. According to the project team, the PA was
intentionally non-prescriptive with regard to specific policies, given the time sensitivity and the need for brevity
in the way actions are described. Technical assistance and partnership work allowed teams to grasp the
technical content of the rules and ensure that critical service gaps for urban communities and migrants were
addressed through the PA, as well as allowing flexibility for adaptation to local contexts, as each State would
codify its own rules for implementation. (Satisfactory)

PA14 supported national and State governments to scale up COVID-19 social assistance for migrant
workers. According to the 2011 census, migrant workers comprised 34 percent of the total Indian population
and accounted for nearly 9 million workers migrating annually between 2011 and 2016. These workers
dominated low-paying, hazardous, and informal jobs (especially construction work) in urban areas where
safety net coverage is low (ICR, p. 10). Prior to this reform, India lacked a mechanism to track inter-state
mobility, which limited access to social assistance. PA14 supported the Ministry of Home Affairs to create a
temporary migrant database for targeting immediate cash and employment support for COVID-19 relief. This
effort was also intended to help pave the path for an inter-State migrant portal for universal use through
PA15. (Highly Satisfactory)

PA15 supported the Ministry of Labor and Employment to redefine “interstate migrant” in labor laws to cover
informal migrants with adequate social protection coverage. PA15 supported state government flexibility to


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



use the SDRF for immediate cash and in-kind support to migrants irrespective of their State of residence.
This intervention was critical to providing social assistance to migrant workers who were stranded out of their
home States due to lockdowns. PA15 also facilitated the creation of a decentralized migrant registration
portal through the new Occupation Safety Code (2020) to make portable benefits permanent. (Highly
Satisfactory)

PA16 supported returning-migrants and their households in rural areas. During the pandemic, reverse
migration placed a strain on rural households that relied on migrant remittances. PA16 supported the Ministry
of Rural Development to create a short-term employment support program targeted at returning migrants.
However, creating a separate scheme instead of leveraging existing ones could contribute to fragmentation in
the Indian social protection landscape, which did not fully align with the objective of a coordinated social
protection landscape. (Satisfactory)

PA17 enabled additional information technology interventions for beneficiaries to have agency over their
benefits in the medium term. PA17 modified the original trigger and shifted the focus toward integrating all
Direct Benefit Transfers of cash within the Unified Mobile Application for New-Age Governance system. This
helped enhance coordination and enabled citizens to easily access information related to receipt of benefits
transfers from ministries, departments, and agencies. This initiative was intended to alleviate information
gaps among beneficiaries and help them to access their benefits by enabling citizens to easily access
information related to receipt of benefits transfers from various central and state ministries/departments. The
use of mobile technology, together with disaster recovery protocols, was to ensure that the system would
remain resilient and operational in the event of disruption from natural disasters. However, according to the
ICR (p. 11), further investments to enhance digital literacy and technology access are needed, especially for
women to empower and increase their voice and agency. (Highly Satisfactory)

PDO 4: Supporting core reforms to address climate change

PA18 and PA19 were part of Pillar 4, which addressed climate change prevention and building community
resilience against related shocks.

PA18 focused on groundwater conservation to help enhance community resilience, as groundwater is more
resilient to climate change than surface water, The Ministry of Jal Shakti issued revised guidelines for
groundwater extraction that aimed to regulate the use of India’s fast-depleting groundwater resources that
account for 40 percent of the country’s total water supply. In India, overexploitation of groundwater
coupled with intensive extraction for irrigation and industrial purposes have resulted in critical groundwater
management concerns in the country. Some of the major consequences of groundwater withdrawal at a rate
higher than that of recharge are depletion of water tables, saltwater encroachment, drying of aquifers,
groundwater pollution, water logging, and salinity (DPF 2 Program Document, p. 34). Despite these
consequences, prior to this PA, there were no user fees for groundwater and no groundwater policy. (Highly
Satisfactory)

PA19 focused on incentivizing the use of renewable energy sources by waiving inter-state transmission
charges and losses as alternatives to fossil fuel-based energy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It was
deemed an effective incentive, as transmission charges and losses constitute a large expense for power
producers in South Asian countries. This PA was aligned with India's “Panchamrit” action plan, which
envisages a transition toward net-zero emissions. (Satisfactory)




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

                                                                                 Actual as
                                                                                                  RI
                                   RI                                               % of
       Description         PAs           Baseline          Target       Actual              Achievement
                               Relevance                                          targeted
                                                                                                Rating
                                                                                   change
Objective 1: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide
coordinated and adequate social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
RI1: Adequacy of benefits
provided through the
COVID-19 Social
Protection Support
                           PA1
Program measured by                                                      47%     More than
                                    S            0%         40%                                  High
PMGKY transfers as a                                                  (Oct.2020)    100%
                           PA5
percent share of total
household consumption
expenditures for the
poorest quintile in India.
RI2: Coverage of benefits
provided through the
COVID-19 Social
Protection Support
Program measured by        PA1
                                                                      91% (Dec. More than
share of bottom 40%                HS            0%         60%                                  High
                                                                        2022)       100%
(consumption percentiles) PA5
households receiving at
least one PMGKY social
assistance (food/cash)
benefit.
RI3: Gender-sensitive
program coverage
measured by share of
bottom 40% (consumption PA1                                             91.2%
                                                                                 More than
percentiles) households            HS            0%         70%                                  High
                                                                                    100%
with female-head           PA5                                       (Dec. 2022)
receiving at least one
PMGKY social assistance
(food/cash) benefit.
RI4: Access to essential
                                                                      91% (Dec. More than
food supplies provided     PA2     HS            0%         60%                                  High
                                                                        2022)       100%
through the COVID-19

                                                                                           Page 11 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



Social Protection Program
measured by percentage
share of poor households
receiving the additional
food ration entitlement for
a three-month period as
outlined by PMGKAY.
RI5: Access to wage
protection measures
provided through the
COVID-19 Social
Protection Program
measured by percentage
share of low-wage (as       PA3
                                                                       73.78%    More than
defined and identified by           HS           0%         25%                                   High
                                                                     (June 2021)   100%
Government program)         PA4
workers withdrawing
funds from Employee
Provident Fund Accounts
citing the COVID-19
pandemic as a reason for
withdrawal.
RI6: Timeliness of wage-
loss compensation
measures guaranteed by
COVID-19 Social
Protection Program for
low-wage workers            PA3
                                                                     95.46% (May More than
measured by percentage              HS           0%         60%                                   High
                                                                        2020)      100%
of low-wage workers in      PA4
SME’s receiving
additional contribution
announced within eight-
weeks of the
announcement.
Objective 2: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers
in essential service supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic
RI7: Access to health
insurance measures
provided through the                                                                           Substantial
COVID-19 Social                                                                              (downgraded
                            PA5                         15% (Target
Protection Program                                                               More than from High due
                                    MS           0%     revised from    100%
measured by percentage                                                             100%         to lower
                            PA7                             30%)
share of essential service                                                                    relevance of
workers covered by the                                                                           the RI)
Special Health Insurance
Scheme.


                                                                                             Page 12 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



PDO 3: Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including
migrants and informal workers
RI8: Access to support
provided through the
COVID-19 Social
Protection Program for
informal workers
                            PA8
measured by percentage                                                 66.75%    More than
                                   HS          0%         50%                                  High
share of construction                                               (Dec. 2023)    100%
workers registered with
Building and Other
Construction Workers
Fund receiving cash
transfers.
RI9: Migrant-neutrality of
support provided through
the COVID-19 Social                                                    Portable  More than
Protection Program                                                      Health   100% for
measured by percentage PA11                                          Insurance:   health
of India’s vulnerable              HS         15%         45%        51.1% and insurance Substantial
population in urban areas                                          Portable Life and 65%
covered by portable life                                              Insurance   for life
and accident insurance                                             34.4% [2022] insurance.
through Department of
Financial Services (DFS).
RI10: Access to support
provided through the        PA8
COVID-19 Social
Protection Program for      PA9
                                                                     87% (Dec. More than
informal workers                    S         10%         33%                                  High
                                                                         2023)     100%
measured by percentage PA11
share of informal workers
receiving at least one      PA15
social protection benefit.
RI11: Gender-sensitive      PA6    HS         N/A         40%          54.5% in Over 100%      High
program coverage                                                    MGNREGS
measured by proportion of PA8                                        (2021-22) |
female informal workers in                                             52.9% in
total beneficiary pool of   PA9                                        eShram
social protection in India.                                            (2023) |
                            PA11                                      63.95% in
                                                                   NSAP (2023)
                            PA15
                                                                   [*** Program
                                                                        specific
                                                                   figures have
                                                                     been used


                                                                                          Page 13 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



                                                                     because of
                                                                    difficulties in
                                                                     calculating
                                                                    the number
                                                                      of female
                                                                        informal
                                                                    workers and
                                                                          total
                                                                     beneficiary
                                                                     pool due to
                                                                       overlaps
                                                                       between
                                                                      programs
                                                                       (i.e., one
                                                                      individual
                                                                         can be
                                                                    beneficiaries
                                                                     of multiple
                                                                     programs)]
RI12: Migrant-neutrality of
support provided through
the COVID-19 Social           PA9
Protection Program
                              PA12
measured by percentage                                              56.5% (June More than
                                      HS          0%      33%                                      High
of India’s population able                                             2022)     100%
                              PA14
to access to portable food
benefits through the          PA15
Public Distribution System
(PDS).
RI13: Migrant-neutrality of
India’s social protection
system measured as the
                              PA9
percentage of states                                                100% (June More than
                                      HS          N/A     40%                                      High
implementing One Nation                                               2022)     100%
                              PA12
One Ration for portable
access to the Public
Distribution System.
                              PA9

                              PA12
RI14: Percentage of
India’s bottom 40 percent     PA13
                                                                      80.37%    More than
quintile in urban areas               HS         15%      33%                                      High
                                                                    (Dec. 2023)  100%
covered by at least one       PA14
social protection benefit.
                              PA15

                              PA16

                                                                                             Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



RI15: Timeliness of cash-
transfers provided through PA9
the COVID-19 Social
Protection Program         PA10
measured by percentage
                                                                           84% (Oct.    More than
of poor / bottom 40        PA14     S         0%          50%                                             High
                                                                             2020)       100%
quintile households who
have received at least one PA16
PMGKY benefit within
eight-week period of       PA17
program announcement.
Objective 4: Supporting core reforms to address climate change
                                                                               New
                                                            Codification
                                                                          groundwater
                                                                  of
                                                                              policy
                                                            groundwater
RI16: Improved regulatory                        No pre-                 (applicable in              Modest
                                                             policy with
capacity to conserve                             existing                all states and          (downgraded
                                                             water user
groundwater, thereby                           groundwater                  UTs) with More than from High due
                           PA18        MU                       fees
improving water security                        policy with                 user fees   100%        to lower
                                                              concept
of the country in the face                      water user                 formulated             relevance of
                                                              through
of climate change.                                 fees                        and                   the RI)
                                                            government
                                                                           notification
                                                              rules to
                                                                         issued. (Sep.
                                                                state
                                                                               200)
RI17: Increase in the
cumulative renewable
power installed capacity                                                                         Negligible
to meet India’s NDC                                                                            (downgraded
targets, retain India’s                                                             More than from High due
                         PA19           U        85.9 GW      172 GW      178.36 GW
global position on wind                                                              100%         to lower
and solar power and                                                                             relevance of
increase employment                                                                                the RI)
through renewable energy
projects.

Objective 1. Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide coordinated and
adequate social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic

RI 1-3 all provide different measures of the success of PAs 1 and 5, whose aim was to put in place the policy
structure for COVID-19 relief.

RI1 (PMGKY transfers as a percent share of total household consumption expenditures for the poorest quintile
in India) measured the adequacy of benefits supported by the DPF. This measure is in line with the World Bank
SPJ ATLAS and ASPIRE databases, which measure adequacy of social protection and labor programs. In these
databases, according to the project team in an interview with IEG, adequacy is measured by the total transfer
amount received by the population participating in social insurance, social safety net, and unemployment
benefits and active labor market programs as a share of their total welfare. Due to data constraints in India, the


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



RI used available data on household expenditure averages for the poorest quintile as a proxy measure rather
than the household expenditures of relevant beneficiaries. Satisfactory.

R2 (share of bottom 40 percent (consumption percentiles) households receiving at least one PMGKY social
assistance (food/cash) benefit) measured the coverage of benefits. The program document for the first DPF
noted that 14 percent of below-poverty-line households were not enrolled in any of the five cash transfers being
used to provide COVID-19 relief at the time of approval. Consequently, coverage was an important measure of
improvements to the social protection system. Highly Satisfactory.

RI3 (bottom 40 percent (consumption percentiles) households with female-head receiving at least one PMGKY
social assistance (food/cash) benefit) monitored the gender sensitivity of program coverage, putting an extra
emphasis on outcomes for women-headed households. Highly satisfactory.

RI4 (percentage share of poor households receiving the additional food ration entitlement for a three-month
period) measured the coverage of food aid given in the context of the COVID-19 response, as distinct from the
coverage of other forms of cash-transfer based aid. Highly Satisfactory.

RI5 (percentage share of low-wage workers withdrawing funds from Employee Provident Fund accounts citing
the COVID-19 pandemic as a reason for withdrawal) measured the utilization of a new provision enacted
through the PA which gave workers access to Provident Fund Accounts, and RI6 (percentage of low-wage
workers in SMEs receiving additional contribution announced within eight weeks of the announcement)
measured the timeliness of the wage-loss compensation measures. Although the associated PA did not in itself
aim at greater timeliness, this can be seen as a measure of the efficiency of the program. RI5 and RI6: Highly
Satisfactory.

Objective 2: Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers in
essential service supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic

RI7 (percentage share of essential service workers covered by the Special Health Insurance Scheme) measured
coverage of the scheme but not adequacy of support. The target was revised downward (from 30 percent uptake
to 15 percent) during the second DPF considering the limited uptake in 2020-21 due to availability of other
health insurance schemes. This suggests that the objective of protecting health workers during COVID-19 was
indeed achieved, but the achievement may not have been directly attributable to the PAs (ICR, p.13).
Moderately Satisfactory.

Objective 3: Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including migrants and
informal workers

RI8 (percentage share of construction workers registered with the Building and Other Construction Workers fund
receiving cash transfers) measured the coverage of support for one significant segment of informal
workers. According to the DPF1 Program Document (p. 7), seasonal migrants dominate low-paying, hazardous,
and informal market jobs in key sectors in urban areas, including construction, and in several States, migrants
relying on ad-hoc construction or service jobs were displaced due to the lockdown. Highly satisfactory.

RI9, RI10, and RI11 all measure various aspects of coverage related to PA3, which set the policy structure in
place for "universal coverage for a basic package of social protection benefits" leveraging existing structures
including PDS (in-kind transfer), PMJDY (cash transfers/insurance), e-KYC (cash transfers/insurance), and
Aadhar (all types of social protection benefits). RI9 (percentage of India’s vulnerable population in urban areas
covered by portable life and accident insurance) measured insurance coverage. RI10 (percentage share of

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



informal workers receiving at least one social protection benefit) measured access to COVID-19-related social
protection support by informal workers (both cash, PA11 and PA12, and in-kind, PA9, PA13, and PA14), but not
adequacy. RI11 (proportion of female informal workers in total beneficiary pool of social protection in India)
measured the gender sensitivity of program coverage, measuring the percentage of female informal workers
among the total population of social protection beneficiaries in both formal and informal sectors. RI9: Highly
Satisfactory. RI10: Satisfactory. RI11: Highly Satisfactory.

RI12 and RI 13 measured different aspects of the success of PAs to support the One Nation One Ration
platform supporting food rations for all migrants across State boundaries. RI12 measured the percentage of
India’s population able to access to portable food benefits through the Public Distribution System, and RI13
measured the percentage of States implementing One Nation One Ration for portable access to the Public
Distribution System. Both RI12 and RI13 were Highly Satisfactory.

RI14 (percentage of India’s bottom 40 percent quintile in urban areas covered by at least one social protection
benefit) measured the success of a range of prior actions which, together, were meant to provide a menu of
varied types of support for vulnerable populations. This included PDS (in-kind transfer), PMJDY (cash
transfers/insurance), e-KYC cash transfers/insurance), and Aadhar (all types of SP benefits). Highly
Satisfactory.

RI15 (percentage of poor / bottom 40 quintile households who have received at least one PMGKY benefit within
eight-week period of program announcement) measured the timeliness of transfers. While none of the PAs
specifically aimed at improving timeliness, some did address delivery mechanisms (PA10 and PA17), and
RI15 can be seen as a measure of efficiency of the social protection programs supported. Satisfactory.

Objective 4: Supporting core reforms to address climate change

RI16 (improved regulatory capacity to conserve groundwater) measured PA18's success at supporting
groundwater conservation. The associated PA lists a range of policy guidelines to be issued, with the goal of (i)
introducing the concept of a Water Conservation Fee (WCF); (ii) encouraging use of recycled and treated
sewage water by industries; (iii) creating provision for actions against polluting industries; (iv) mandating a
requirement for digital flow meters, piezometers, and digital water level recorders (with or without telemetry
depending upon quantum of extraction); (v) mandating water audit by industries extracting ground water of 500
m3/day or more in safe and semi-critical and 200 m3/day or more in critical and over-exploited assessment
units; and (vi) mandating rooftop rain water harvesting except for specified industries. The RI target, however,
only aims at codification of these rules, without any measure of implementation outcomes. Moderately
Unsatisfactory.

RI17 measured PA19’s success at incentivizing the use of renewable energy sources. However, the phrasing of
the RI, “increase in cumulative renewable power installed capacity,” is not an accurate reflection of what the
PA actually committed to doing, which is “incentivizing the use of renewable energy sources.” Although greater
installed capacity may be a prerequisite to greater use of renewable energy (RE), the PA was framed in terms of
actual use of renewable energy. Moreover, the causal chain between the PA, lowering transmission fees for
renewable energy, and an increase in cumulative installed capacity is weak, as such an increase could be
attributable to a variety of different factors. The project team, when asked by IEG about attribution difficulties,
responded: "Based on the team’s assessment, we would like to state that a two-fold increase in RE generation
capacity is not solely attributable to the waiver of transmission charges and losses (RI17), and the
government's policy position in this matter (especially the Panchamrit) played a significant role. The action to
waive transmission charges and losses does send a clear message about the rationale and intent at the policy


                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



  level to mitigate hardship and acted as a potential catalyst to mobilize other initiatives on the
  ground. Transmission charges and losses constitute a large expense for power producers in South Asian
  countries where transmission systems are not very efficient and thus, waiver of such charges gives
  government agencies / private investors a strong incentive to invest in RE. The team believes that RI17 is
  largely attributable to PA11, while noting that other factors were also at play." While acknowledging this
  response, IEG questions whether the time lag between the prior action and any impact it might have on installed
  capacity makes the argument that the growth in capacity could be attributed to recent policy changes. A more
  directly attributable indicator should have been found for this PA. Unsatisfactory.




  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to provide coordinated and adequate
               social protection to the poor from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic

               Rationale
               This objective was fully achieved. Achievement of the objective involved systemic reforms to: (i) support the
               scale up of cash/in-kind assistance through PMGKY and PMGKAY, which targeted women-headed
               households; (ii) initiate regulatory reforms to enhance the service delivery of state government; and (iii)
               provide low-wage workers income protection and liquidity support (ICR, p.3). Targets for all RIs were
               surpassed. 91 percent of households in the bottom 40 percent of consumption percentiles received at least
               one PMGKY social assistance. PMGKY transfers amounted to 47 percent of total household consumption
               expenditures for the poorest quintile in India, and 91 percent of poor households received an additional food
               ration entitlement for a three-month period as outlined by PMGKAY. 91.2 percent of female-headed
               households reported receiving at least one social assistance intervention. In all cases, these achievements
               greatly surpassed targets. For low-wage workers, access to wage protection measures surpassed the target
               almost threefold (73.78 percent), with 96.46 percent receiving additional contributions within eight weeks of
               the announcement. The target for coverage of these wage protection measures was achieved six months
               prior to program close, which the ICR (p. 14) attributes to the efficacy of these reforms in protecting
               vulnerable urban construction workers from destitution. Moreover, the ICR cites December 2023 data
               showing that 66.75 percent of registered construction workers in 2020-2021 and 2021-22 received cash/funds
               from the board.



               Rating

                                                                                                             Page 18 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)




Highly Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthening the capability of state and national governments in India to protect workers in essential service
supply chains during the COVID-19 pandemic

Rationale
The objective was fully achieved. As envisioned by the PAs, the Government of India established a special
health insurance scheme for health workers providing essential care and medical services to COVID-19
patients, covering all essential service workers. This included social insurance (life, accident, and old-age
insurance) reforms. The Bank provided technical expertise to synthesize government-managed health
insurance programs and delivery mechanisms into a special health insurance scheme, scaling vertically to
cover low-paid, informal frontline health workers (ICR, p. 3).

However, the ICR (p. 13) notes that “...the uptake of PMGKP was limited during DPF1 due to health workers
being covered through parallel public and private sector health insurance schemes. This trend was reflected
through a downward revision of RI7 (target reduced from 30 percent to 15 percent) during the second DPF,
considering the limited uptake in 2020-21 due to availability of other health insurance schemes. This suggests
that the objective of protecting health workers during COVID-19 was indeed achieved, but the achievement
may not have been directly attributable to the PAs.” On this basis, the relevance of the associated RIs was
downgraded to MS, and consequently the achievement of the objective was downgraded to Satisfactory.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improving access to social protection and delivery for vulnerable populations including migrants and informal
workers

Rationale
This objective targeted vulnerable populations through different PAs supporting a range of programs targeting
specific populations, including construction workers, migrant workers, informal workers, and the urban
poor. In addition, the goal of wage protection for low-wage workers in SMEs, while reported under Objective
1, is equally relevant for this objective. Achievement of the objective involved structural reforms to: (i) revise
regulations to ensure migrants, informal workers, and the urban poor had timely access to social protection
interventions; (ii) increase new beneficiaries’ uptake of PMGKY through information campaigns; (iii) make



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 25
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



                  food assistance portable; and (iv) reform social insurance to cover women-headed households and the newly
                  vulnerable (ICR, p. 3).

                  Eight results indicators were set for this objective (not including those cited under Objective 1 for low-wage
                  workers), of which all but one were surpassed. In the case of RI9, which measured the percentage of the
                  vulnerable population in urban areas covered by portable life and accident insurance (target of 45 percent),
                  the ICR reported that 51.1 percent had portable health insurance and 34.4 percent had portable life insurance
                  by program close. Overall, these reforms helped reduce fragmentation of the Indian social
                  protection/insurance system and enhanced coverage for migrant workers as well as vulnerable people in the
                  informal economy and in urban areas.




                  Rating
                  Highly Satisfactory



                  OBJECTIVE 4
                  Objective
                  Supporting core reforms to address climate change

                  Rationale
                  This objective was added in the second DPF. The two PAs associated with this goal addressed groundwater
                  conservation and increasing cumulative renewable power as two important climate-change related goals for
                  India. In the first case, a new groundwater policy was successfully introduced, with user fees formulated and
                  notifications issued. In the second, the aim of an increase in cumulative renewable power capacity was met,
                  although whether this achievement is mostly attributable to the prior action on reducing waiving inter-state
                  transmission charges is questionable. While both RIs were fully achieved, concerns raised about the
                  relevance of the RIs led to the downgrading of the results to modest.




                  Rating
                  Moderately Unsatisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                                  Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



Rationale

Overall, the project was very effective, setting the groundwork for a more decentralized, more portable, and thus
more responsive social protection system, while extending a wide variety of social protection and social
insurance measures to vulnerable Indians. In particular, achievements were noteworthy regarding marginalized
groups such as inter-state migrants and informal workers. Consequently, achievement of two of the four
objectives was rated Highly Satisfactory, with a third objective downgraded to Satisfactory and a fourth to
Moderately Unsatisfactory due to questions regarding the relevance of their results indicator and the extent to
which their achievement was fully attributable to the associated PAs.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

The program outcomes were rated as Satisfactory. The program was found to be highly relevant and timely,
based on a deep understanding of the long-standing challenges faced by India's growing social protection
system, balanced with due regard to the urgency of need during the COVID-19 pandemic. All but one RI
were fully achieved; however, efficacy ratings for some RIs were lowered due to flaws in a number of the RIs.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risk to development outcome is minimal due to strong government commitment to reforms. According
to the ICR (p. 19), government leadership has consistently shown strong commitment to prioritizing social
protection to improve efficiency of delivery, coverage, and access. Reforms under Objective 1 reflected the Fifth
Finance Commission recommendations, which are part of the constitutional mandate. Prior actions under
Objectives 2 and 3 leveraged existing programs while making important improvements such as portability and
digital payments of benefits. The climate reforms under Objective 4 aligned with government priorities and
increased commitment to address climate change. Moreover, since the DPF series leveraged pre-existing
systems and social protection benefits are funded through the government budget without donor assistance,
program outcomes should be sustained beyond the DPF series.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)




a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

The reforms in the two DPFs were based on strong analytical work and extensive Bank experience
working with the government on its social protection agenda. Prior actions were thoroughly grounded in
recent analytical work led by the highly technical and well-grounded social protection team in collaboration with
various academicians and experts. The DPF design incorporated surveys and rapid reviews by two national
think-tanks for the Bank. The operation built on lessons from the previous DPF series and supported key
reforms that were designed to address identified implementation challenges (ICR, p. 17). The DPFs also
reflected the goverment's policies and priorities, including through supporting implementation of India’s Fifth
Finance Commission recommendations and alignment with the government’s COVID-19 strategy. The
connection between the DPF series theory of change, prior analytical work, and government strategies was
clear and specific in the program document.

The convening power of the Bank helped the government leverage further financing from other
development partners through the DPF series. The Asian Development Bank (ADB), German Kreditanstalt
Fur Wiederaufbau (KfW), Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and Agence Française de
Développement (AFD) partnered on the first phase of the DPF. The donors fully aligned with the policy matrix
and contributed US$ 1 billion to the proposed DPF 1 and 2 reforms. For DPF2, the Asian Infrastructure
Investment Bank (AIIB) committed to the policy matrix. Collaboration with knowledge partners was also ongoing
through Advisory Services and Analytics. A donor working group was set up and facilitated by a
secretariat financed by an ADB technical assistance. That group met every six months to coordinate and
harmonize efforts, related to implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the program and technical assistance
(ICR, p. 18).

Program design, for both DPFs, recognized substantial overall risk due to the unstable macroeconomic
environment, a high degree of uncertainty with regard to how the pandemic would develop, and certain
weaker elements of institutional capacity, such as lack of mechanisms for supporting migrant
workers. In some cases, the program documents for the DPFs proposed mitigating support such as technical
assistance. For other cases, such as the uncertainty of the extent to which the pandemic would affect public
health and macroeconomic stability, the Bank acknowledged the importance of proceeding regardless of the
risk, as “the proposed operation would likely achieve its objectives as it is designed to provide an economic
lifeline to the vulnerable” (Program Document DPF1, p. 43).

The results framework for the DPF was for the most part robust, but included some RIs that did not
adequately measure the associated PA's contribution to achievement of the objectives. One RI out of 17
was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory and a second one Unsatisfactory.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation


                                                                                                    Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



Rationale

The Bank maintained frequent (bilateral) contact with the ministries to monitor the program results
despite the pandemic and lockdowns. Regular donor discussions were organized and facilitated by the
secretariat financed under an ADB technical assistance since the first DPF, to coordinate and take stock of the
technical assistance support to the government as part of implementation. Moreover, bilateral meetings took
place during the implementation of DPF2. KfW convened monthly meetings to exchange information on studies,
analytics, and any pending issues. According to the ICR (p. 18), however, results indicators were not all tracked,
as administrative data from ministries were not always available. Monitoring responsibilities were mapped and
shared with development partners.

No triggers, targets, or RIs were adapted in the course of the series to reflect to lessons learned or
changes in underlying conditions, risks, operational priorities, or unexpected events after approval. In
two instances proxy measures were used because of unavailable data; however, in both these instances, the
proxy measures were an adequate gauge of PA results.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

Both design and implementation of the project, particularly considering the uncertainty surrounding the
pandemic’s potential health and economic impact, were highly satisfactory. The Bank was able to support the
government to provide urgently needed assistance in a timely manner while laying the groundwork for a more
integrated social protection system moving forward.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Overall, this operation helped alleviate and prevent further social and economic distress from COVID-19
and future shocks among the most vulnerable groups. The interventions enhanced coordination between
central and State government agencies for immediate positive poverty and social impacts and helped prevent
further social and economic distress (ICR, p. 18).




                                                                                                   Page 23 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



b. Environmental

DPF 2 had a positive impact on climate mitigation. Specifically, it helped put in place groundwater
conservation policies and incentivize renewable energy use and/or installation of renewable energy capacity
through lowering transmission costs. According to the ICR, the DPF series informed policymakers on the
importance of social protection systems for climate change adaptation and disaster response (p. 19).




c. Gender

The series was demonstrated to have had positive impacts on vulnerable women. While none of the PAs
specifically targeted women, women's particular vulnerability made them important beneficiaries of the social
protection programs supported through this DPF. The success of these measures in reaching women was
measured through two RIs, the targets for both of which were surpassed. In addition, according to the ICR (p.
18), anecdotal information shows that women gained voice and agency to take critical decisions that also
impacted their families and their position in communities.



d. Other

---
10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was clear and concise, providing useful analysis and relevant lessons for future operations, identifying,
where relevant, where present reforms need to be reinforced by further action. Its data were adequate, and its
orientation was outcome-oriented. Its lessons were comprehensive and insightful. However, in the ICR's
discussions on relevance, particularly of climate-related actions and their results, the analysis remained at the
surface level and did not sufficiently present the theory of change for the climate objective or the extent to which
the PAs were relevant for the Bank and the government's climate agendas in India.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
 Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreement/Comments
                                                                                  Efficacy was downgraded for
 Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               three RIs due to shortcomings in
                                                                                  relevance of RIs.

                                                                                                     Page 24 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     India COVID19 Response Social Protection (P173943)



Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons from the ICR (p. 22):

Leveraging appropriate technology can enhance access and scale up a coordinated shock-responsive
social protection system. The government was able to reduce system fragmentation and integrate five major
national social protection programs by leveraging pre-existing technology-enabled platforms for enhancing
beneficiaries’ access and speeding up service delivery. However, additional technology-enabled reforms are still
needed, particularly social registries for dynamic targeting of the poor and vulnerable.

Enhancing the institutional capacity of local/State governments can be necessary to strengthen last-mile
delivery. The central government responded to the pandemic by scaling up social protection assistance through
PMGKY. However, a significant portion of the vulnerable population—especially migrants and urban informal
workers—were at risk of exclusion. The States were the best-placed to deliver social assistance to these
excluded groups, but they needed financial and technical support. Hence, the government enhanced State
Disaster Risk Fund allocations and usage flexibility, which helped reduce fiscal constraints, and the Bank and
other development partners provided technical assistance during implementation. However, further initiatives to
enhance State governments’ institutional capacity are critical to anchoring effective State-level responses.

A less fragmented and more coordinated social protection architecture can significantly enhance
national and State governments’ capacity to respond to shocks. Historically, India has delivered social
assistance through a complex set of schemes without portability of benefits across State boundaries. However,
COVID-19 highlighted the need for a more coordinated system, including a coordinated government platform for
monitoring, data collection, and knowledge sharing across national and sub-national governments. The success
of related interventions under the DPF series demonstrated the effectiveness of an integrated approach for
responding to shocks. For instance, the efficacy of the PMGKY package showcased that an integrated approach
is critical for accelerating and scaling up social assistance during an emergency.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 25 of 25
