     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024308

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                    Project Name
 P144726                                       National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II

 Country                                       Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                         Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56930                                    15-Mar-2021                                         196,223,194.78

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 28-May-2015                                  14-Mar-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             308,400,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                              196,223,194.78                                               0.00

 Actual                                          196,223,194.78                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero         Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p.5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 23),
   the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this second National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project was to
   reduce vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards of coastal communities in project
   States of Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal, and increase the capacity of these
   State entities to effectively plan for and respond to disasters.



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



   For the analysis in this ICRR, the PDO statement will be parsed as follows:

          to reduce vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards of coastal communities in
           Project States
          to increase the capacity of the State entities to effectively plan for and respond to disasters.

   This NCRMP II is a national project implemented by the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA)
   together with the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) in six states – Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka,
   Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
   Yes

   Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
   No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
      1. Early Warning Dissemination Systems (US$18.10 million, at appraisal; various restructurings
            reduced this amount first to US$17.77 million; then to US$17.56 million; then to US$13.37 million;
            US$12.1 million, actual). This component was to finance the expansion of the warning systems for
            coastal communities in Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal to enhance
            their emergency preparedness capacity. This component was to finance the installation of
            communication systems, siren towers, and disaster preparedness capacity of the implementing
            entities – the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and existing state nodal agencies for
            disaster management such as the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) or
            Revenue/Relief Departments. The first restructuring reduced the allocation to US$17.77 million
            because financing of activities for three of the original six target states – Gujarat, Maharashtra, and
            West Bengal – was dropped. These states were to continue to be covered by early warning
            dissemination under the ongoing work on the web-based Dynamic Composite Risk Atlas Decision
            Support System (DCRA-DSS) tool, in consultations with the India Meteorological Department (IMD),
            Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), State Disaster Management
            Authorities, and in the roll-out of the early warning application or app.
         2. Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (US$314.8 million at appraisal; various restructurings
            reduced this amount first to US$181.18 million, then to US$170.98 million, then to US$166.18
            million; US$227.9 million, actual). This component was to finance infrastructure investments such as
            multi-purpose emergency shelters (MPCS), upgrade roads, underground electrical cabling (UGEC),
            bridges, saline embankments, and bunds to improve access to emergency shelter and evacuation
            routes and protect critical infrastructure against cyclones and hydro- meteorological hazards. The
            first restructuring dropped some of the planned civil works – 75 MPCs; 11 bridges in Goa, Gujarat,
            and Karnataka; road works in Goa and Kerala; UGEC works in Gujarat, and saline embankment
            packages in Goa and Maharashtra because of continued procurement challenges.



                                                                                                       Page 2 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



      3. Technical Assistance (TA) for Multi-Hazard Risk Management (US$29.5 million at appraisal;
         various restructurings reduced this amount first to US$13.33 million, then to US$12.97 million, then
         to US$8.74 million; US$2.1 million, actual). This component was to finance TA to enhance the
         quality of information on multi-hazard risks for decision-making and to strengthen risk management
         of the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA). This component was also to finance TA to
         improve understanding and institutional capacity across the coastal states. Restructuring cancelled
         one study – the preparatory consultancy for nine states to design a second phase of the National
         Seismic Risk Mitigation Project. This study was to be financed under the proposed India
         Comprehensive National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (P174830).
      4. Project Management and Implementation Support (US$24.6 million at appraisal; various
         restructurings reduced this amount to US$16.12 million, then to US$15.89 million, then to US$14.11
         million; US$13.3 million, actual). This component was to finance project management, operating
         costs for State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs), training, and consulting services for
         specialized activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$ 308.40 million. The credit disbursed a total of
  US$196.22 million. A total of US$102 million was cancelled in succession (see Dates below): first for
  US$80 million; second for US$11 million, and third for US$15 million.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed this project.

  Borrower Contribution: The government committed to contribute US$78.60 million and disbursed US$59.2
  million. The World Bank Task Team confirmed on January 15, 2025 that the government did not disburse
  any further contribution since the scope and targets were reduced with the government financing some of
  the planned activities.

  Dates: The project was approved on May 28, 2015, became effective on November 9, 2015, with an original
  closing date of March 15, 2021. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on June 4, 2018. After the
  following level 2 restructurings, the closing date was extended by 24 months to close on March 14, 2023.

  Restructurings:

        On February 17, 2021, to extend the closing date by 18 months from March 15, 2021 to September
         15, 2022 because of the impact of COVID-19 and cancel US$80 million because of the following
         factors that resulted in cost savings:
              o long-standing procurement challenges for investments under components A (the EWDS) and
                 B (cyclone risk mitigating infrastructure) that slowed initial disbursement and proved
                 infeasible;
              o currency-exchange gains;
              o dropped activities in components C (technical assistance for multi-hazard risk management)
                 and D (project management and implementation support).
        On September 6, 2021, to revise the targets of the indicators in the results framework reflecting the
         revised cost allocation under the first project restructuring due to the COVID-19 pandemic, civil
         works implementation challenges, and potential impacts of seasonal cyclones required additional
         time. This was not considered a second restructuring, but a supplement to the first restructuring.

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 25
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



    On September 14, 2022, to extend the closing date by another six months from September 15, 2022
     to March 14, 2023, cancel an additional US$11.0 million reducing allocations across all
     four components, and revise the targets for the indicators of the results framework accordingly. The
     following factors justified this restructuring:
          o Cyclones Yaas and Tauktae slowed implementation in both the west and east coasts.
          o COVID-19 restrictions continued, supply chains were disrupted, labor shortages occurred,
             and resettlement actions caused delays.
          o Cost savings (lower than anticipated cost of works and materials) and contractual variations
             and lower than budgeted expenditures for training in disaster damages assessments led to
             unutilized funds.
          o Revised the targets of output and outcome indicators in the results framework due to
             readiness and procurement issues:
                    The following targets of the output indicators were revised –
                           “Number of multi-purpose cyclone and flood shelters completed” (from an
                              original target of 340 to 262 to 261). One Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelter was
                              cancelled. The government decided to finance some shelters.
                           Number of sirens installed (from an original target of 750, revised to 200) due
                              to procurement challenges and technological tower design advancements.
                           Roads rehabilitated, rural (from an original target of 310 km to 205 km)
                           Number of bridges completed (from an original target of 13 to 2)
                           Embankments rehabilitated (from an original target of 89 km to 30 km)
                              because the government decided to finance the rehabilitation of other
                              embankments.
                           Area protected by rehabilitated embankments (from an original target of 1,600
                              km2 to 29 km2)
                           Kilometers of underground High Tension (HT) and Low Tension (LT) lines
                              (from an original target of 280 km to 1,409 km)
                    The following targets of the outcome indicators were revised –
                           “Number of people with access to multi-purpose cyclone and flood shelters
                              built or rehabilitated” (from an original target of 500,000 people to 295,050 to
                              294,300 people).
                           Proportion of vulnerable coastal population with access to emergency shelters
                              (from an original target of 30 percent to 17 percent)
                           Results of the comprehensive multi-hazard risk financing strategy presented
                              to and used by NDMA for policy making (original target did not include the
                              presentation to and use of the results for policy making, but retained the target
                              at Yes/No).
    On March 13, 2023 to amend the FA and cancel another US$15.0 million of the credit because of
     cost savings from the following:
          o Extension of several works and consultancies beyond the project closing date and no longer
             funded by the project;
          o Exchange rate gains;
          o Lower than budgeted cost of works and materials under EWDS;
          o Dropped one consultancy under component C – the National Seismic Risk Mitigation
             Program preparatory consultancy for 9 States.




                                                                                                 Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



   Split Rating: A split rating of the outcome will be undertaken. The PDO remained unchanged throughout.
   Available resources were reduced. The scope narrowed. Targets were adjusted accordingly. According to
   the guidelines, when reduced financing narrows the scope, a split rating of the outcome would apply.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context: This project (NCRMP II) followed the first phase of NCRMP to reduce vulnerability in coastal
communities and enhancing the capacity of state entities to plan and respond to disasters. India continues
to rank among the top five most disaster-hit countries with an estimated annual economic loss of US$9.8
billion from multiple natural disasters at appraisal. About 7,517 km of the country’s coastline is exposed to
10 percent of the world’s tropical cyclones. Vulnerability to cyclones and other hydro-meteorological
hazards, particularly along the west coast, has escalated shown by an increased frequency of cyclone
occurrences in the project states during the project period itself with 20 cyclones during 2019–2023, and 8
of them striking the west coast. This project was part of a phased approach to cover wide regions of the
country in sequence. Phase I, approved in 2010, encompassed the states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh.
Phase II covered Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal. This second phase was
to benefit about 560 million people under intensified and more frequent hydro-meteorological disasters.

National Plans: This project was highly relevant to the country’s policy priorities in disaster risk reduction
(DRR) and cyclone risk mitigation. The government adopted its National Disaster Management Plan in
March 2015 consistent with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (2015–2030) and the
National Disaster Management Plan (NDMP), National Policy on Disaster Management (NPDM), and the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC). The PDO was relevant to the Prime Minister’s ten-point
disaster risk reduction agenda. The government acknowledged that early warning systems installed in the
coastal states under this project helped alert coastal communities during the recent cyclones. Training,
mock drills, and key roles in the maintenance and management of Cyclone Shelter Management &
Maintenance Committees (CSMMCs) have also increased women's participation in disaster risk
management. In 2021, the government’s 15th Finance Commission created a window for states to finance
disaster mitigation investments, informed by the experience from this project. This project is part of a
national multi-hazard mitigation program of the NDMA to better understand hazards like seismic risk, floods,
and landslides, to inform the design and establishment of a National Disaster Management communication
network.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The PDO was relevant to the Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) FY18-22. The World Bank’s Performance Learning Review extended the CPF to remain
effective until FY25. The PDO was relevant to achieving the objectives under CPF Focus Area 1: Promoting
Resource-Efficient Growth, Objective 1.5: Improve disaster risk management.

World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Country: The World Bank financed the first phase of
this project (NCRMP I). That project developed the composite risk atlas to indicate the scale of cyclone risk
of the west coast states. The World Bank has financed the NCRMP-I, the Odisha Cyclone Reconstruction
Project, Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project, Bihar Kosi Flood Recovery
Project, and the Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project. All these projects were designed to improve
disaster risk management (DRM) capacity at the state and national levels. These projects financed

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



               analytical work, equipment, training, establishing systems for better risk management such as forecasting,
               early warning systems, community-based DRM, multi-hazard risk assessments for planning, and decision
               support systems. During the preparation stage, the project was built on insights from the Coastal Disaster
               Risk Reduction Project (CDRRP), NCRMP I, and other regional coastal projects, particularly the EWDS
               units and the organizational structure and financing of CSMMCs. Gujarat’s comprehensive needs
               assessment under the first phase of this project involved GIS-based risk analyses and community
               consultations. This served as a strong foundation for site selection and design of shelters for this project.
               Shelter designs and screening processes from both NCRMP projects have informed subsequent shelter
               projects in the states.

               The PDO itself was appropriately expressed to address the development problem arising from increased
               incidence and intensity from hydro meteorological risks brought by climate change.

               The relevance of objective is rated High. Approximately 14 percent of India’s population reside in India’s
               extensive coastline spanning 66 coastal districts. Fisheries and aquaculture along the coast employing over
               6 million people and contribute 4 percent to the country's gross domestic product (GDP) annually. With the
               heightened vulnerabilities from climate change, the government is committed to proactive disaster risk
               reduction (DRR) as a strategic move away from a reactive, post-disaster response. The government is
               committed to fostering preparedness and resilience, especially across the coastal regions of India.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To reduce vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards of coastal communities in Project
                             States

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change: A Theory of Change (TOC) was not required at appraisal. One was prepared during the
                             various restructurings using the inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes in the results framework (PAD,
                             Annex 1). According to the TOC, investments such as installing communication systems, siren towers, roads,
                             bridges, and embankments, would enhance the emergency preparedness capacity of the target coastal
                             communities to respond to the increasing intensity and frequency of hydro-meteorological based disasters.
                             The target coastal communities were in Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal.
                             This component was to finance EWDS systems managed by the National Disaster Management Authority
                             (NDMA), and by the existing state nodal agencies for disaster management such as the State Disaster
                             Management Authorities (SDMAs) or Revenue/Relief Departments.



                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



Inputs: were training, technical assistance, and financing of the investments to expand the warning systems
for coastal communities in Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, and West Bengal.

Outputs: were to be the constructed bridges, rehabilitated embankments, the length of underground cabling
achieved, and rehabilitated rural roads. Rural roads, described as rural access, feeder, market, agricultural,
irrigation, forestry, or community roads, were functionally classified below trunk or primary, secondary or link
roads, or tertiary roads. Rural roads connect small urban centers/towns/settlements of less than 2,000 to
5,000 people to each other or to higher classes of road, market towns and urban centers.

Outcomes: were to be the reduced vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards of coastal
communities in the target state expressed as a proportion of the coastal population who can now be reached
by the early warning system; have access to emergency shelters; and the increase in the area benefiting from
rehabilitated or constructed embankments.

Critical Assumptions: The following critical assumptions if realized were to enhance the achievement of this
objective: (i) the implementing agencies and their project implementation units have sufficient staff and
adequate capacity; (ii) the states have adequate budget for operations and maintenance (O&M) of the
investments made; (iii) relevant government departments utilize the analytical work to design and execute
additional projects; (iv) disaster management authorities – NDMA, SDMAs, and DDMAs) – incorporate risk
identification studies in their future projects; (v) government agencies utilize the established institutional
mechanisms beyond the project period; and (vi) skilled personnel and equipment are available to the
government beyond the project period.

Overall, the TOC constructed during the restructurings and informed the project at completion was adequate
to establish that inputs led to outputs and expected outcomes. However, the expected outcomes missed
some indicators that would have attributed the completed activities to reducing the vulnerability of the coastal
areas.

OUTPUTS: One output exceeded the original target while for the others, the original targets were not
achieved:

      1,409 km of high- and low-tension lines were moved underground exceeding the original target of 280
       km. Goa completed 315 km, Maharashtra 621.5 km, West Bengal 472.5 km. The reason for this vast
       overachievement was that the target states increased their demand for underground electric cables
       (UGEC) to reduce power related accidents or the need to replace above ground structures following
       hydro-meteorological events. The World Bank Task team added on January 15, 2025 that the original
       target was revised to correspond to the results of a detailed survey and the target states aiming to
       increase the targeting of the more vulnerable households.

The following targets were not achieved:

      193 sirens were installed in Goa (37), Kerala (126) and Karnataka (30) as part of the Remote Public
       Alert Communication Systems (RPACs), not achieving the original target of 750 due to procurement
       challenges, and advancements in technological design. These technological advancements in the
       design of siren towers integrated with the web-based Dynamic Composite Risk Atlas (web-DCRA)
       tool, broadened the targeted coastal population covered to compensate for the reduced number of
       siren towers.


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)




      260 multipurpose cyclone and flood shelters were completed in five states (Goa (11), Gujarat (76)
         Karnataka (10), Kerala (17), and West Bengal (146), except for Maharashtra not achieving the original
         target of 340 shelters. In some cases, the government financed some of the shelters that were
         originally part of the project. The various multi-purpose uses of the shelters included evacuation
         centers for marginalized scheduled tribe communities and those who lived in kutchas, shelter
         livestock, COVID-19 care centers during the pandemic, schools, or fire stations.
        205 km of rural roads in Gujarat and Karnataka were rehabilitated, not achieving the original target
         of 310 km. The completed roads improved access to the multi-purpose cyclone shelters (MPCSs) to
         facilitate evacuation.
        2 bridges were completed in Karnataka, not achieving the original target of 13. Procurement issues
         and readiness to implement led to reduced outputs. Restructuring reduced the targets (see below)
         because the investments would not be completed within the project period.
        30 km of saline embankments were rehabilitated, not achieving the original target of 90 km of saline
         embankments in Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Goa. In some cases, the government financed some of
         the targeted embankments.
        29 km2 was protected by embankments in Maharashtra (17.22 km2) and Karnataka (11.78 km2), not
         achieving the original (provisional) target of 1,600 km2. The government financed some embankments
         and reduced the corresponding area protected by the project-financed embankments.
         Restructuring reduced the number of target cities from six to three due to procurement issues and
         readiness to implement that reduced the target area to be protected.

OUTCOMES: One outcome target was achieved:

      75 percent of the targeted coastal population were covered by the early warning and dissemination
         system (EWDS), achieving the original target of 75 percent. EWDS was completed in Goa, Kerala,
         and Karnataka. According to the ICR, after the Biparjoy cyclone in Gujarat, EWDS reached 100
         percent coverage of the target population.

The following target outcome indicators were not achieved.

      293,550 people accessed the multipurpose cyclone and flood shelters built or rehabilitated, not
       achieving the original target of 500,000 people. This was originally reported as an intermediate results
       or output indicator.
      17 percent of the coastal population now had access to emergency shelters, not achieving the original
       target of 30 percent.

The following outcome was not reported nor included in the results framework and had no target - avoided
damages or incidence of electrical accidents reduced after cabling was moved underground.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Modest given the partial achievement of
the outcomes.



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was not revised. Targets of output and outcome indicators were reduced except for one
indicator (length of high- and low-tension lines that were moved underground).

Revised Rationale
Revised TOC. The TOC was not revised as the restructuring did not affect the TOC.

Revised Inputs: The cancellation of a total of US$108 million or more than a third of the original commitment
reduced available funds. Targets of outputs and outcome indicators were reduced accordingly.

Revised Outputs: were to be the reduced number of infrastructure investments related to the early warning
systems covering 3 rather than 6 target states. Gujarat, Maharashtra, and West Bengal were dropped
because the proposed investments in these states were no longer feasible to be completed within the project
timeline. Investments in four of the six states were identified during implementation rather than at appraisal.
The “Remote Public Alarm and Communication System or R-PACS” was changed to “sirens” in the
September 2021 restructuring due to procurement challenges, improved tower designs, and technological
advancements. MPCS and embankment activities initially planned under the project were later funded by the
government’s ongoing schemes.

Revised Outcomes: The indicators were unchanged. The targets were reduced to match the reduced inputs
and outputs.

Revised Critical Assumptions: Unchanged.

Overall, the TOC adequately supported the causal relations between the reduced inputs, the adjusted
outputs, and the expected outcomes.

REVISED OUTPUTS: One target for an output indicator was exceeded.

      1,409 km of high- and low-tension lines were moved underground, exceeding the revised target of
       1,286 km The findings of the baseline Benefit, Monitoring, and Evaluation (BME) study showed that
       the underground cabling works existed in only 1.1 percent of urban clusters in selected project cities.
       The sampled clusters in Karnataka, Kerala, West Bengal, and Maharashtra had no such
       infrastructure. Goa completed 315 km, Maharashtra 621.5 km, and West Bengal 472.5 km in locations
       with high tourist footfall and serving the coastal households, lifeline infrastructure and economic
       infrastructure such as hotels, shops, and fishing centers. These sites faced heavy damages from
       damaged poles, wires, and conductors in previous cyclones before the cabling moved underground.
       There is no data on avoided damages after cabling was moved underground. There is no data on
       avoided damages after cabling was moved underground.

The rest of the output targets substantially, or fully achieved the revised targets:

      260 multi-purpose cyclone and flood shelters were completed, achieving the revised target of 261.
       One Multi-Purpose Cyclone Shelter was cancelled. These buildings were built according to code,



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



         considered the needs of women and persons with disabilities. These shelters were used as
         evacuation enters during the cyclones and as COVID-19 care centers during the pandemic.
        193 sirens were installed in the following states: Goa, Karnataka, and Kerala, achieving the revised
         target of 200. Also included were towers designed to withstand winds with speed of up to 250 kmph.
         These sirens were installed at the MPCSs, district and block emergency operation centers (EOCs),
         fish landing centers, and telecom towers.
        205 km of rural roads were rehabilitated, achieving the revised target of 205 km. The completed roads
         improved access to the shelters.
        2 bridges in Karnataka were completed, achieving the revised target of 2.
        30 km of embankments were rehabilitated, achieving the revised target of 30 km.
        29 km2 was protected by rehabilitated embankments, achieving the revised target of 29 km2.

REVISED OUTCOMES: The following targets of the outcome indicators were substantially or fully
achieved:

      293,550 people accessed the multipurpose cyclone and flood shelters built or rehabilitated, very
         nearly achieving the revised target of 295,050 people was later further reduced to 294,300 people.
      According to the Benefit, Monitoring, and Evaluation (BME) survey at closing, all cluster respondents
       found the roads to be extremely useful in enabling movement of people during flooding and other
       emergencies. Previously existing roads used to be inundated and unpassable during the monsoons.
       Survey respondents from coastal villages in Gujarat reported using these roads to evacuate to MPCSs
       during cyclone Tauktae. Karnataka coastal villagers reported that the newly constructed roads were
       their only connection to the highways and reduced their travel time to reach services.
      17 percent of the coastal population got access to emergency shelters, achieving the revised target of
       17 percent.

The ICR also reported the following outcomes. These were not part of the results framework and hence, had
no target values:

      The rehabilitated saline embankments in Maharashtra led to an increase in overall productivity of
       protected paddies from 40,000 to 100,000 million tons (clarified by the World Bank task team on
       January 15, 2025 that this covered only the project period) and protected 4,192 families from floods.
       The government of Karnataka financed on its own an additional 74 km of saline embankments using
       the design from this project.
      Kerala used the EWDS to strengthen state/district/taluka emergency operation centers and integrated
       it with the Kerala Warnings, Crisis, and Hazards Management (KWaCHaM) system, a composite
       emergency preparedness and response system, to enhance early warning capabilities and crisis
       response across the state of Kerala. This framework system disseminated knowledge, issued
       warnings, monitored developing crisis, and ensured a response network. A taluka is an administrative
       subdivision of a district, or a group of villages and towns organized for administrative purposes.
      The three states that were dropped from receiving sirens were nevertheless covered by the alert
       system by integrating the web-based Dynamic Composite Risk Atlas (DCRA) and Decision Support
       System (DSS) for cyclone risk mitigation and response planning into the installed sirens. The project-
       financed sirens with the web-DCRA tool could reach 30 million to 165 million people.
      By March 2023, the project covered 45 percent of the targeted coastal population. The government
       used the existing National Disaster Alert Portal SACHET (mobile application) and Common Alerting

                                                                                                Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



       Protocol (CAP). The World Bank team confirmed on January 15, 2025 that the project-financed web-
       DCRA mobile app was not released. These combined systems demonstrated effectiveness during
       recent cyclones. CAP alerts reached 100 percent of affected populations during Cyclones Biparjoy
       and Remal. The web-DCRA tool tracked Cyclone Biparjoy in June 2023.

The following outcome was reported but not included in the results framework and had no target value -
 Shelter designs and screening processes from both NCRMP Phase I and Phase II have informed
subsequent shelter projects in both coastal and non-coastal states as clarified by the World Bank team on
January 15, 2025.

The achievement of this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase the capacity of the State entities to effectively plan for and respond to disasters.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC): The project was not required to prepare a TOC at the time of appraisal. One was
prepared during the various restructurings informed by the causal relations established between the outputs
and expected outcomes of the results framework.

Inputs: were to be the financing of training and technical studies designed to enhance the capacity of the
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA); existing state nodal agencies for disaster management
such as the State Disaster Management Authorities (SDMAs) or Revenue/Relief Departments to respond to
hydro-meteorological induced disasters.

Outputs: were to be the training sessions to be delivered including reports and various studies presented to
the national and state agencies. These outputs were to form part of policy to enhance capacity of state
entities to plan and respond to disasters.

Outcomes: were to be the increased capacity of the state entities to effectively plan for and respond to
disasters in project states by outlining investment plans informed by the results of the studies. The indicators
used in this TOC, however, were at the intermediate rather than at outcome level. There was no evidence
that specific policies from the reports were adopted by the agencies to indicate an increase capacity to plan
and respond to disasters.

Critical Assumptions: The same critical assumptions above also applied here.

The TOC was a reasonable presentation of the links established between inputs, outputs and expected
outcomes. Missing, however, were other outcome level indicators that could have measured relevant project



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



results at outcome level. Completing and presenting the reports are insufficient measurements to
demonstrate increased capacity to plan for and respond to disasters.

OUTPUTS: One target output was exceeded:

      9 training modules on disaster damage assessment were delivered, exceeding the original target of 8.
       The participants were state officials from various departments such as Health, Education, Panchayati
       Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies and Rural Development, First Aid, Search and Rescue, Shelter
       Management, and Early Warning and Communication.
            o Over 24,000 state government officials and 37,486 community representatives were trained on
               various disaster preparedness techniques including first aid, search and rescue, and shelter
               management through 1,457 shelter-level trainings. No targets were reported.
                      The training sessions across sectors have been rated quite or particularly useful in
                        terms of content and effectiveness, by over 9 out of 10 trainees in Goa, Gujarat, Kerala,
                        and West Bengal.
                      Respondents from West Bengal stated examples of using the skills acquired during
                        Cyclone Yaas for rescue of two children from drowning in the river at the time of Durga
                        Puja and for responding to a snake-bite situation
                      Respondents from Karnataka cited using the skills during the Madikeri floods of 2021.
                        The project also delivered nine modules of trainings (compared to a target of eight
                        modules)
            o 198 multi-hazard risk assessment for selected areas including 31 research articles, 14 risk
               information platforms, and 44 databases on hazard, vulnerability, and risk from 50 different
               agencies were completed. The expanse of data included 18 different hazards, climate change
               impact on hazards in the 2050s scenario, 15 infrastructure/asset classes, agriculture assets,
               and exposure data for populations for all Indian states and UTs. (The original target was that
               these risk assessments were conducted).
            o Probabilistic risk model for selected areas were completed. State officials were trained on the
               operation of the tool and a manual was prepared (the original target was that probabilistic risk
               models were completed). The probabilistic risk maps depicted cyclone risks and vulnerabilities
               along India’s coastlines and provided an interactive map viewer for detailed visualization as
               part of the web-DCRA-DSS tool that was developed. NDMA launched this during the NDMA
               formation day in September 2022.
            o Physical structural assessment of lifeline infrastructure was completed (the original target was
               that the assessments were completed). The vulnerability assessment of critical infrastructure in
               eight high seismic risk prone States was prepared for the proposed US$700 million National
               Seismic Risk Mitigation Project.
            o Hydro-meteorological Resilience Action Plans were completed for 6 cities – Panjim, Goa;
               Kochi, Kerala; Porbandar, Gujarat; Mangaluru, Karnataka; Ratnagiri, Maharashtra; and
               Bidhannagar, West Bengal (The original target was that these plans were completed. The
               World Bank task team confirmed on January 15, 2025 that the target was 6). The plans were
               developed by assessing seven hydro-meteorological hazards, exposure risks, and vulnerability
               of urban assets and communities to guide decision makers in improving the cities’ resilience
               and reduce risks to hydro-met hazards under changing climate scenarios. The study
               recommended structural and non-structural measures, emphasized the need for detailed
               feasibility studies, engineering plans, nature-based solutions of the recommended measures.



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



               The HmRAP web portal include all the digital elevation models, digital terrain models, maps
               and submitted to NDMA to be hosted in the National Informatics Center (NIC) cloud at IMD.

OUTCOMES:

      A national multi-hazard risk assessment and risk information sharing platform was completed. This
       included risk assessment strategies for four states – Uttarakhand, Odisha, Kerala, and Gujarat. These
       states established a database of economic and financial disaster-induced losses and catastrophic risk
       profiles. The risk assessment strategy included an analysis of the national institutional context for risk
       financing and state specific disaster financing mechanism. One homogenous platform contained all
       publicly available risk information from these state entities. This platform included a review of an
       existing inventory of risk assessment studies, research articles, information platforms and databases
       on hazard, vulnerability, and risk. The risk platform can generate risk profile reports dynamically at
       user-selected resolutions (state, district, sub-district, and city levels) for investment planning. All the
       reports were presented to the Ministry of Finance. The vulnerability assessment informed the
       development of a web-based Dynamic Composite Risk Atlas – Decision Support System (web-DCRA-
       DSS tool.
      A Comprehensive Multi-hazard Risk Financing Strategy (CMhRFS) was completed.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. There was lack of evidence to support that the reported outcomes provided evidence of
an increase in capacity of the targeted six state entities to plan and respond to disasters. For example, the
adoption of budgets indicating that disaster resilient investments were to be implemented following the
recommendations made under the vulnerability assessment and the financing strategy would have been
useful.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was unchanged.

Revised Rationale
Revised Theory of Change: The TOC remained unchanged.

Revised Inputs: Cancelled funds led to reduced financing of training and technical studies.

Revised Outputs: One study was dropped – a planned second phase of the study to design a National
Seismic Risk Mitigation Project and carried over to the proposed World Bank-financed India Comprehensive
National Earthquake Risk Mitigation Project (P174830).

Revised Outcomes: were unchanged.



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



Revised Critical Assumptions: Unchanged.

Revised OUTPUTS:

      A study was dropped, reducing the number of studies from three to two - the Comprehensive Multi-
       hazard Risk Financing Strategy (CMhRFS) study, and the vulnerability assessment.
      Several deliverables under the risk financing strategy were to be approved after closing because
       these were still being contracted at the time of the ICR. The World Bank task team clarified on
       January 15, 2025 that the government financed all the outputs after the project closed and were no
       longer part of the project outputs.
      Achievements for the original outputs reported above remained valid here.

Revised OUTCOMES:

      The vulnerability assessment informed the development of a web-based Dynamic Composite Risk
       Atlas – Decision Support System (web-DCRA-DSS tool) as targeted.
      The completed Comprehensive Multi-hazard Risk Financing Strategy (CMhRFS) led the 15th Finance
       Commission to include state-specific risk financing strategies, ex-ante financing mechanisms, and
       centrally allocated disaster funds as instruments available to the states for disaster risk
       management. The target was that these completed strategy and assessment were to identify policy
       recommendations to enhance the capacity of the state entities to plan and respond to disasters. The
       state specific mechanisms for disaster risk management were offered as evidence of enhanced
       capacity to plan and respond to disasters. This indicator is intermediate at best. Evidence of enhanced
       capacity would have been the states budgets showing disaster resilient infrastructure investments to
       reduce hydro-meteorological risks. The outcome indicator did not provide a clear causal link to
       achieving the objective based on the inputs and expected outputs.

The ICR also reported the following outcomes that were not part of the results framework and hence, had no
indicators or target values:

      NDMA undertook a study to analyze the disaster risk management in eight selected countries of
       Australia, Canada, Germany, Indonesia, Japan, the Philippines, Türkiye, and the United States. The
       study was to highlight good practices in risk-informed planning that would strengthen coastal Indian
       states' capacity to plan and respond to disasters. According to the World Bank task team on January
       15, 2025, the results of the study were used to inform the architecture of NDMA’s disaster
       management institutions.
      The web-DCRA tool was launched on NDMA formation day, September 28, 2022, and in use for pre-
       event planning and active cyclone response. The World Bank task team confirmed it was highlighted
       during the January 14, 2025 150th Foundation Day of India Meteorological Department, Ministry of
       Earth Sciences as the impact based forecast (IBF) tool. Probabilistic risk assessment maps
       depicted cyclone risks and vulnerabilities along the coast. The web-DCRA tool provides a granular risk
       assessment, location-specific cyclonic wind speeds and inundation levels due to storm surge, cyclone-
       induced rainfall, and riverine flood and the average annual losses. An interactive map provided
       detailed visualization. State officials continue to be trained on a rolling basis, according to the World
       Bank task team on January 15, 2025, on the operation of the tool. The tool is used for (i) planning of
       mitigation investments, (ii) site selection and design of infrastructure investments, (iii) and real-time
       response and recovery planning. The system was used during Cyclone Amphan (pilot phase) and

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



                                     other cyclones. States used information for evacuation planning, resource allocation for the National
                                     Disaster Response Force (NDRF), State Disaster Response Force (SDRF), Fire and Emergency
                                     services, and community volunteers/task forces for real-time response in cyclones such as Biparjoy.
                                     Cyclone Biparjoy had zero casualties in the project area. The tool’s accurate simulations of wind
                                     speeds and storm surge heights, capacity to map flood inundation, vital informed emergency
                                     management. The TOC did not include outcome indicators that would have shown the causal link
                                     between the tools developed and the enhanced capacity of the state entities to plan and respond to
                                     disasters.

                              Overall, the revised efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate
                              shortcomings. The two completed studies substantially achieved the target. These studies informed the
                              state specific mechanisms available to the states for disaster risk management, including making available
                              disaster risk mitigation financing. This indicates the outputs contributed to achieving the expected outcomes
                              and substantially contributed to achieving the objective. However, the lack of indicators on state policies
                              adopted and use of the available financing point to a moderate shortcoming in achieving the objective.



                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives using the original target indicators is rated
                            Modest. The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the first original objective is rated Modest. Not all the
                            targets of the outcome indicators were achieved. Restructuring led to funds being cancelled,
                            reduced scope because three of the six target states were dropped. However, these same states were to
                            continue to be part of the early warning system supported by the project. The indicators to support the
                            achievement of the outcome of the second objective – increased capacity of the original six target states to
                            plan and respond to disasters could also have been strengthened as discussed above.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives using the revised target indicators is rated
                            Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Some additional indicators could have strengthened the causal link
                            between the outputs and expected outcomes relative to state capacity to plan and respond to disasters.




                                                                                                                                Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)




  Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, a cost benefit analysis was conducted for the multi-purpose cyclone
shelters. The PAD only used lives saved during disasters expressed as the value of statistical lives (VSL). The
value of statistical life is an estimate of the financial value society places on reducing the average number of
deaths by one or how much society is willing to pay to reduce the risk of death. Benefits from the multipurpose
use of these shelters were not valued and not included in the analysis. The discount rate used was 12
percent. The net present value (NPV) was estimated at US$79 million, and the estimated internal rate of return
(IRR) was 18 percent. Benefits from roads and bridges, bunds, and underground cables were not quantified or
considered at appraisal (PAD, paragraphs 28-29).

At closing, a cost benefit analysis was conducted for the capital investments under cyclone risk mitigation
infrastructure or 89 percent of the total project costs. These included multi-purpose cyclone shelters, roads and
bridges, embankments and bunds, and underground cabling. For roads, only the general benefits of smooth and
faster traffic were quantified. Roads facilitated evacuation and transporting emergency and relief supplies during
disasters and access to markets the rest of the year. The protection of agricultural crops allowing for multiple
crop cultivation throughout the year and properties from saline water intrusion was the main benefits of saline
embankments and bunds. Only the likely benefits of multiple rice crops were considered. Benefits for the
underground cabling included the avoided damages from cyclones and subsequent repair costs for the electrical
distribution system. Avoided loss of productivity and comfort to the residents was not included in the quantitative
measures of the economic efficiency. The analysis used a 10 percent discount rate. The net present
value (NPV) of the overall investments was estimated to be US$155.9 million with an estimated internal rate of
return (IRR) of 22.3 percent and a benefit-cost ratio (BCR) of 1.9.

No comparison of the economic efficiency at appraisal and completion could be made for the overall
investments in cyclone risk mitigation investments because different discount rates applied to investments in
shelters - 12 percent at appraisal and 10 percent at closing.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Project procurement challenges, limited implementation capacity
at the state levels, and the COVID-19 pandemic led to implementation delays. The project period was extended
for a total of 24 months. Procurement (see Section 10 Other Issues below) was challenging with delays in
design and tendering that led to investments that could not be completed even in the extended project period.
Some investments were appraised during implementation and posed procurement challenges. Restructuring
dropped three of the original six states. Delayed decision-making and internal approvals by some states
adversely impacted the project implementation. Implementation efficiency varied across implementing agencies
in participating states – some experienced a high rate of staff turnover; some experienced seven cyclones
during the project period; some went through delays in approving technical designs and financial claims.
However, the central project management unit at the National Disaster Management Authority ensured
continuity. Corrective measures were adopted. Design support for mitigation investments were enhanced.
Infeasible investments were cancelled. Project management costs were low – US$24.6 million at appraisal,
which was reduced to US$13.3 million at project completion – with some states maintaining lean teams at the
SPIUs and collaborated effectively with the implementing agencies.


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



Efficiency is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings from procurement issues. US$108 million (or 25
percent) of the original US$308 million committed to the project was cancelled even as the project period was
extended by 24 months.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?                Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                      0
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                   0
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

                                                           Original                    After Restructuring
Relevance of Objective                                     High
Efficacy to Achieve Objectives
Obj 1 - to reduce vulnerability to hydro-
                                                           Modest                      Substantial
meteorological
Obj 2 - to increase capacity of the State entities to
                                                           Substantial                 Substantial
effectively plan and respond to disasters
Overall Efficacy                                           Modest                      Substantial
Efficiency                                                 Substantial                 Substantial
Overall Outcome                                            Moderately Unsatisfactory   Satisfactory
Outcome Rating Value                                       3                           5
Amount Disbursed (in US$ millions)                         148.76                      47.44
Disbursement rate                                          148.76/196.2                47.44/196.2
Weight Value                                               0.76                        0.24
Total Weights                                              0.76*3 = 2.3                0.24*5 = 1.2
Overall Outcome Rating                                     3.5 = 4                     Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                      Page 17 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)




The following pose risks to the development outcomes:

      Technical risks: This is a moderate risk. The web-based DCRA DSS and the overall early warning
         system rely on the implemented innovative technology and systems. Installed software require
         periodic updates.
        Financial risks: This is a moderate risk. The adequacy of the corpus fund dedicated to O&M of
         MPCS is critical for longevity of the infrastructure. Established mechanisms may lack sustainable
         financing and hinder the maintenance of infrastructure. To address this risk, the government created
         a window for states to finance disaster mitigation investments, informed by the experience from this
         project.
        Risk of reduced government ownership or political commitment. This is a moderate risk. Political
         changes could lead to shifts in policy priorities. Governmental and stakeholders’ commitment may
         reduce over time affecting the sustainability of project benefits.
        Economic risks. This is a moderate risk. Economic fluctuations may influence the availability of
         funds for necessary upgrades and maintenance of the investments completed under the project.
         Inflation and the rising costs of materials and labor may not be fully anticipated in budgeting for the
         O&M needs of the project after closing.
        Social risks. This is a moderate risk. Community institutions have been initiated in this project and
         stakeholder engagement may wane over time. To mitigate this risk, the states may need to continue
         engaging these community institutions during emergencies and encourage them to participate when
         there is no emergency in using and maintaining the facilities they oversee.
        Environmental risks and of exposure to natural disasters: This is a high risk. The United Nations
         ranks India as having an extremely high mortality rate risk due to extreme vulnerability and exposure
         to multiple natural disasters. Most cities are exposed to multiple hazards: a study of 144 Indian cities
         noted that 120 cities were at risk from flooding, 52 from landslides, and 40 from earthquakes. With
         sea level rise, most of India’s largest cities (Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata) were at risk of storm surges
         and damaging floods. Unexpected severe weather events could result in damage that exceeds
         available funds.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank team designed this project to support the country’s plan to reduce disaster risk at its
  coastal regions. The technical, financial, and economic aspects focused on capacity building of the
  participating states and investing in disaster resilient infrastructure to enhance response and resilience to
  hydro-meteorological events. This project was the second phase of the first World Bank-funded project in
  India exclusively focusing on ex-ante disaster risk mitigation. The World Bank team replicated the design
  of the preceding project, identified the coastal communities in the target states as primary beneficiaries to
  benefit from cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure and early warning systems, and focused on increasing
  state level DRM capacity. The World Bank team designed the project informed by the following lessons
  from the preceding phase, other disaster risk management projects in India, and international practice: (i)
  increasing investments in disaster risk mitigation – both physical infrastructure (emergency cyclone
  shelters, access routes) and in improved EWDSs – may reduce casualties; (ii) GIS-based risk analyses

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



  together with community consultations could form a more comprehensive needs assessment to
  strengthen the criteria for site selection and design of investments such as shelters; (iii) engaging
  communities to adopt a long-term strategy for operating and maintaining could help sustain these assets
  in states with highly recurrent natural hazards. assets such as having especially in. For example, Odisha
  established Cyclone Shelter Management & Maintenance Committees (CSM & MCs) for each shelter as
  dedicated implementation/ management unit with clear roles for its staff to work on both on-going and
  emergency projects; and (iv) adopting a strong disaster response mechanism to save lives and
  livelihoods by refocusing efforts away from response – rebuilding infrastructure – to adaptation and
  preparedness by investing in disaster resilient water and flood management, enhancing capacities of
  affected communities, boosting early warning communication systems, etc.

  The World Bank team adapted the results framework from the preceding project to integrate lessons
  learned and refocused the PDO of the previous phase to emphasize the outcome of the participating
  states’ enhanced capacity to plan and respond to disasters. The World Bank team identified mitigating
  measures to address potential safeguard issues. Project Implementation Units (PIUs) were established.
  Preparatory documents, safeguards instruments, financial management and procurement manuals, and a
  first 18-month Procurement Plan were in place. However, the World Bank team did not identify adequate
  outcome indicators in its results framework to strengthen the causal link between the outputs and the
  expected outcomes relative to enhanced capacity of the target states to plan and respond to disasters.
  (see Section 9 M&E below).

  Overall, the quality of Bank supervision at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory. The Bank team
  incorporated lessons learned from the first phase of this project and other similar disaster risk reduction
  projects in the country and global experience to improve design. The Bank team focused on boosting
  capacity at the state level to ensure sustainability of the interventions. However, the Bank team did not
  adequately capture the link between the outputs and the expected outcomes relative to the enhanced
  capacity of the states to plan and respond to disasters. The Bank team also did not adequately
  assess the implementation and capacity risks.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted 16 supervision missions over the eight-year implementation period,
 including virtual ones during the pandemic. The team was staffed with the appropriate experts and were
 mostly in-country staff, with some international staff, and experienced technical consultants to support the
 government. The team participated in the Project Steering Committee (PSC) meetings and conducted
 frequent field visits and additional technical missions as needed. The team suggested corrective measures
 and identified challenges in ISRs and Aide Memoires. The team addressed the initial staffing delays by
 adding meetings and technical missions for on-ground assistance. The Bank team addressed frequent
 PMU staff changes by accelerating procurement approval processes. Differing capacities of the states
 slowed project implementation. Sectoral experts assisted in conducting training where the PMU and SPIUs
 faced capacity gaps. NCRMP I and NCRMP II overlapped in implementation. The PSC meetings were
 conducted at the same time so that older participant states shared knowledge with newcomers on how to


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



 implement World Bank-financed projects. The Bank team ensured that the PMU played a strong
 coordinating role to fill variations in governance, political structure, and processes of the project states.

 The team conducted the Mid Term Review (MTR) in 2018 and aided the PMU and SPIUs formulate an
 action plan to resolve procurement issues that delayed implementation. However, the government request
 to cancel infeasible investments and revise the indicators in the results framework took over two years after
 the MTR further delaying the improvements. The team used restructurings to achieve the PDO with
 reduced resources and reduced number of participating states. The pandemic and subsequent lockdowns
 paused project activities, but the World Bank team implemented virtual monitoring, and extended timelines
 to address urgent pandemic-related needs. The states were affected by cyclones during implementation
 and had to shift to response delaying the implementation of building resilience.

 The Bank team did not sufficiently address the shortcomings in the RF and M&E system during the
 restructurings.

 Overall, the quality of Bank team supervision is rated Satisfactory with moderate shortcomings. Periodic
 trainings could have replaced demand driven training, especially in procurement where staff changes, new
 SPIUs lacking familiarity with World Bank processes, could have exchanged experience with the SPIUs
 who were more familiar with these processes (see Section 10 Other Issues, Procurement below). Many
 challenges beyond the control of both the World Bank and the country and their participating states - such
 as COVID-19 pandemic, the numerous cyclones that strained the capacity of the target states - were
 addressed through restructurings, cancelled funds, and reallocation of resources within the framework of
 the original project design, to achieve the PDO.

 The overall Bank performance at entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory, and at supervision Satisfactory
 with minor shortcomings. The overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Theory of Change, first formulated during the restructurings, provided a reasonable causal link
 between the outputs from the activities and expected outcomes of the PDO. The PDO was well formulated
 and captured the investments made to reduce vulnerability to hydro-meteorological events and the
 expected enhanced capacity of the participating states to plan, respond, and reduce their risks to recurring
 hazards. The M&E design relied on a management information system (MIS) initiated under NCRMP I but
 did not consider the six target states. The indicators in the results framework encompassed a considerable
 scope of the interventions proposed but did not capture all outcomes. The intermediate results indicators
 adequately captured the contribution of the activities and investment outputs toward contributing to


                                                                                                       Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



 outcomes. However, the outcome of enhanced capacity of state entities to effectively plan and respond to
 disasters itself was less appropriately defined and appeared to have been limited to “presenting” reports
 rather than aiming at an overall improved capacity to effectively plan for and respond to disasters. For
 example, the ICR notes that none of the outcome indicator quantified the utilization of knowledge created
 or measured to what extent they were integrated into standard operating procedures or frameworks of key
 institutions. Furthermore, no indicators measured or tracked the rate at which authorities or institutions
 have implemented recommendations. Baseline data was to be collected during implementation as part of
 the Baseline, Monitoring, and Evaluation (BME) study to help establish more realistic targets during
 restructuring. Another shortcoming of the results framework was the lack of state specific outcome
 indicators.



b. M&E Implementation
  The NDMA implemented the earlier M&E system as designed during phase 1 of the project. The NDMA
  PMU relied on emails, Excel files, and updated presentations for M&E arrangements. Some states, such
  as West Bengal, developed an MIS for its use but this was not replicated by the other states. A Benefit,
  Monitoring, and Evaluation study (BME) study was conducted to establish the baselines, to facilitate
  appropriate targets. Since this was conducted during implementation, results of the study were to inform
  more realistic targets at midterm and establish achievable targets of outcome indicators at closing.
  However, the study was perception-based only. A cost-benefit analysis of the different investments was
  to be part of the BME but was not completed in time. The project did not use a technology-based
  advanced MIS to monitor each participating state in different stages of preparation and implementation.
  The identified indicators in the results framework adequately monitored progress toward achieving the
  PDO, although not all relevant outcome indicators were included in the results framework as noted
  above. The SPIUs and PMU, the PSCs, and Project Oversight Committees (POCs), formed by key
  department heads, regularly monitored progress but not beyond the output levels. Datasets in the web-
  DCRA-DSS or other risk assessment studies conducted under the project have not yet been used to
  produce other useful baseline studies. The BME study provided the project outcomes through a midterm
  survey conducted in April 2022 and an end-term survey conducted in March 2023. The BME study
  conducted discussions with 20 focus groups, interviews with 2,000 households, and 50 key informants
  who identified qualitative outcomes. Most of the households information collected centered around their
  perceptions about the project activities rather than quantitatively monitoring and evaluating the actual
  outputs and outcomes according to the results framework.

  Other outcomes such as the increase in agricultural productivity because these rehabilitated
  embankments protected a wider area from saline intrusion or avoided damages in loss of lives or
  property because of disaster risk reduction related infrastructure investments were not identified as
  outcomes. These were not monitored.



c. M&E Utilization
  The World Bank team used the progress reports submitted by the PMU and the PIUs to inform the
  mission discussions, Aide Memoires, ISRs, and the restructuring papers. Management also used the
  progress reports regularly monitored by SPIUs to measure progress against the outputs in the results
  framework. The information monitored was made public. The PMU sought asset utilization reports from
  SPIUs following cyclones or disasters to inform mid-course corrections, such as in the O&M

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



  arrangements of the shelters. However, there were no state-specific asset utilization and this lack limited
  the use of such reports. The ICR reported that the potential for cross-learning among experienced and
  new states, was not fully exploited. the M&E data were utilized in an effective manner to track progress,
  monitor project activities, and record results against the PDO.

  The overall Quality of M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: The project was assigned a Category “A” under the World Bank’s
   environmental safeguards. The following safeguard policies were triggered: Operational Policy (OP)4.01 on
   Environmental Assessment, OP4.04 on Natural Habitats, and OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources. The
   ICR reported that compliance with environmental safeguards was Moderately Satisfactory but did not
   describe the compliance rating for each policy. The World Bank’s Operations Portal noted Moderately
   Satisfactory compliance for OP4.01, Satisfactory compliance for OP4.04 and for OP4.11. The project
   prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF). The environmental impacts were associated with the construction of buildings, roads,
   bridges, underground electrical cabling (UGEC), and repairs of the existing embankment, installation of
   towers and poles for mounting alert sirens. Impacts on vegetation, drainage, air quality, noise levels, and
   occupational health and safety were anticipated. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
   was conducted for subprojects with potential adverse impacts. Before commencement of civil works, the
   PIUs obtained regulatory approvals including coastal regulation zone clearances and required preparation
   of subproject Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) in bidding documents. Site restoration was
   implemented after the construction phase. Regular third-party independent audits were conducted and
   found no significant negative environmental and social (E&S) impacts were found. The first phase of this
   project (NCRMP I) provided groundwork for environmental safeguards that applied to this project.
   Nonetheless, safeguards standards needed to accommodate the unique environmental contexts of different
   states. According to the ICR, the PIUs conducted subproject assessments using screening forms.
   Environmentally and socially appropriate site selection avoided adverse impacts. The project did not result
   in removal of physical cultural resources nor affect critical ecosystems (ICR, paragraph 58).

   Social Safeguards: The project triggered OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The expected social
   impacts included temporary livelihood disturbances associated with the construction and a modest loss of
   land. The ICR did not report on compliance, but the World Bank’s Operations Portal indicated Moderately
   Satisfactory compliance. The SPIUs implemented the civil works in accordance with the Indigenous
   People’s Instrument and Operational Policy 4.12 of the World Bank. Though the project coastal population
   included some population of Scheduled Tribes (STs), the project activities did not result in any adverse
   impact on the STs. No grievances were received during implementation. The project did not result in
   involuntary resettlement. In Maharashtra, land was acquired from 28 households for saline embankment
   construction. The PIU prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and compensated the affected
   households in accordance with the prevailing laws on land acquisition. The RAPs were prepared, and

                                                                                                   Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



   Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) were signed between the state governments and the affected
   households. According to the PIU, the minor grievances were received and resolved at the field level.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The financial management adopted for this project followed those implemented
   under the first phase of the project. Substantial fiduciary risk was noted because of the participation of
   target states. Not all participating states were familiar with World Bank financial management policies. The
   Project Management Unit (PMU) and the State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs) hired FM specialists.
   However, delayed fund flows persisted and complicated financial management compliance. The FM
   Manual called for financial flows to be managed through World Bank reimbursements after the PMU
   submitted interim unaudited financial reports (IUFRs). Some IUFRs reported discrepancies in expenditures
   because component-wise investments were not detailed, and they called for improved granular financial
   reporting. Inadequate or delayed staffing in the FM department posed additional challenges. Audits were
   frequently delayed. In some cases, these were of low quality. Such audits raised questions about financial
   transparency, which affected the project’s credibility. The World Bank team confirmed in January 16, 2025
   that qualified opinions were satisfactorily resolved. Continuous adjustments in FM practices were adopted
   and improvements implemented.

   Procurement: The project’s procurement processes complied with the World Bank’s guidelines (ICR,
   paragraph 62). Challenges marked implementation. The internal clearance-related delays affected
   payments to contractors and consultants. The PMU at NDMA did not ensure timely procurement and
   contract management interventions. The implementing agency did not have a dedicated team to oversee
   progress and tackle obstacles. Both the PMU and SPIUs did not monitor payments in a timely manner. The
   World Bank task team clarified in January 15, 2025 that there were slippages although not across all states
   and not throughout the project period. Procurement officials changed. Over time, these processes
   improved as the PMU and SPIUs gained experience and complied with World Bank policies.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                     Page 23 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



Quality of M&E                   Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The project operations offered the following lessons:

      If standardized templates are customized for each participating target state, this may
         contribute to attributing how the risk from cyclones and other hydro-meteorological
         hazards are reduced in each state. In this project, project investments highlighted the
         effective response to Cyclones Amphan and Yaas. The investments adhered to standardized
         disaster resilient design principles. Quality construction complied with the latest codes and
         World Bank guidelines. The MPCS design created standardized templates that allowed
         customization to meet specific needs of each state. The designs of these investments
         underwent rigorous quality audits. High quality components formed part of the final
         structures.
        If planning for O&M, realistic expectations are important considerations. In this project,
         community institutions, such as the CSMMC fostered ownership and encouraged vigilant
         maintenance and repair of the infrastructure. Adequate budgeting would fund long-term
         maintenance and provide for arising unexpected repair costs following extreme weather
         events.
        Shelters used for other purposes benefit the community. In this project, the shelters
         were used for other functions after disasters. Communities embraced its use beyond during
         emergency, to serve as hubs for community gatherings, educational programs, and
         delivering community health services.
        A formal knowledge exchange platform may facilitate the spread of best practices and
         innovative solutions to reduce vulnerabilities. In this project, all agencies including
         SPIUs, the supervision consultant, and PMU began collaborating during the inception stage.
         However, the national, state, and local agencies did not formalize channels where they
         could share knowledge and best practices among the states. Regular workshops, webinars,
         and collaborative platforms could help facilitate the exchange of information, share
         experiences of what works, and replicate innovative solutions such as conducting periodic
         mock drills and awareness campaigns, visual aids and translation during training. These aids
         could facilitate timely response, overcome language barriers, and promote better
         understanding in reducing vulnerabilities.
        A programmatic approach for DRM projects may facilitate progressive achievement of
         DRM related objectives. In this project, design was built on the outcomes achieved under
         the first phase, acknowledging the knowledge accumulated from the preceding phase.
         Enhancing institutional capabilities demonstrated the continuing benefits of utilizing existing
         frameworks. For example, as NCRMP I implementation was ending, this phase was starting.
         Conducting combined Phases I and II PSC meetings because of the programmatic nature of
         the approach to DRM facilitated knowledge sharing and strengthened institutional
         relationships. Newly participating states benefited from the more experienced ones on
         complying with the policies of World Bank-financed projects. The longer-term engagement



                                                                                                     Page 24 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Proj-II (P144726)



         fostered by a programmatic approach lends to a realistic achievement of DRM related
         objectives.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The quality of the ICR is rated Substantial. The ICR provided a detailed overview of the project, and the TOC
provided a clear narrative that justified the ratings. The narrative focused on results. The report was internally
consistent and followed the OPCS guidelines. The annexes provided additional information to bolster the
results. The explanations in Annex 1 under the results framework were useful. The ICR is candid,
acknowledging the shortcomings of adopting the M&E system in place for the first phase of the project, the lack
of better indicators to reflect the outcomes achieved and, the missed opportunities in improving the design of
capacity building interventions during the restructurings. Lessons were clear, useful, and based on the evidence
from the ICR with recommended areas for improvement. Quality of the ICR is hence rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 25
