     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024353

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P145263                                    LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                         Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-53580,IDA-59860,IDA-63690,IDA-        28-Feb-2018                                         31,330,890.56
 D4220

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Jan-2014                               29-Feb-2024

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             2,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            32,481,781.19                                               0.00

 Actual                                        31,330,890.56                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Rima Al-Azar               Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




 P161154_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161154                                    Lisungi Safety Nets System Project - AF ( P161154 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



 30-Mar-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00



 P166143_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P166143                                    LISUNGI Safety Nets System Project II ( P166143 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Feb-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the 2014 Financing Agreement (FA Schedule 1, p. 5), and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD
   2014, p. 17), the Project Development Objective (PDO) was to “Establish the key building blocks of a national
   safety net program and pilot a cash transfer program to improve access to health and education services of
   poorest households in participating areas". In 2017, in order to reflect the project’s scaling up and the
   introduction of a new activity (Income Generating Activities – IGA), the PDO was refined to " Strengthen the
   social safety net system and its programs aimed at improving both access to health and education services
   and productivity among poor and vulnerable households in participating areas." (PAD 2017, p. 1 and FA 2017




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



   Schedule 1, p. 4). For the purpose of this ICRR, the revised PDO (2017) will be used and can be unpacked as
   follows:

   Objective 1. Strengthen the safety net system and its programs;

   Objective 2. Improve access to health and education services for poor and vulnerable households in
   participating areas; and

   Objective 3. Improve productivity for poor and vulnerable households in participating areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components:

   Component 1: Establishment of key building blocks of a national safety net program and
   enhancement of local capacities. (Original financing: US$1.2 million of which US$0.2 million from the
   International Development Association (IDA) and US$1 million from government funds; Actual cost at
   closing: US$2.0 million). This component aimed to establish the basic elements of an effective national
   safety net system. Activities included: (i) the development of a Management Information System (MIS); (ii)
   establishment of a unique registry of potential safety net beneficiaries; (iii) the setting up of an Information,
   Education, and Communication campaign (IEC); (iv) the setting up of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
   procedures; (v) technical assistance to evaluate and finance studies to address the needs of specific
   populations such as the disabled and the indigenous population; (vi) procurement of equipment and
   software to make the system functional; and (vii) training of Lisungi project staff.

   Component 2: Strengthening the demand-side of services through cash transfers. (Original financing:
   US$12.2 million, of which US$1.4 million from the IDA and US$10.8 million from government funds; Actual
   cost at closing: US$23.5 million). This component aimed to establish a cash transfer program in order to
   increase the consumption of the poorest households with children and/or elderly members. Households with
   children would receive conditional cash transfers (CCT) and elderly beneficiaries would receive
   unconditional cash transfers (UCT). Activities under this component included: (i) beneficiary identification
   and selection based on a multi-step process including community-based targeting, a proxy means test
   (PMT), and community validation; (ii) payment of benefits to eligible households on a quarterly basis for a
   period of 24 months; and (iii) coordination with health and education sectors to facilitate access to services
   and monitor conditions.

   Component 3: Project management, M&E. (Original financing: US$3.6 million, of which US$0.4 million
   IDA and US$3.2 million government funds; Actual cost at closing: US$6.1 million). This component aimed to

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



   ensure that the implementing structures became operational and included the following (i) hiring of (non-civil
   servant) staff; (ii) procurement of equipment and operating costs directly linked to the daily management of
   the project at the central and local levels; (iii) regular internal audits and annual external audits; (iv) training
   of key personnel at the central and local levels; and (v) development of project manuals and procedures.

   As mentioned earlier, Component 2 was modified during implementation in order to introduce a new activity:
   support to IGAs. In addition, in 2019, the project partnered with the United Nations High Commissioner for
   Refugees (UNHCR) to expand its geographical focus, integrate refugees among the project’s beneficiaries,
   and implement activities in the Likouala region (ICR, p. 14).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project had six restructurings; two of which were ‘Level Two’ restructurings:

       1. In March 2017, the first Additional Financing (AF1) and restructuring revised the original PDOs and
            increased the original credit amount by US$10 million.
       2.   In June 2018, the second restructuring removed counterpart financing since the government had not
            contributed funds to the project since December 2016.
       3.   In February 2019, the second AF (AF2) added another IDA credit of US$12.84 million and an IDA
            grant of US$9.16 million from the IDA Window for Host Communities and Refugees (WHR).
       4.   In October 2019, the fourth restructuring extended the loan and project closing date.
       5.   In September 2022, the fifth restructuring extended the loan and project closing date.
       6.   In February 2024, the sixth restructuring focused on reallocating funds between subcomponents and
            partial cancellation of funds.

   As a result of these restructurings, the Project Development Indicators (PDI) were revised by (1) increasing
   the targeted number of beneficiaries (due to an increase in financing); (2) introducing an indicator to capture
   support to IGAs (as a new activity); (3) introducing indicators to monitor number of refugees and indigenous
   populations (IPs) reached (as two new categories of beneficiaries); and (4) introducing new sub-indicators
   (e.g., percentages of women (female), social pensions, other cash transfers (conditional cash transfers or
   CCTs)) to reflect corporate results indicators (CRI) (ICR, p. 7).

   Though AF2 established linkages across the World Bank-financed human development portfolio to tackle
   supply-side constraints in health and education (ICR, p. 8); however, neither the PDO nor the PDIs were
   modified to reflect this new balance between demand and supply side interventions.

   In order to scale-up the initial pilot project designed in 2014 into a national social safety net project, the
   project was extended on three occasions for a total of six years: (1) The first AF extended the closing date
   from 28 February 2018 to 31 December 2019. (2) The second AF extended the project by three years,
   setting the new closing date to 31 December 2022. (3) The restructuring in 2022 extended the closing date
   to 29 February 2024 (ICR, p. 8).




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                         Page 4 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



               Rationale
               The project was highly relevant since it addressed the development challenges faced by the
               Republic of Congo, namely: (1) very low education and health outcomes, (2) high unemployment,
               especially among youth, and (3) small and fragmented social protection services (PAD 214, p. 15 and ICR,
               p.2). It was also relevant to the needs of the people by (1) adapting and responding to the needs of the
               people as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic; and (2) introducing and supporting IGAs.

               The project was aligned with the Government’s strategies and sectoral policies. Specifically, it was in
               line with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper 2012-2016 which emphasized governance
               (political and economic), diversification of the economy, infrastructure development, social inclusion, and
               equity (PAD 2014, p. 13). At appraisal, the Ministry of Social Affairs, Humanitarian Action, and Solidarity
               (Ministère des Affaires Sociales de l'Action Humanitaire et de la Solidarité or MASAH) had recently
               completed a new National Social Action Policy (Politique Nationale d'Action Sociale or PNAS) envisioning
               better targeted, comprehensive safety net programs (PAD 2014, p. 13).

               The project was also fully aligned with the World Bank’s strategies throughout the project’s lifetime.
               Specifically, the project supported the World Bank's Country Partnership Strategy’s (CPS FY13-16) Pillar 2
               (Vulnerability and Resilience) which sought to strengthen social protection and envisaged providing
               advisory assistance to the MASAH for the implementation of the PNAS (CPS Report No. 71713-CG, p.
               19). The AF1 (2017) was also aligned with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) of the Republic of
               Congo, which highlighted the importance of increasing access of the population to social programs (PAD
               2017, p. 1). At closing, objectives remained fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for
               FY20-24 (Report No. 126962-CG), which was extended until 2025. In particular, the project contributes to
               the CPF Focus Area 2 which aims to build human capital and enhance resilience for social inclusion (CPF,
               p. 30). Finally, the project contributed to the World Bank’s global strategy of reducing absolute poverty and
               promoting shared prosperity.

               In addition to being fully aligned with national and Bank strategies, the project maintained its relevance
               through its adaptability to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic by using the systems it has put in
               place to quickly register 250,000 beneficiary households who were able to receive cash transfers to
               mitigate the economic impact of lockdowns (ICR, p. 25).


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Strengthen the safety net system and its programs


                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




Rationale
The Theory of Change (ToC) held that by (i) establishing a Single Social Registry (Registre Social
Unique or RSU) as a national database of the poor and a payment system; (ii) setting up a MIS and a
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM); (iii) training Lisungi project staff; and (iv) carrying out
information campaigns, the social protection system would be improved by creating a single entry
point for multiple interventions for the poor and vulnerable Congolese; efficiency of cash transfers
would be enhanced; and citizens would know better their rights.

Prior to the project, in Congo, the social protection system was small and fragmented. In 2011, Congo,
an oil-producing country, had a high poverty rate estimated to be 46.5 percent and high inequality with the top
quintile of the population retaining more than 52 percent of the overall household income PAD 2014, p. 14).
Congo’s social protection system was in adequate to address this high poverty rate. It was also underfunded
with MASAH’s budget constituting only was only 0.51 percent of the 2012 revised national budget (PAD 2017,
p. 3) and with an extremely low social protection coverage (0.9 percent in 2005) compared to 14.3 percent for
Sub-Saharan Africa (PAD 2017, p.3). Furthermore, it lacked the necessary components to make it effective
(targeting, monitoring, etc.). The project aimed at strengthening the social safety system to allow a more
equitable sharing of oil prosperity to generate employment and reduce both poverty and inequality (PAD
2014, p. 13). It planned to do so by (1) taking a more systematic approach to targeting specific groups of the
populations (the poorest and most vulnerable); (2) consolidating and coordinating cash transfer programs for
the poor and vulnerable population; and (3) strengthening governance and the government's capacity to
manage and design safety net programs (PAD 2014, pp. 16-17).

Outputs and Intermediate Results

The project exceeded almost all the targets it had established under this Outcome, mainly:

The project established a unique registry of potential beneficiaries and a modular MIS. The initial target
was to register 15,000 potential beneficiary households which was increased to 80,000 (AF2). By 2024, the
project had succeeded in registering 893,058 households (more than 10 times the revised target) which
consisted of around two-thirds of Congo’s population. This made Congo the country with the highest Single
Social Registry (Registre Social Unique or RSU) coverage in Sub-Saharan Africa (ICR, p. 12). This success
was partly due to the ability of the project to register the 250,000 beneficiary households of the COVID-19
project, another Bank-funded operation.

The project surpassed all its initial (and revised targets) for the number of beneficiaries of the Social
Safety Net (SSN) programs (see Table 1) with the highest being the social pension beneficiaries (elderly)
which were more than four times what was initially targeted.

Table 1. Number and type of beneficiary (targeted and reached)

                                                                             Actual
                                                      Initial   Revised                     Percentage
Type of beneficiary                                                          achieved
                                                      target    Target                      achieved
                                                                             (2024)
Social safety net (SSN) programs                      50,000    80,000       172,814        216%
SSN programs (female)                                 25,000    40,000       89,413         224%
Percentage female                                     50%       50%          52%            104%
SSN programs (social pensions)                        3,500     10,000       45,789         458%

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




SSN programs (refugees)                               18,000    18,000       24,514          136%
SSN programs (indigenous)                             0         3,000        4,887           163%

Several “building blocks” of a social safety net program were established. The project set up a modular
MIS system to enroll potential beneficiaries in the different cash transfer programs, track payments, monitor
compliance with conditions. It also supported monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to produce administrative
reports and put in a place a GRM. However, the GRM was only able to process 36 percent of the more than
17,000 complaints received and did not achieve the target of addressing 70 percent of grievances (ICR, p.
29).

Several information campaigns were implemented. However, the ICR does not provide any information
regarding these campaigns (number, frequency, quality, etc). The Results Framework (RF) indicates that 100
percent of beneficiaries know their rights and responsibilities regarding the program rules and entitlements
(ICR, p. 29) and equally 100 percent of beneficiaries report they are aware of IGA’s objectives and
entitlements (ICR, p 29). However, and as the ICR points out, it would have been preferable to do a proper
assessment with specific questions to assess the degree of beneficiaries’ awareness (ICR, p.
29). Furthermore, the high number of complaints mainly from households who would have like to be included
in the program (ICR, p. 29) is an indication that the communication of eligibility criteria was not effective.

A high number of project personnel were trained. The project had initially established a target of 170 staff
to be trained at the MASAH’s decentralized offices (Circonscription d'Action Sociale - CAS) (ICR, p. 30). The
project succeeded in building the capacity of 418 project personnel, thus achieving 245 percent of the original
target.

Outcomes

      Increase in number of World Bank-financed projects using the RSU. Several World Bank-funded
       projects (e.g. Health Sector project (P143849), the Skills Development for Employability Project
       (P128628), the Urban Development and Poor Neighborhood Upgrading Project (P146933) and the
       Social Protection and Youth Productive Inclusion Project (P174178)) used the RSU to register their
       beneficiaries which led to the significant expansion of the RSU (ICR, p. 27).
      Buy-in by other development partners. Other development partners (e.g., Agence Française de
       Développement – AFD and the United Nations Children’s Fund - UNICEF) provided technical and
       financial support indicating the success of the project in enhancing Congo’s national social safety net
       system (ICR, p. 13).
      Rapid response to the COVID-19 pandemic which was among the fastest in sub-Saharan Africa
       (ICR, p. 19). The systems established by the project permitted the identification and rapid targeting of
       250,000 households who benefited from one-time emergency cash transfers. It also enabled the
       government to introduce mobile payments in urban areas, where the pandemic’s impact was most
       severe (ICR, p. 25).
      Use as a policy tool to mitigate the effects of fuel subsidy reform. The safety net system was also
       used to accompany the International Monetary Fund (IMF)’s conditions on increased social sector
       investment. In mid-2024, the government used the National Safety Net Program (Programme National
       de Filets Sociaux or PNFS) to make the first round of domestically financed payments to offset the
       adverse impact of fuel subsidy reforms on the poorest households (ICR, p. 24).



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



However, an important outcome – the improved efficiency of the payment system – was not tracked. There is
no information on whether the cash transfers were done regularly and in a timely manner. Though the project
had envisaged to monitor the “percentage of cash transfer beneficiary households who receive payments in a
timely manner”, this indicator was removed due to difficulties in tracking payments to nomadic beneficiaries in
Likouala (ICR, p. 7).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve access to health and education services for poor and vulnerable households in participating areas

Rationale
The ToC held that by providing (1) conditional cash transfers to households; and (2) performance-
based grants to health facilities and education support to schools in Likouala, poor and vulnerable
households’ access to health and education services would be improved in participating areas.

In Congo, at the time of project appraisal in 2014, health and education outcomes were low.
Throughout the country, health outcomes were poor and there were large inequalities between urban
and rural areas and between different socioeconomic groups. The main shortcomings in health outcome
indicators were: (a) High infant mortality rate. In rural areas, the rate was estimated at 51 per 1,000 births
compared to 45 in urban areas, while the same rate was 52 among the poorest 20 percent population of the
country and 36 among the richest 20 percent. (b) Low full vaccination of children aged 12-23 months. Only
49.3 percent of urban children aged 12- 23 months old have received all required vaccinations, while even
fewer rural children in that age group have been fully vaccinated (39.7 percent). (c) Low prenatal exams. Only
73 percent of women with no education benefitted from antenatal care during their last pregnancy (PAD 2014,
pp. 14-15).

In education, despite improvements in a few outcome indicators such as the enrollment rate, there
were still major shortcomings in the internal efficiency of the Congolese education system, such as:
(a) More than one-third of the population (38.4 percent) had not completed primary school, and only 3 percent
had gone on to higher education. (b) The average number of years of schooling achieved by boys aged 6 to
14 years old was 2.5, while that of girls of the same age was 2.6. (c) The primary school completion rate was
low (83 percent) and the dropout rate was significant (5.7 percent). Furthermore, there were high disparities
at the regional level - with much lower access in rural areas; and among different socio-economic groups –
with poor children more likely to drop out of school due to a lack of income to pay for transport, school
materials, and extra fees (PAD 2014, p. 15).

Outputs and Interim Results

The RF includes information on the number of households reached with CCT (73,617 households) of which
6.6 percent were IPs. However, no information is provided on the initial target to determine whether the



                                                                                                 Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



project achieved its target or not. Furthermore, neither the ICR nor the RF provide information on the number
or sex of children who benefited from these CCTs.

Table 2. CCT beneficiaries

                                                                                Actual
                                                                    Revised                    Percentage
Indicator                                            Initial target             achieved
                                                                    Target                     achieved
                                                                                (2024)
Beneficiaries of Safety Nets programs (CCTs)         n/a          60,500        73,617         n/a
Beneficiaries of social safety net programs -
                                                     n/a          3,000         4,887          n/a
Indigenous population (CCTs)

In addition, the ToC includes supply level outputs (education sector support provided to schools and
performance-based grants to health facilities) (ICR, p. 4). However, the ICR does not provide any information
(number of schools/health facilities supported).

The RF includes three Interim Results Indicators, only one would be considered as such (Percentage point
increase of pregnant women receiving the maternal health package), the other two (Percentage points
increase in enrolment rates in primary schools by grades and gender and percentage points increase of
children under 1 year-old in with vaccination card up-to-date) are outcome indicators. All three indicators were
dropped after AF2 (ICR, p. 30). Nevertheless, the PIU continued monitoring the percentage point increase of
pregnant women receiving the maternal health package which was achieved (85 percent achieved versus 80
percent targeted).

Outcomes

Based on three different sources (the Results Framework, the Impact Evaluation, and the Borrower’s ICR),
the project exceeded almost all the targets it had established under this Outcome, mainly:

According to the RF, the project achieved the following outcomes:

      Increase to 80 percent the beneficiaries aged 12-23 months who had regular bi-monthly visits to
       health centers (ICR, p. 11); and
      Increase to 97 percent the children aged 6-14 years attending school at least 80 percent of the time
       (ICR, p. 11).



Table 3. Outcome indicators for Objective 2

                                                                              Actual
                                                     Initial    Revised                       Percentage
Indicator                                                                     achieved
                                                     target     Target                        achieved
                                                                              (2024)
Percentage of infant beneficiaries aged 0-11
months who had regular monthly visits to health      70         90            64              71%
centers


                                                                                                     Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




Percentage of beneficiaries aged 12-23 months
                                                    70           70            80              114%
who had regular bi-monthly visits to health centers
Percentage of beneficiary children aged 6-14 years
                                                    95           90            97              197%
attending school at least 80 percent of the time

The outcome that was not achieved was the “Percentage of infant beneficiaries aged 0-11 months who had
regular monthly visits to health centers” which had a target of 90 percent yet the project was able to achieve
64 percent (ICR, p. 11). Furthermore, the “percentage points increase of children under 1 year-old in
participating areas with vaccination card up-to-date” had an initial target of 62 percent. After AF1, this target
was decreased to 40 percent due to shortage of vaccine in health centers. After AF2, the indicator was
marked for deletion. Nevertheless, the PIU continued monitoring it and the ICR states that at project closing
the target reached 61 percent. While it is true that this means that the result surpassed by 195 percent the
revised target (ICR, p. 31), the ICRR would not consider this as a success since it fell short of the original
target of 62 percent.

According to the impact evaluation covering activities from 2015 to 2022 in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, and
Cuvette (ICR, p. 14), the project contributed to a decrease in the following:

      Percentage of children aged 0 to 11 months who had not had medical visits by 5.8 percent;
      Percentage of children aged 12 to 23 months who did not have regular compulsory medical visits by
       4.2 percent;
      Percentage of unvaccinated children aged 0 to 23 months by 4.2 percent; and
      Percentage of children aged 6 to 14 who did not attend school decreased by 4.8 percent.

The ICR does not discuss the robustness of the methodology underlying the impact evaluation, nor whether
such a decrease is significant.

The impact evaluation for Likouala was still ongoing by the time of the drafting of the ICR.



According to the Borrower ICR, the project was able to achieve the following outcomes for the Lisungi
beneficiary households who were able to (1) have higher access to public services (education, health,
drinking water, and electricity) than non-beneficiary households (gains in these indicators ranging from 4-17
percent; (2) increase their food budget by 33 percent from 1,500 FCFA per day to 2,000 FCFA;
(3) increase their possession of durable goods; and (4) have higher exam pass rates from 60 percent
in 2021 (before Lisungi support) to 96 percent in 2023 in schools that received project support. The source of
these indicators is not available.

The project was able to achieve these outcomes by (1) implementing accompanying measures to strengthen
the demand side (e.g., carrying out home visits and issuing health cards to beneficiaries in Likouala
exempting them from essential health services fees and running functional literacy and numeracy
campaigns); and (2) by supporting directly supply-side constraints in both the health and education sectors
and, indirectly, by partnering with two Bank-funded projects (e.g., provision of learning material, building
capacity of CAS staff, teacher training and remuneration) (ICR, p. 13). However, the ICR does not provide
information on the effectiveness of such support (e.g., whether the sequencing of the supply level activities


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



was in line with the demand level activities). The project team noted that were challenges in ensuring that
supply-level interventions and CCTs were well-synchronized, in particular in the Likouala region.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Improve productivity for poor and vulnerable households in participating areas

Rationale
The ToC held that by providing productive economic inclusion grants and startup kits and
apprenticeships to youth, asset depletion would be reduced and economic productivity among poor
and vulnerable households, including indigenous peoples and refugees, would be improved.

A top-up cash transfer was provided to select households (either current beneficiaries of the CCT or to other
poor households enrolled in the social registry) on the basis of a short plan outlining proposed IGAs and
included accompanying measures such as training and guidance on how to make a success of the activities
(PAD 2017, p. 10). Furthermore, this activity aimed to increase beneficiaries' access to credit and promote
savings by establishing linkages with micro-finance institutions and/or banks (PAD 2017, p. 10).

The IGA cash transfer was designed to increase productivity and promote empowerment of selected
beneficiaries. The proposed IGAs were meant to be small-scale (undertaken at household level) and could
include (a) the purchase of inputs for gardens or subsistence farming to improve dietary diversity of
households; (b) the establishment of community savings groups; (c) the support to adopt alternative
livelihoods such as the purchase of small equipment, e.g. a sewing machine or the means to deliver goods to
market; and (d) the provision of capacity building activities to ensure that the small scale activities are
operational. Besides that, this activity aimed to increase beneficiaries' access to credit and promote savings
by establishing linkages with micro-finance institutions and/or banks (PAD 2017, p. 10).

Outputs and Interim Results

The project did not fully meet the output targets for this Outcome.

While the project succeeded in achieving 124 percent of the target for the Congolese population, the project
failed to meet the IGA target for indigenous people reaching only 6.5 percent of the initial target (see Table 3).
This was due to several challenges including (1) low literacy and numeracy challenges, (2) lack of agency of
indigenous people (treated as property of ethnic Bantu people), (3) difficulty in identifying productive
opportunities due to their nomadic lifestyles, and (4) challenges in establishing regular coaching schedules.

Table 3. Number of beneficiaries of IGA activities

                                                                               Actual
                                                      Initial    Revised                       Percentage
Indicator                                                                      achieved
                                                      target     Target                        achieved
                                                                               (2024)

                                                                                                   Page 11 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




Beneficiaries of SSN programs (IGA)                  40,000     80,0000       99,197          124%
Beneficiaries of SSN programs (IGA indigenous)       0          9,000         587             6.5%

In addition to the above activity, the project trained a total of 900 young men and women, including 250
refugees and 45 indigenous youth (ICR, p. 15). It also covered the cost of “labor market insertion kits”
consisting of basic tools and equipment for young vocational training graduates to exercise their chosen
trades (ICR, p. 8).

Outcomes

The project had not identified a PDI for this Outcome (improved productivity) but included two IRIs
that were intended to serve as proxies for productivity: (1) the percentage of households reporting that
asset depletion is prevented as a result of CCTs and IGA transfers, and (2) the percentage of beneficiaries
that feel project investment (IGA) reflected their need. Whereas the first could be considered a proxy indicator
at the outcome level, the second is a relevance indicator. In addition, the project had initially envisaged
another proxy indicator to measure productivity (Percentage of beneficiary households with 15 percent
consumption increase) which was deleted in 2019 after AF2. The RF indicated that the project fell three
percentage points short of meeting the target related to asset depletion (see Table 3).

Table 4. Proxy outcome indicators for Outcome 3

                                                                              Actual
                                                     Initial    Revised                       Percentage
Indicator                                                                     achieved
                                                     target     Target                        achieved
                                                                              (2024)
Percentage of households reporting that asset
depletion is prevented as a result of transfers (CCT 50         50            47              94%
and IGA)
Percentage of beneficiary households with 15
                                                     75         n/a           71 (2021)       95%
percent consumption increase



1.Both the completed and ongoing impact evaluations indicate that the project has achieved the
following:

      Decrease in poverty incidence. Between 2015 and 2022, the Lisungi program helped reduce
       poverty by 23.5 percent for project beneficiaries. The positive effect on poverty reduction is higher for
       households who benefitted from CCTs and IGAs than those who received only CCTs. Between 2015
       and 2022, the incidence of poverty among those households experienced a reduction in poverty of
       38.9 percent. (ICR, p. 41).
      Increase in economic productivity. 24 percent of beneficiaries had invested part of their cash
       transfer benefits to open their own micro business in Makoua district, where the analysis was
       conducted.
      Increase in consumption. The first impact evaluation which covered the period 2015-2022, indicated
       that consumption increased by over 30 percentage points in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, and Cuvette
       compared to non-beneficiaries of cash transfers. Midline results for Likouala showed an increase in
       daily household consumption of 25 percent (ICR, p. 41). While the impact evaluation for Likouala has

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 28
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



                                   not yet provided results on human capital, midline results indicate a very strong increase in household
                                   expenditures by 34 percent (ICR, p.14).
                                  Increase in asset accumulation. The value of beneficiary assets increased by a multiple of 3.5
                                   compared to 2.5 for non-beneficiaries in Likouala (ICR, p. 41).
                                  Improved responsiveness to shocks. Beneficiaries often used their savings to respond to shocks.
                                   Households in the control group were likely to ask parents and friends for help, suggesting that the
                                   intervention helped build beneficiary households’ resilience (ICR, p. 41).
                                  Creation of multiplier effect on local economy. The Efficiency Analysis stated that cash transfers
                                   generated multiplier effects on the local economy of up to 1.84 (ICR, p. 42); however, no information is
                                   provided as to how this impact was calculated.

                            The Borrower ICR provides additional information which indicates a more limited impact of the IGA activities
                            than what the ICR has described given the weaknesses in the IGA-related accompanying measures that were
                            provided due to (1) the type of training (more specialized training and coaching on specific livelihood tracks
                            were needed); and (2) the capacities of implementing partners (both the NGOs that lacked specific sectoral
                            expertise and decentralized sectoral government services, such as agricultural extension services, that were
                            under-resourced ) (ICR, p. 47).



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project's overall efficacy is rated Substantial based on the aggregated achievements of project
                            objectives, as discussed above. The project succeeded in setting up the Social Safety Net “architecture”
                            which was used by successive Bank-funded projects as well as by other development organizations. It also
                            achieved several of its targets to improve better access to health and education services. However, the
                            project’s indicators do not allow for understanding the actual number of children assisted, neither does it
                            provide a baseline to assess the degree of change that was achieved. In addition, two important results were
                            not met: (1) Percentage of infant beneficiaries aged 0-11 months who had regular monthly visits to health
                            centers (under Objective 2), and (2) Indigenous people who benefitted from IGA (under Objective 3). Finally,
                            the proxy indicators for productivity were also not fully met.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



          5. Efficiency


                                                                                                                            Page 13 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



Efficiency as analyzed based on coverage, timeliness, cost, capacity, and implementation
arrangements.

In terms of coverage, the project reached a large number of beneficiaries, exceeding most of the initial
targets set. The project was able to register a high number of vulnerable persons as well as provide cash
transfers to a wide range of beneficiaries (elderly, women, youth, refugees and indigenous peoples). This high
coverage and the substantially higher number of beneficiaries reached than originally targeted was partly due to
the scaling up to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic when 250,000 persons were registered to receive a one-
time cash transfer to mitigate the impact of the pandemic (ICR, p. 25).

Inclusion/exclusion errors are not mentioned in the ICR. The project established specific criteria when
selecting beneficiaries which included both a Proxy Means Testing (PMT) and community validation (ICR, p. 18).
Nevertheless, the ICR does not discuss any errors of inclusion/exclusion which are common in social protection
programs. In order to measure its targeting accuracy, the project had initially intended that at least 75 percent of
its beneficiaries were living below the food poverty line. Its targeting achieved ensured that 81 percent of the
total beneficiaries were below the poverty line (ICR, p. 30). While achieving its objective in terms of inclusion,
nevertheless, this means that 19 percent of the project’s beneficiaries were above the poverty line. Furthermore,
the GRM received a high number of complaints (17,000) from persons who were not included and since the rate
of addressing these complaints was low (36 percent) this may be an indication of some exclusion errors;
however, there is insufficient information to make this determination

The project became effective in seven months (ICR, p. iii); however, it later experienced delays due
several operational factors which led to a 14-month extension. The project was delayed for four main
reasons: (1) Coordination challenges among the three sectoral ministries (Social Affairs, Health and Education)
slowed down implementation (ICR, p. 9). (2) From 2016-2017, project implementation was significantly affected
by the shortfall in counterpart funding (ICR, p. 46). (3) In 2022, the project experienced implementation delays
resulting from the PIU’s mobilization for the COVID-19 response. (4) Remoteness of the Likouala region created
logistical challenges which further delayed implementation (ICR, p. 9). As a result, the project closing date was
extended to February 29, 2024 (ICR, p. 8).



The Bank succeeded to a large extent – but not completely - in filling the financial gap created by the
lack of counterpart funding. The US$ 15 million of counterpart financing did not materialize as originally
envisaged which resulted in the temporary suspension of cash transfer payments (ICR, p. 6). In order not to
jeopardize the achievement of the PDO (ICR, p. 6), the World Bank managed to find alternate sources of
funding. In addition, the project had benefitted from favorable exchange rates and efficiency gains. Thus,
available funds were reallocated from the cash transfer subcomponent to the Health and Education
subcomponents (ICR, p. 8).

The project's operational cost was not analyzed in the ICR. The ICR provides the percentage of the budget
allocated per component/subcomponent and estimates that the “cost” of the CCTs is 38.5 percent and that of
IGAs is 18 percent (ICR, p. 45). However, these percentages do not reflect the operational cost of the activity,
but rather the percentage of the budget allocated for the activity. As a result, it is not possible to assess whether
the project’s efficiency and operational costs decreased over time. The information does not allow the
comparative efficiency analysis of the pilot phase versus the scaling up phase nor to compare the efficiency of




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



implementing in rural versus urban areas, in particular whether the introduction of mobile payments improved
efficiency.

Overall project management costs (under component 3) represented 19 percent of the total project
amount. This is below the 21 percent estimated at appraisal (ICR, p. 16).

The Internal Rate of Return (IRR) at the end of the project is higher than originally estimated. Using the
same activities (cash transfers and consumption) to calculate the IRR, and a discount rate of six percent, the
return on investments analysis carried out at the end of the project shows a benefit to cost ratio of 1.11 and an
estimated IRR of 33 percent, which compares favorably to the IRR of 19 percent and benefit to cost ratio of 1.12
estimated at appraisal (ICR, Annex 4, p. 43). By adding the activities to support human capital and economic
inclusion, the ICR calculates the IRR to be 42 percent and the benefit to cost ratio to be 1.14.


Implementation arrangements, while they allowed for greater sectoral integration, created some
inefficiencies due to some coordination challenges and low capacity at the decentralized level. The inter-
sectoral steering committee (Comité d'Orientation Stratégique - COS) which included representatives of the
Ministries in charge of Finance, Social Affairs, Education, and Health ensured greater complementarity and
multi-sectoral integration. However, this arrangement also created coordination challenges and tensions
between the PIU and the MASAH as supervisory Ministry. The ICR does not discuss implementation issues at
the decentralized level. The Borrower ICR points out to difficulties at that level due to a lack of qualified staff and
operating resources which undermined the CAS offices’ involvement (ICR, pp. 46-47).

Overall efficiency findings reflected what would be expected in the operation’s sector.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?              Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         71.80
 Appraisal                                                    19.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         75.00
 ICR Estimate                                                 33.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated High, as development objectives were fully aligned with both the
Government’s as well as partners’ - including the World Bank – priorities. Overall efficacy was rated Substantial,
as the project succeeded in setting up the basic building blocks of a Social Safety Net system and in registering

                                                                                                        Page 15 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



a high number of vulnerable persons. However, the robustness of the methodology used for the Impact
Evaluation is not known so the robustness of the evidence is also not fully known. Efficiency was also rated
Substantial, reflecting what would be expected in the operation’s sector. The aggregated findings are indicative
of a Satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is analyzed across the following dimensions: policy, financial,
organizational, technical capacity regarding the strengthening of a social safety net system.

At the policy level, safety nets have become anchored in Congo’s policy framework. In 2019, the
government issued Decree n° 2019-134 which officially institutionalized the single registry for all social
programs and mandated all such programs to utilize it for identification and targeting. Furthermore, a
complementary decree established data sharing and protection protocols (ICR, p. 12). Since then, safety
nets have become anchored in Congo’s policy framework with increasing ambition, culminating in the
creation of a National Safety Net Program (Programme National de Filets Sociaux or PNFS) by decree n°
2023-1740 in 2023 (ICR, p. 10).



Financial sustainability remains a major challenger due to the difficulty in mobilizing domestic social
protection financing. Nevertheless, the government funded the first round of domestically financed PNFS
payments in mid-2024 to offset the adverse impact of fuel subsidy reforms on the poorest households (ICR,
p. 24). In addition, the government has financed the construction of a new building that will house the RSU
along with the staff of the PNFS (ICR, p. 12).

Organizational strengthening - through the establishment of a single registry, a MIS and a GRM - is
another aspect that contributes to sustaining development outcomes. The operational tools that were
developed (e.g., establishment of the beneficiary registry, the PMT for targeting, MIS, the M&E system) will
be key for further developing and improving the efficiency and allow the further expansion of SP in the
country (ICR, p. 12). As of early 2024, more than 893,000 households – representing around two-thirds of
Congo’s population – were registered in the RSU (ICR, p. 12). Currently, the government is working on
improving the RSU’s interoperability with the civil registration and vital statistics databases which would allow
the scalability of the system (ICR, p. 12).

At the human resources level, the project strengthened MASAH’s capacities at the central and
decentralized levels. The project established a PIU staffed mostly by civil servants. This was meant to
ensure that those individuals would be re-absorbed by their ministries after the project, and that capacity
would thereby remain in the civil service instead of having to rely on consultants (ICR, p. 19). The central
level MASAH staff participated in several national and international capacity development activities, including
for example the Global Forum on Adaptive Social Protection and the Core Courses organized by the Social
Protection and Jobs Global Practice (ICR, p. 17). Furthermore, the project built the capacity of 418 staff
working at the local Social Assistance Circumscription (CAS) offices (ICR, p.30). UNICEF and UNHCR both

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



played key roles as partners for institutional strengthening regarding the CAS staff, as well as health and
education officials in the Likouala region. Once the National Safety Net Program had been established in
2023, capacity building efforts also began to include the PNFS team (ICR, p. 17).

At the beneficiary/household level, the accompanying measures contributed to increase the success of
the businesses and training on financial education, savings and measures targeted to beneficiary families
with children, importance of nutrition, hygiene, and education (PAD 2017, p. 5 and ICR, p. 14). In addition,
basic literacy and numeracy skills training was provided to IPs (ICR, p. 12). However, no information
regarding number of persons who benefitted from these capacity building measures, nor their quality and
effectiveness which limits the ability of the ICRR to determine the extent to which they are sustainable.

Finally, the sustainability of supply side aspects remains limited. The Borrow ICR notes that despite
investments, schools and health centers remain inadequately staffed and resourced, which affects the quality
of service delivery. Poor households are unable to consistently access high quality education and health
services, thus limiting the sustainability of health and education outcomes (ICR, p. 46).

Overall, the project’s sustainability is supported by (1) its extension and scaling up over time, (2) its
institutionalization, (3) its success in becoming the main vehicle for shock response in the country (ICR, p. 10
and p. 23), (4) its use by subsequent Bank-funded instruments and other development organizations to
deliver cash transfers (ICR, p. 13). However, whereas the social safety net system as a means to implement
CCTs may be sustainable and scalable, the achievement of human development outcomes is dependent on
the availability and quality of health and education services.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project’s design had some strong elements, in particular the use of analytical assessments
  and lessons learnt from other national and international social protection programs. However, it
  did not appropriately assess the risk of lack of counterpart funding or low capacity of
  implementing partners.

  The project’s design benefitted from several analytical assessments (PAD 2014, pp. 14-15).
  Including the 2011 Household Consumption Survey (Enquête Consommation Ménage or ECOM) and
  the 2011/12 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS). It also incorporated lessons from several
  evaluations such as the Independent Evaluation Group's Safety Nets Review of 2011 - Evidence and
  Lessons Learned from Impact Evaluations on Social Safety Nets (PAD 2014, p. 16) and the evaluation of
  the implementation of the Country Partnership Strategy for FY10-12 (PAD 2014, p. 25).

  The design of the pilot project was clear and concise and was based on clearly
  identified government priorities and drew on international good practices and lessons learned
  from the MASAH and other development partners in Congo. The pilot project consisted of three well-
  defined components that focused on the core building blocks of the future delivery system which allowed
  for the gradual expansion of scope through two consecutive Bank-funded AF operations (ICR, p. 22).



                                                                                                    Page 17 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



The project’s implementation arrangements relied on a mix of national systems (MASAH) and
partnerships with UNICEF to ensure sufficient capacity and UNHCR to increase its geographic
scope and target refugees. The project was executed by MASAH and supported by an inter-sectorial
steering committee (Comité d'Orientation Stratégique, COS) and a technical LISUNGI project team.
UNICEF and UNHCR both played key roles as partners for institutional strengthening regarding the CAS
staff, as well as health and education officials (ICR, p. 17). UNICEF provided technical assistance to the
design and implementation of IECs and built the capacity of the CAS social workers (ICR, p. 13). In 2019,
collaboration with the UNHCR was formalized as a technical assistance contract between UNHCR and a
government institution under a World Bank-financed project – the first of its kind (ICR, p. 23). However,
the ICR does not mention any collaboration with technical institutions to provide the capacity building
necessary to ensure the success of IGAs.

The project’s design had some weaknesses: one related to government funding and another to
the complexity of project design in a low-capacity environment.

The project did not sufficiently consider the risk of counterpart funding not materializing and put
in place mitigating strategies. Given the significant share of expected counterpart (US$15 of the total
US$17 million) (PAD 2014, p. 24), the initial project design was heavily reliant on counterpart
funding. Due to the economic slowdown resulting from the oil price shock, the government was unable to
mobilize the necessary funds. The project team was able to mobilize resources to fill the funding gap;
however, this contributed to implementation delays (ICR, p. 26).

The project’s design was complex given the low-capacity context. The amount of cash transfer was
variable and depended on household composition (number of children, number of elderly). The transfers
were conditional on regular health center visits and at school attendance of least 80 percent per child per
month. The variable benefit amount increased operational complexity and made it difficult for
beneficiaries to understand their entitlements leading to a high number of grievances (ICR, p. 24).
Furthermore, monitoring compliance with conditionalities proved complex and burdensome given the
limited implementation capacity for health facilities, schools, and the PIU (ICR, p. 24).

In addition, the design of the Results Framework did not include some relevant outcome
indicators, nor did it have baseline data for some output level (discussed further in the M&E
section below).

Furthermore, during restructuring and according to the project team, the design of the scaling up
of the project and expansion into the Likouala region in the north relied too much on the
experience gained during the pilot phase and was not sufficiently adapted to the different and
more challenging context of the northern region.

Finally, since as per World Bank guidelines, including the Theory of Change in Project Appraisal
Documents became mandatory as of May 2018, the project design did not include a ToC which
presented the pathways from inputs, outputs to outcomes and objectives. Nevertheless, the PAD
included a detailed RF – albeit with some weaknesses - which allowed the ICR to re-construct a ToC.
The RF is discussed below under M&E Design.




                                                                                                 Page 18 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The following elements were considered to have contributed to the quality of the Bank’s supervision and
 had a favorable impact on project activities:

       Continuity in team leadership allowed for smooth transitions and proper handovers between task
          team leaders.
       Appropriate skills combination of Bank supervision teams located both at headquarters and in
          Brazzaville permitted comprehensive technical support.
       Quick pivoting to weekly virtual technical meetings with the PIU during the COVID-19 pandemic
          guaranteed smooth implementation support (ICR, p. 20).
         Dedicated, monthly meetings with the PNFS team provided technical assistance as needed (ICR, p.
          23).
         Effective collaboration across the Education and Health, Nutrition and Population General Practices
          allowed addressing supply-side challenges.
         Provision of analytical and advisory services allowed to refine the targeting methodology by
          complementing community targeting with the use of PMT to rank households by vulnerability level
          (ICR, p. 23).
         Technical assistance through the Rapid Social Response Trust Fund through the task “Informing
          gender smart social protection in Congo” (P173535) provided technical advice to refine IGA activity
          and improve the handling of Gender-Based Violence issues (ICR, p. 23).
         Good collaboration with development partners (AFD, UNICEF, UNHCR) helped address financing
          and implementation challenges.



 Finally, project funds were almost completely disbursed (98.21 percent); different design improvements
 were made as part of the restructurings and AFs; and counterpart capacity was built (ICR, p. 20).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The RF included Outcome level indicators for two out of three of the project’s objectives which
 were clearly stated. However, the outcome related to productivity (Objective 3) did not have an

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



 associated indicator, despite it being a key element of the AF PDO statement (ICR, p. 20). Instead, the
 RF contained two IRIs for Outcome 3 that served as proxies for productivity: (i) the percentage of
 households reporting that asset depletion is prevented as a result of CCTs and IGA transfers, and (ii) the
 percentage of beneficiaries that feel project investment (IGA) reflected their need. However, the second is
 an indicator of relevance (and not an outcome indicator).

 The RF did not provide any baseline information even though two baseline surveys were
 conducted. While baseline data for most indicators were not available at appraisal (ICR, p. 20), the PIU
 was able to do so relatively quickly and conducted two baseline studies: one in 2015 and a second in 2021
 covering the Likouala region (ICR, p. 41). However, the RF was not updated with this baseline
 information. Lacking baseline information and number of children and mothers reached, it is difficult to
 assess the extent to which the project succeeded in achieving its outcomes, since measuring solely the
 “percent increase” may give the impression that the project was highly successful, even when the number
 of beneficiaries is relatively low.

 The RF exhibited some confusion between outcome and output level indicators by including output
 indicators to measure outcome level achievements. For example, for Objective 1, the RF identifies “number
 of beneficiaries registered” and “number of beneficiaries assisted” as the indicators to monitor the project at
 PDO level whereas they are output level indicators. In addition, the number of beneficiaries receiving
 conditional cash transfers is an output indicator for Objective 2 and the number of beneficiaries of IGA for
 Objective 3. The RF also includes outcome level indicators as Intermediate Results Indicators (e.g.,
 efficiency of payments, efficiency of GRM, beneficiary awareness).

 The RF is missing some key indicators. For example, it includes indicators focusing mostly on the
 demand side (number of beneficiaries) and does not monitor the supply side activities (e.g., number health
 facilities receiving performance-based grants for number of schools assisted). It also does not monitor any
 outcome results for the unconditional cash transfers for elderly.

 Sex-disaggregated monitoring was included unevenly in the RF. The project monitored the number of
 women beneficiaries of social safety net programs. Though the majority of IGA grants were allocated to
 women to close gender gaps in asset ownership and enable their productive economic inclusion (ICR, p.
 14), there is no sex-disaggregated indicator capturing this result. Equally =, though the project identified
 gender gaps in education between boys and girls and tracked school attendance for both sexes after
 receipt of the CCTs (ICR, p. 17), neither the RF nor the ICR provide sex-disaggregated data regarding
 children’s access to health and education services.

 Interestingly, the RF monitored the project’s relevance and efficiency through a few indicators. This
 included the percentage of grievances received and resolved within 30 days (ICR, pp. 36-38).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR states that the project's M&E implementation included adequate resources, such as a
  dedicated M&E specialist and third party-expertise provided by universities and consulting firms
  (ICR, p. 21). The development of a M&E strategy and the establishment of the MIS helped track progress
  towards the PDOs (ICR, p. 21). The project collaborated with UNHCR which had a presence in Likouala
  to monitor project activities (ICR, p. 19). However, the Borrower ICR mentions that the PIU’s M&E team



                                                                                                    Page 20 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



was understaffed with only one staff responsible for collecting and processing data and reporting
activities for the first seven years of the project (ICR, p. 47).

The project utilized several tools to implement M&E. These included: (1) surveys on household
resilience, (2) monitoring surveys, (3) beneficiary surveys carried out by external evaluators, (4) one
targeting assessment, (5) UNHCR verification surveys, (6) annual process evaluations and/ or thematic
assessments (e.g., effectiveness of cash transfer and IGA activities), (7) annual independent audits to
assess the program's operations; (8) regular spot checks on a bi-annual basis to reduce fraud and
corruption, and (9) two impact evaluations (ICR, pp. 20-21).

Several indicators were modified or eliminated during project implementation. Two original PDO
indicators were changed in the AF2 restructuring. “The percentage of beneficiary households who
live below the food poverty line” was moved to become an IRI, and the indicator “percentage of cash
transfer beneficiary households who receive payments in a timely manner” was removed due to
difficulties in tracking payments to nomadic beneficiaries in Likouala. Additional changes which included
edits to indicator formulations, new indicators, or indicator deletions were introduced either for clarity or to
align with new corporate results indicators. They did not represent substantive changes in the logic of the
results measurement (ICR, p. 7). They included the following:

      Introduction of new PDIs to track type of beneficiaries (e.g., number of refugees and
         indigenous peoples)
        Introduction of new PDIs to capture corporate results indicators (e.g., Beneficiaries of social
         safety net programs” and its sub-indicators for percentages of women (female), social pensions,
         other cash transfers (conditional cash transfers or CCTs), and other social assistance programs,
         such as IGAs
        Increasing target to reflect additional financing (e.g., number of beneficiary households
         registered)
        Increasing target to reflect achievement of previously-set target (e.g., percentage of infant
         beneficiaries aged between 0 and 11 months old who had regular monthly visits to health centers
         was increased from 70 percent to 90 percent since it had been surpassed in participating project
         areas)
        Deletion of indicators (e.g., number of elderly receiving UCTs and number of CAS staff trained,
         percentage of beneficiaries aged between 12 and 23 months old who had regular bi-monthly visits
         to health centers)



The quality of M&E implementation is mixed. The team was proactive about updating the RF and
Operations Portal throughout the long implementation period, including managing glitches that occurred
with successive system upgrades (ICR, p. 21). However, the RF, though it was updated with the
introduction of the Outcome 3 (productive activity), it did not include a PDI to measure this outcome.
Finally, the ICR is silent on the quality of the M&E though the Borrower’s ICR notes shortcomings from
some local NGOs that could have performed better in monitoring local level activities (ICR, p. 46).



The project could have tracked and analyzed additional outcome-level indicators to demonstrate
results. For example, the project was supposed to provide cash transfers on a quarterly basis for two

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



  years for a total of eight quarterly payments (PAD 2014, p. 21). At the end of the two-year period, a
  community committee would evaluate the beneficiary household to determine whether the household
  would continue receiving the benefits or be referred to other interventions provided by MASAH (PAD
  2024, p. 21). Neither the PAD nor the ICR provide information regarding the criteria to make such a
  determination. In addition, neither the RF nor the ICR provide information on the number/percentage of
  households which continued to receive benefits. Another example is that given the duration of the project
  (10 years), the M&E could have collected more information to measure human development outcome
  indicators, such as (1) education enrolment and completion in addition to attendance; and (2) used
  surveys such as Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS) and/or DHS to provide information regarding its
  achievements.



c. M&E Utilization
  To a large extent, M&E data and reports were used effectively to inform project implementation
  and management decisions and scale-up.

  Monitoring data helped in improving the accompanying measures to increase effectiveness of
  health and education services. Early monitoring data showed that health services utilization remained
  low. As a result, the project partnered with UNICEF, which provided technical assistance and financing
  to strengthen the IECs in targeted communities and reinforce the capacity of the CAS social workers
  (ICR, p. 13). Similarly, in the Likouala region, early monitoring data identified challenges in the take-up of
  education services. As a result, the project introduced functional literacy and numeracy campaigns for
  indigenous populations (ICR, p. 21).

  Results of the impact evaluation led to scaling up: The first impact evaluation demonstrated that
  cash transfers had a significant effect not only on the uptake of health and education services, but also
  on household investment and productivity. This motivated the government to scale the project through
  AF1 (ICR, p. 20).

  Thematic assessments resulted in better sequencing of activities. Monitoring data and thematic
  assessments demonstrated that IGA payments should be phased-in a few months after CCT payments
  are introduced. In order that productive grants are not used for consumption support but invested in
  productive assets (ICR, p. 21). This led the project to modify its approach.

  Though the project undertook two gender studies, the ICR does not mention if the
  recommendations were implemented or not. The first focused on reinforcing the productive economic
  inclusion component and the second provided an assessment of gender-based violence (GBV) risk and
  proposed mitigation measures (ICR, p. 17). There is no information as to whether the recommendations
  of both studies were incorporated into project implementation.

  Evidence from the different surveys was used for advocacy purposes. The project’s regular
  carrying out of surveys and studies served to carry out evidence-based advocacy and demonstrate to
  decision-makers that cash transfers are an effective tool in the fight against poverty (ICR, p. 47).

  Interestingly, although some indicators were removed during restructurings, the PIU continued
  to monitor them indicating the usefulness of these indicators (e.g., number of staff trained and



                                                                                                      Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



  percentage of beneficiaries aged between 12 and 23 months old who had regular bi-monthly
  visits to health centers) reflecting the utility of these indicators.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project's overall safeguards rating was recorded as Moderately Satisfactory in the Operations
   Portal.

   The parent project was appraised in 2014 under the old safeguards policies and as such was
   categorized as category C and did not trigger any safeguards policy. Subsequently the two AFs
   triggered different Operational Policies (OPs). AF1, which included an expansion of the project areas and
   an upgrade of the Environmental and Social (E&S) risk category to B, triggered OP 4.10 (Indigenous
   Peoples). AF2 which further scaled up the project, triggered OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP4.36
   (Forests), OP4.09 (Pesticides), OP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP4.12 (Involuntary
   Resettlement) (ICR, p. 21). However, the ICR (p. i) indicates that the EA category remained unchanged
   between appraisal and closing and rates it as “C”. The ICR does not explicitly state if the project complied
   with the Bank's safeguards policies.

   The project prepared and disclosed all the necessary E&S frameworks and plans. The project
   prepared (1) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that included an
   Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); (2) an Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework
   (IPPF), and (3) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). In addition, the project also developed a
   procedure for accident and incident response which was crucial in responding to the incidents that occurred
   during implementation. It also prepared a Biomedical Waste Management Plan and trained health facility
   staff on issues relating to the management, storage, and incineration of biomedical waste (ICR, p. 21).

   By closing, the social safeguards compliance of the project was rated moderately satisfactory
   though there is no information on how safeguard compliance was rated in each of the 16 Implementation
   Status Reports (ISR). The ICR states that the project implementation faced safeguards issues, such as the
   difficulties in defending the rights of the indigenous population (ICR, p. 19) without providing additional
   details and if/how these issues were addressed.

   As mentioned earlier, the project faced challenges in setting up a functional GRM and in
   establishing grievance management committees. Only 36 percent of the grievances were registered,
   processed, and resolved (against 70 percent indicated as a target in the results framework) (ICR, p. 22).
   Furthermore, the ICR does not provide information on how the GRM and safeguards were communicated at
   the community level. Neither does it describe the type of grievances received and the extent to which they
   were related to safeguard issues.




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  In terms of financial management, the ICR mentions that the project adequately met all the financial
  management requirements at closing (ICR, p. 22) and financial management performance was
  consistently rated as moderately satisfactory (MS). It also states that quarterly Interim Financial
  Reports (IFRs) and annual audit reports were submitted regularly and on a timely basis. The closing audit
  was received before the due date of June 30, 2024. However, several weaknesses were observed which
  included (1) inefficient organization of the accounting team; (2) delays in the justification of advances and
  documentation of expenses; and (3) insufficiently justified expenses for XAF 37 million which were noted
  during the last supervision mission and which were addressed appropriately with the support of the Bank
  team (ICR, p. 22).

  In terms of procurement performance, the project was upgraded from Moderately Unsatisfactory
  (MU) to Moderately Satisfactory (MS) at closing. Procurement activities were carried out in accordance
  with the relevant Bank procedures and guidelines, including the World Bank Procurement Directives for the
  parent project (PAD 2014) and the World Bank Procurement Regulations for Investment Project Financing
  (IPF) Borrowers for the additional financing and the Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and
  Corruption in Projects Financed by the IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants (PAD 2017) (ICR, p. 22).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR identified one positive unintended impact. The RSU played a crucial role in Congo’s response
  to the COVID-19 pandemic, which was among the fastest in Sub-Saharan Africa (ICR, p. 12).

  The ICR alludes to another unintended impact on peace-building which was strengthened by including
  both refugees and host communities in social protection programs. However, the ICR does not provide
  additional information on how and to what extent this was achieved (ICR, p. 25).

  As a result of the Lisungi project, the Education sector project has included the construction of
  schools in the Likouala region to strengthen supply side activities.



d. Other
  The project undertook several steps to enhance social inclusion by targeting women, indigenous
  peoples and refugees.

  The majority of IGA grants were allocated to women to close gender gaps in asset ownership and
  enable their productive economic inclusion (ICR, p. 14).

  The project tapped into the Rapid Social Response Fund’s Gender Window to conduct two studies
  and strengthen the gender outcomes of the project. The first research focused on the productive
  economic inclusion component and provided recommendations for strengthening it (e.g., addressing lack of
  affordable childcare as a barrier for women to pursue IGAs and the need to engage men to support
  women’s economic activities). The second study provided an assessment of (GBV) risk and mitigation
  measures (ICR, p. 17).


                                                                                                  Page 24 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



   Though these two studies provided recommendations to strengthen women’s inclusion and to put in place
   GBV risk mitigation measures (ICR, pp. 14-15), the ICR does not provide any information on what risks
   were identified and whether there were specific unintended gender-related results due to the targeting of
   women for IGA activities.[SH1] [RA2]

   Furthermore, the project targeted youth in Likouala, and trained a total of 900 young men and women,
   including 250 refugees and 45 indigenous youth (ICR, p. 15).

   Collaboration with other development partners allowed the inclusion of IPs and refugees as
   beneficiaries. Collaboration with UNHCR and AFD allowed for geographic expansion (efficiency) and with
   UNICEF led to improving delivery (effectiveness). (PAD 2017, p. 4).



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                Quality at Entry is rated
                                                                                Moderately Satisfactory due to
                                                                                insufficient risk mitigation of lack
                                                                                of counterpart funding,
                                                                                complexity of design, weak
Bank Performance               Satisfactory           Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                Results Framework and
                                                                                expansion of project to a new
                                                                                geaographical area without
                                                                                considering sufficiently the
                                                                                context.
Quality of M&E                 Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR confirms the series of lessons and recommendations emerging from the project’s
experience (ICR, pp. 26-27). The ICRR summarizes the most relevant lessons below:

Better risk assessment during design allows for putting in place mitigation measures. The risk
of substantial government counterpart funding falling through was not identified as such. As a result,
mitigation measures were not foreseen ahead of time resulting in project delays.

In limited capacity contexts, a simpler design for calculating cash benefits and monitoring of
conditionalities is better than a more complex one. A relatively simple design allows for ease in
communicating entitlements to beneficiaries and improves project efficiency.



                                                                                                    Page 25 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



Social safety net programs are more effective when they address both demand side as well
as supply side challenges. SSN tend to focus more on the demand side (eligibility, selection
criteria, CCTs/UCTs setting up systems to deliver transfers). However, it is equally important to
strengthen linkages with the health and education sectors to overcome supply side challenges and
to ensure outcome level results for CCTs.

Combining CCTs and IGAs allows for smoother consumption patterns since poor households
do not need to use the IGA transfers to meet their food needs when they are faced with external
shocks (e.g., illness, death of a family member) which undermines their ability to make productive
investments.

The lesson regarding the inclusion of both refugees and host communities in social
protection programs and its impact on peace-building is not supported by any analysis. The
information provided is limited to better access to social services and poverty reduction for both
refugees and host communities (ICR, p. 25).

Additional Note: The ICR missed an opportunity to draw lessons regarding some important
aspects of the project such as (1) implementation difficulties faced in rural versus urban areas and
how they were addressed; (2) challenges with working with other Bank-financed programs to
improve supply side aspects (ICR, p. 13) (what worked, what did not, if there were challenges with
sequencing, geographical overlap, etc.); (3) implementation challenges due to its multisectoral
nature (education, health, social protection) (ICR, p. 16); (4) difficulties in identifying productive
opportunities given the indigenous populations nomadic lifestyles (ICR, p. 14); (5) the importance of
ensuring minimum capacity (by running functional literacy and numeracy sessions in the Likouala
region) to improve indigenous people’s understanding of their rights under the project (ICR, p. 12);
(6) integrating refugees and host communities in SSN programs; and (7) targeting predominantly
women for IGAs and whether this had any unintended positive/negative outcomes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall ICR quality is rated Substantial, but marginally so. There are a number of aspects where more
information could have strengthened the ICR.

The ICR has some positive features, including a well-reconstructed Theory of Change. However, the
reconstructed ToC - which was based on the project’s Results Framework - could have been strengthened with
the inclusion of the key assumptions underlying the ToC (e.g., existence of sufficient capacities at the
decentralized level; access to remote locations, internet connectivity).

The ICR is concisely written and makes well-use of the available data from the impact evaluation to
demonstrate results. However, given the duration of the project (10 years), and even though it was not an
education nor a health project, it would have been interesting to include health (infant mortality rates) and

                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)



education outcomes (enrollment, retention, completion) by referring to evidence from MICS and/or DHS
studies.

The ICR lacks some essential information, such as information regarding (1) the cooperatives established
(ICR, p. 14), (2) outcomes related to the UCTs to elderly persons, (3) selection criteria for IGAs, and (4) the
ratio of beneficiaries that received only IGA support to those that received CCT and IGA assistance, and (5)
analysis of the accompanying measures and their impact (or lack thereof) on outcomes except in efficiency
analysis (ICR, p. 41). In addition, under the description of the components, the ICR does not present separately
the four sub-components of Component 2 in detail: Subcomponent 2A (CCTs), Subcomponent 2B (IGAs),
Subcomponent 2C (Health Services), and Subcomponent 2D (Education services) which are listed in Table 3
(ICR, p. 45). Whereas Annex 4 (Efficiency Analysis) provides information on the budget allocated to these four
subcomponents; however, it is unclear what amount was used to finance the UCTs targeting the elderly.

Given that the project started as a pilot and was later scaled-up, the ICR could have provided an
analysis between the different phases of the project in terms of effectiveness. The project expanded
during its lifetime the type of activities, geographic area and type of beneficiaries. An analysis regarding the
differences in terms of targeting, implementation challenges faced, etc. would have been useful, especially
since there were several challenges in implementing the project in the Likouala region.

With the exception to the reference that the government mobilized the PIU during the COVID-19 pandemic to
prepare and implement a new emergency operation (ICR, p. 16), there is insufficient analysis of the impact of
COVID-19 on project implementation, especially on the access to health and education services during COVID-
19. Although gender is addressed, however, there is insufficient information provided regarding the impact of
targeting mostly women for the IGA transfers nor on how the sex-disaggregated differences to access to health
and education services were addressed.

The ICR is insufficiently candid especially for a project that had a duration of 10 years and was
implemented in a context that had substantial internal weaknesses in the fiduciary environment (PAD
2014, p. 70), including weak internal controls. It also does not capture the several challenges mentioned in the
Borrower’s ICR (such as weak capacity of local implementing partners). The ICR could have been more candid
and addressed the inclusion/exclusion errors and how they were addressed, especially given the weakness in
the GRM. Community validation of poor households merited more discussion especially in the different types of
communities (urban, rural, nomadic, refugees). The ICR should also have discussed the robustness of the
methodology underlying the two main sources of evidence for project results, i.e., the beneficiary assessment
and the impact evaluation. Finally, the ICR is insufficiently critical of the Results Framework which had several
shortcomings discussed in the M&E Design section and which the project team highlighted during the interview.

The Lessons Learned section provides hints regarding several challenges that have impacted both the project’s
efficiency (e.g., logistical challenges) as well as effectiveness (e.g., importance of linking CCTs and IGAs,
targeting both the host community and refugees) which were not raised in the Efficacy/Efficiency sections.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 27 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project (P145263)




                                                                              Page 28 of 28
