     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024319

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163255                                    Peru Integrated Health Networks

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                       Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-89200                                 31-Jan-2024                                           7,365,224.97

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Jan-2019                                31-Jan-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             125,000,000.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                7,365,224.97                                             0.00

 Actual                                            7,365,224.97                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Disha Zaidi                 Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement dated March 13, 2019, Schedule 1, the objective of the project was to (i)
   improve the resolutive capacity and quality of public First‐Level Health Services in Lima Metropolitan Area
   and Prioritized Regions, and (ii) increase the capacity of the Single Health Information System and the public
   sector’s pharmaceutical products and medical supplies provision system.




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



   In terms of assessing the achievement of PDOs, this ICR Review and the ICR unpacked the compound PDO
   statement as follows:

        1. improve the resolutive capacity and quality of public First‐Level Health Services in Lima Metropolitan
          Area and prioritized regions;
        2. increase the capacity of the Single Health Information System; and
        3. improve the public sector’s pharmaceutical products and medical supplies provision system.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improving the Organization and Supply of Health Services Using an Integrated Health
   Networks Model in Lima Metropolitan Area and prioritized regions (Appraisal: US$45,718,898; Used:
   US$5,551,874). This component aimed to implement a new service delivery model through Integrated
   Health Networks (RIS) in targeted areas. It planned to improve the quality, efficiency, appropriateness, and
   timeliness of public health responses to new and evolving health needs while addressing access and quality
   disparities. The component included investments in infrastructure such as rehabilitation, expansion, or new
   construction, mainly for first-level health facilities. It also provided funding for technical assistance, tools,
   and services to tackle new disease burdens, including clinical practice guidelines and patient care pathways
   as well as focused on change management and communication plans. Additionally, it would finance both
   medical (like clinical furniture and instruments) and non-medical equipment (such as IT and
   electromechanical devices) for these facilities. Eventually, this component would improve resolutive
   capacity, quality, and coordination of care and a reduction in waiting times.

   Component 2: Improving the Capacity of the Single Health Information System at the National Level
   (Sistema Único de Información en Salud/ SUIS) (Appraisal: US$71,664,338; Used: US$402,840). This
   component focused on ensuring adequate access to, and management of information for clinical and
   administrative decision-making in the health system. Access included improving the quantity, quality, and
   timeliness of information. To achieve this objective, the component focused on: (i) Strengthening
   governance and standardizing data and ICT processes; (ii) Providing the necessary technological and
   network infrastructure to support the implementation of the SUIS; (iii) Enhancing human competencies for
   effective registration, management, and use of information within the SUIS; and (iv) Integrating user
   engagement as a core aspect of the SUIS development and implementation.

   Component 3: Improving the Management of Pharmaceutical Products and Medical Supplies
   (including medical devices) in Lima Metropolitan Area and Prioritized Regions (Appraisal:
   US$30,116,764; Used: US$1,410,511). This component aimed to enhance the quantity, quality, timeliness,
   and affordability of pharmaceutical products, medical devices, and medical supplies in Ministry of Health/
   Ministerio de Salud (MINSA) and Regional Governments/Gobiernos Regionales (GORE) facilities through
   financing the construction of a new central warehouse in Lima, rehabilitating several warehouses in



                                                                                                      Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



   prioritized regions, and implementing a traceability and stock management system for these products and
   supplies.

   Component 4: Project management (Appraisal: US$10,325,000; ‘Used’ funds not reported in the ICR)
   – IBRD: US$0 and Government of Peru: US$10,325,000). This component would fund operating
   expenses, equipment, furniture, vehicles, and personnel necessary for executing the WB Project in areas
   such as contract management, procurement, financial management, and monitoring and evaluation,
   including financial audits. It also planned to finance technical assistance needed to complete the formulation
   of the Government Program in invierte.pe and support selected operational expenses and staff for
   implementing common activities under the Government’s program.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The project was financed through the World Bank’s Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. The
   estimated cost at appraisal was US$ 157.83 million, consisting of US$125 million as IBRD financing, and
   Recipient contribution of US$32.83 million (PAD, p.2). The actual amount disbursed was US$7.4 million
   through IBRD financing (ICR, p.ii).

   Dates: The project was approved on January 31, 2019, and became effective on June 4, 2019. The
   midterm review was held on February 20, 2023. The project underwent one restructuring on August 23,
   2021, and closed on January 31, 2024.

   Restructuring: In August 2021, the Project went through a restructuring aimed at improving implementation
   speed by changing institutional arrangements and creating a new PIU. Initially, PRONIS, a unit within the
   Ministry of Health (MINSA) responsible for managing major public infrastructure investments, served as the
   Project’s PIU. However, PRONIS’s expertise was focused primarily on infrastructure projects, which did not
   align with the specific needs of this health-focused Project. In addition, political instability and the COVID-19
   pandemic further hindered the authorities' commitment and delayed progress. In response, the World Bank
   approved the creation of a new PIU within MINSA, dedicated to the Program for Creation of Integrated
   Health Networks (Programa de Creación de Redes Integradas de Salud/ PCRIS), aiming to enhance focus
   and operational capacity for the Project (ICR, p. 9).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
In Peru, the poor face significant barriers to accessing health services, being less likely to seek care when
needed and more prone to out-of-pocket expenses for services and medications. Geographic disparities
further exacerbate these challenges, especially for members of the Comprehensive Health Insurance
System (Seguro Integral de Salud/SIS) in underserved areas. (PAD, pp. 8-9).

There were several other constraints identified in Peru which this project planned to address. Health
outcomes in Peru lag behind those of comparable countries, particularly in chronic and noncommunicable
diseases. Primary healthcare facilities (IPRESS) often prioritize labor and delivery services, and struggle to
manage chronic conditions like diabetes and hypertension. This inefficiency leads to unnecessary reliance

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



               on high-cost hospitals for conditions that could be treated more affordably at first-level healthcare centers.
               Urban areas, in particular, allocate disproportionate resources to labor and delivery rather than chronic care
               (ICR, p. 2).

               To address these health sector issues, the proposed project aimed to strengthen and optimize first-level
               healthcare facilities, allowing them to provide a broader range of high-quality services. This would involve
               shifting hospitals' focus from basic care for chronic diseases to more complex treatments. Improvements in
               the procurement and distribution of medications, along with modernizing clinical and administrative
               management through information technology were important for ensuring better chronic care. (ICR, p.2).

               The project’s broader goal was to reduce the burden of disease for those without social security or private
               health insurance, improve health sector efficiency, and alleviate the saturation of second- and third-level
               facilities. This would allow hospitals to focus on more complex cases while enhancing the quality and
               access to primary care services. Hence making this project relevant to the changes needed in the health
               sector.

               Alignment with Strategy: The project aligned with both WBG Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs)
               implemented during the project timeframe (CPF FY17-FY21 and CPF FY23-FY27) with the goal of
               improving health service accessibility and quality. The CPF FY17-FY21 emphasized improving health
               service delivery for the poor, including the design of a new service delivery model for healthcare. This
               model aimed to adapt health services to the country’s evolving epidemiological challenges, incorporating
               shifts in infrastructure, technology, and the referral system. The CPF FY23-FY27 focused on enhancing the
               delivery of public services, particularly through Objective 3 of High-Level Objective (HLO) 2 which targeted
               improved access to quality services across multiple sectors, including health, education, energy, and
               housing. It emphasized integrating infrastructure investments with other social sector improvements, such
               as health, and continues WBG’s engagement in the health sector, including through this Integrated Health
               Networks Project.

               However, effective execution and realization of the project required preconditions and major reforms (ICR,
               p. 15). There were gaps in the theory of change and a disconnect between the planned activities and the
               borrower’s institutional capacities and institutional readiness. Therefore, the project, as designed, had
               limitations to effectively address the development problems it intended to tackle. Consequently, the
               relevance of objectives is rated as Substantial, but only marginally so.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective


                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



Improve the resolutive capacity and quality of public first‐level health services in Lima Metropolitan Area and
prioritized regions


Rationale
Overall, the project’s theory of change faced challenges due to unmet preconditions, including the absence of
a shared institutional vision for healthcare delivery, which required cultural shifts, technological consensus,
and strong governance of the health information system. There was also a lack of stakeholder consensus,
and early user consultations, which led to delays and bottlenecks. The project’s ambitious goals,
compounded by limited sector experience, political changes, and the pandemic, also hindered progress (ICR,
p.15). Additionally, the project’s Results Framework had design flaws, with problematic and unclear
indicators. For instance, one indicator (IRI 6) measured multi-step achievements for the Single Health
Information System, extending the timeline for confirming results (ICR, p.19).

The first objective included activities like redesign of the model of care with an emphasis on the new disease
burden pattern, development of standardized clinical practice guidelines and clinical pathways, establishing
new construction standards to make patient flow more efficient at health centers as well as renovation,
expansion, or reconstruction of health facility infrastructure depending on the current situation of the facility
(p.7, ICR). Overall, these activities fed into the project’s aim of improving the organization and supply of
health services using an Integrated Health Network (RIS) model by improving and expanding physical
infrastructure and equipment, while enhancing the care at first-level healthcare facilities through the use of
clinical practice guidelines, clinical pathways, and supportive care services. (p.4, ICR).

Outputs and intermediate results

Delivery of equipment to 88 healthcare centers was completed, consisting of 4,884 goods which included
biomedical, complementary, instrumental and administrative equipment.

There was progress reported on the development of three cancer practice guidelines on colon, prostrate, and
breast cancer, but these guidelines were not approved and published through an online or mobile application
(ICR, p.31).

Targets were not achieved with the project reporting no change in baseline vs targets for the number of
works and equipment of first-level IPRESS concluded (IRI1) in accordance with current infrastructure and
equipment regulation (baseline was zero and actual achievement at project closing was also zero, even
though target was six); no clinical guidelines were established or published for relevant chronic and
noncommunicable diseases (IRI2) through an online or mobile application (both baseline and actual
achievement at project closing was reported at zero, even though and target was set at 8 clinical
practice guidelines); no changes observed between percentage of adults above 35 years of age in control of
hypertension in the Lima Metropolitan Area for men and women (IRI 4 and IRI 5); and MINSA was not able to
establish a system for measuring user satisfaction results or a protocol for measuring satisfaction (IRI 3). The
ICR does not explain the reasons for why these IRIs were not achieved.

Outcomes

The three outcome indicators associated with this objective were not achieved. This included indicators on
percentage of RIS that offered expanded range of health services in the Lima Metropolitan Area and
prioritized regions for which the baseline and actual achievement at project closing remained at zero, despite

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



an end target of 100 percent; the percentage of adults ages 35 and above who are able to control
hypertension in the Lima Metropolitan Area remained at the baseline of 19.5 percent which was below the
target of 26 percent; and the percentage of targeted populations with a health issue that seek care in the first-
level of health services remained at the baseline of 55 percent, below the target of 65 percent. For all three
outcome indicators, the baseline and the actual achievement data at project closing remained the same or
lower than end target values, indicating zero change/ no change during the project timeframe.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the capacity of the Single Health Information System

Rationale
The theory of change underlying the second objective held that the design and implementation of the Single
Health Information System (SUIS) and the construction of (three) data centers would lead to better
management of patient appointments, admissions, and records by health center facilities through the use of
the SUIS.

Outputs and intermediate results

Activities completed included implementation of technical files for civil works and equipment of the Lima,
Trujillo and Huancavelica Data Center. However, more detail on the specifics of the equipment and the extent
to which these technical files contributed to the actual start-up and working of the data centers is not reported
in the ICR.

At project completion no MINSA data center locations were operational (IRI 7), with both baseline and actual
achievement at project closing reported at zero data centers. There were no new modules and components of
the Single Health Information System that were developed, integrated, and operationalized during the project
time frame with 4 modules reported at baseline and project closing, compared with the end target of 51
modules and components.

Outcomes

The project did not make any progress on the indicator that measured the outcome associated with this
objective through “percentage of RIS in Lima metropolitan area and prioritized regions that reach optimal
implementation of the five essential SUIS modules.” These modules are the medical programming module,
the unique patient portal, the referral/counter-referral module, one consultation module (which
included prenatal care, growth monitoring, and vaccination sub-modules) and the pharmacy module. Both
baseline and actual achievement and project closing remained zero while the end target was set at 60
percent.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the public sector’s pharmaceutical products and medical supplies provision system

Rationale
The theory of change underlying the third objective emphasized activities like construction of a new national
warehouse for pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, provision of equipment to regional warehouses, and
developing a new management model for the procurement and logistics chain eventually providing greater
availability of medicines through cost efficiency for each health center, as well as reducing waste and illicit
use of pharmaceutical products and medical devices. This would enhance and improve the capacity of the
public sector’s pharmaceutical products and medical supplies provision system.

Outputs and intermediate results

The project delivered eight refrigerators to CENARES (National Center for Strategic Health Resourcing) to
enhance the distribution of medical goods. Additionally, supply trucks were provided to facilitate the
transportation of medicines and supplies to pharmacies and first-level healthcare facilities in Lima
Metropolitan Area.

The project also completed implementation of the technical specification documents for the central
warehouse of metropolitan Lima and three regional warehouses.

The project struggled to achieve key targets related to pharmaceutical procurement and medical supply
management. It did not make progress in using registered demand data from the Lima metropolitan area and
prioritized regions to guide the purchase of pharmaceutical products and medical supplies, it was not able to
ensure that that state-owned pharmaceutical product and medical supply warehouses conformed to BPA
(Good Distribution Practice) guidelines for which the baseline and actual achievement at project closing
remained at zero, despite an end target of 5 percent, and also could not ensure the optimal availability of
essential medicines in health facilities (IPRESS) in the Lima metropolitan area with a baseline of 5 percent
and actual achievement at 14 percent, which was well below the 60 percent end target.

Outcomes

The outcome indicator associated with this outcome was not met since MINSA was not able to trace
pharmaceutical products in real time as was initially planned for Lima metropolitan area and prioritized
regions.



Rating
Modest




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            While the project aimed to establish an integrated health care network by strengthening capacity of first-level
                            health centers in Lima and other specified regions through a multitude of approaches including redesign of
                            the model of care with an emphasis on the new disease burden pattern, developing clinical guidelines,
                            improving and expanding physical infrastructure and equipment, building health information systems, and
                            aiming to provide better access to pharmaceutical products and medical supplies through the public sector,
                            the project did not achieve any outcomes, and struggled throughout implementation. Challenges included
                            political instability, a lack of ownership by the government, weak capacity, and the Covid-19 pandemic. Since
                            majority of the outcomes have a negligible rating, the overall efficacy is rated ‘negligible’



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The PAD provided an Economic and Financial Analysis and an Internal Rate of Return but the ICR did not
   assess cost-effectiveness of the project due to ‘slow implementation progress and lack of any achieved targets
   for indicators in the Results Framework’ (ICR, p.14).

   The PAD as part of its ‘Economic and Financial Analysis’ explains costs and benefits of the project by focusing
   on selected direct and indirect impacts (PAD, p.31-35). Indirect benefits generated by the project include a
   reduction in the burden of noncommunicable diseases (NCD) following the expansion of the resolutive capacity
   of first‐level health services to include cardiovascular diseases and diabetes, cost savings for MINSA through
   the control of hypertension, reduction in waiting times at first‐level health facilities, and direct monetary benefits
   through centralized procurement of pharmaceutical products and medical equipment to help reduce costs
   throughout the health system.

   The PAD also identified ‘benefits that are not immediately quantifiable’. For example, the use of clinical
   guidelines and the establishment of a referral and counter‐referral system is expected to improve quality of care
   and increase efficiency at all levels of care. The benefits associated with a robust information system were
   recognized in context of opportunity costs related to staff efforts, patient access, and streamlining other
   resources, but were not calculated.

   The PAD further calculates benefits of the project for ‘impact indicators’ with changes from the baseline
   measured under three scenarios of low, medium, and high effectiveness. The PAD also provides information on
   ‘Current Economic Value’ of the project under the medium-effectiveness scenario (PAD, Table 3, p.34), and
   summarizes the Net Present Value (NPV) of the project based on present value of benefits and present value of
   costs under the current scenarios. The NPV under the high Time Value of Money (TVM) scenario is US$23.8
   million. These correspond to an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 25.9 percent. IRRs provided for other scenarios
   are:

                               High-effectiveness scenario: The IRR is 42.5%, indicating a high return on investment.
                               Medium-effectiveness scenario: The IRR is 25.9%, suggesting a positive and strong return.

                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



      Low-effectiveness scenario: The IRR is 11.7%, still positive, but lower than the other two scenarios.

These economic calculations suggest that the project is expected to generate substantial benefits, with a
particularly high return in scenarios where its effectiveness is optimized. The NPV and IRR values demonstrate
the potential long-term financial viability and value of the project under different assumptions of effectiveness.

Returns to investment: Overall, the economic analysis of the Project shows that there are high returns to the
investments. Even under a low-effectiveness scenario that does not account for all economic benefits of the
Project, the IRR is 11.7 percent.

However, the ICR did not include, assess, or compare economic analysis provided in the PAD due to significant
implementation deficiencies’. Implementation inefficiencies were also identified in the ICR in terms of the
challenges faced by the PIU due to which a restructuring created a new PIU midway through the project (in
2021).

Given that significant shortcomings in implementation reduced project efficiency, and that efficiency was below
expectations in the operation’s sector, overall efficiency is rated modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  25.90
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated Substantial in view of alignment with Bank and government strategies, but with
disconnect between the planned activities and the Borrower’s capacities and addressing preconditions. Overall
efficacy is rated Negligible, as the project barely achieved its objectives. Efficiency is rated Modest, as it was
below expectations in the operation’s sector. The findings are consistent with an Unsatisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)




7. Risk to Development Outcome

Risks and challenges identified at appraisal included frequent changes in leadership especially at MINSA
causing volatility in staffing as well as policy shifts, limited capacity at MINSA further compounded by
decentralization potentially hindering coordination, an ambitious technical design including developing an in-
house information system and designing a new model of care as well as limited implementation capacity
given the projects scale and geographic outreach (PAD, p.31). Several risk mitigation factors were also
identified at appraisal. These mitigation factors were considered to be the project being anchored in the
government program creating a strong government commitment to the program, sufficient funding to mitigate
the risk related to ambitious technical design so that the required expertise can be secured, and to overcome
the risk related to limited implementation capacity the project included a dated covenant to guarantee hiring
of additional fiduciary staff (PAD, p.31).

According to the ICR (p. 24), it did not address the risk to development outcome, as the project failed to
achieve any final outcomes. However, the ICR reported that the main risk was related to the sustainability of
the distribution of 4,884 pieces of equipment (biomedical, complementary, instrumental, and administrative)
to 88 health facilities. While the equipment intended to improve healthcare delivery, the sustainability of its
impact was questionable since the health facilities may not have technical and financial resources for
equipment maintenance and use, and hence undermine long-term project effects (ICR, p.24).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed during the first year of a new government and was focused on strengthening
  the health sector, particularly through Integrated Health Networks. Leveraging the World Bank’s
  experience in Peru, the project team identified a key opportunity to support improvements in the
  governance, efficiency, and equity of the country’s health system (ICR. p.15).

  Even though project design demonstrated relevance to health sector priorities and needs, there were
  several risks and weaknesses in project preparation and implementation that were not taken into
  consideration at project entry. These included: (i) a lack of shared vision, and implementation readiness
  for major reforms within the PCRIS (the ICR says a broader institutional vision for the PCRIS program
  beyond the small team involved in project implementation was not achieved); (ii) development of the in-
  house Unified Health Information System lacked strong governance and consensus on technical
  solutions among various stakeholders; (iii) overall project design did not consider adjustments to payment
  mechanisms and financial incentives to support integrated healthcare networks; (iv) lack of early
  consultations with health centers about equipment and human resource gaps caused delays and
  bottlenecks; (v) not having a clear theory of change linking project objectives to concrete and clear
  outputs and activities was not prepared and could have helped in the preparatory stage of the project (as
  suggested in the ICR). The results chain of the government program in the PAD mixes up activities and
  outputs/ outcomes with no clear linkages between activities and expected outputs.



                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



  Some of these shortcoming are also mentioned in the PAD which identified ‘substantial’ risks for project
  implementation (after consideration of mitigation measures), especially those related to political,
  technical, and implementation risks associated with frequent changes in political authorities including at
  MINSA coupled with MINSA’s limited capacity, an ambitious goal of developing in-house software for the
  Single Health Information System and the design of a new model of care as well as limited
  implementation capacity of the PIU team.

  In view of the lack of implementation readiness, unclear links between activities and expected outcomes,
  lack of consensus around implementation aspects, lack of adjustments to payment mechanisms and
  incentives, absence of diagnosis of gaps in human resources and equipment, and inadequate clarity on
  supported information systems (ICR, p. 23), the Quality at Entry is rated Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank project team/ task team maintained strong local presence through regular missions, and
 collaboration with local counterparts on an ongoing basis. But several challenges persisted despite task
 team efforts. While the WB task team provided technical assistance and advice on optimizing health
 service delivery and implementing interoperable health information systems, procurement activities faced
 challenges despite the introduction of hands-on extended implementation support (HEIS). The team
 maintained close communication with health authorities and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) after the
 decision not to extend the operation, ensuring a proper closure. When the COVID-19 pandemic began, the
 team made efforts to restructure the project to support the country’s emergency response. However, the
 plan failed to proceed due to limited buy-in and coordination issues between the PIU, MINSA, and the
 Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF).

 The project faced delays and coordination issues due to low quality Terms of Reference (ToRs) submitted
 by the PIU for WB review, which required multiple revisions and extended approval times. These
 documents often lacked key details, leading to inefficiencies in the review process. The mid-term review
 (MTR) was delayed until February 2023 due to COVID-19, staff turnover, and political instability, and led by
 the PIU without closer involvement of the WB. The proposed measures from the MTR (e.g., improving
 implementation arrangements and training PIU staff) were not implemented, as the project was nearing its
 original closing date, and the government did not formally request an extension or restructuring. As a
 result, the MTR recommendations remained general and could not address the urgent need for faster
 project implementation.

 Other issues that the project team indicated they could have done differently when approached by IEG,
 included (i) establishing consistent and better coordination with the IADB and develop a comprehensive
 annual implementation plan that could have minimized overlapping activities, and helped speed up
 implementation; (ii) facilitate coordination workshops with user areas involved in the project to help align
 activities and clarify priorities; and (iii) the Bank being more assertive in advocating for transparency and
 efficiency within the PIU structure, to prevent redundant roles and create a more streamlined project team.



                                                                                                   Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



 Throughout project implementation, Peru experienced significant political instability, with three unexpected
 changes in administration and frequent turnover of key officials. Over the course of the Project, there were
 18 different ministers of health, six vice ministers of Health Benefits and Insurance, and 13 vice ministers of
 Public Health. This high turnover in leadership was outside the control of the Bank, and resulted in shifting
 policy directions and inconsistent implementation strategies, which undermined the project's ability to
 maintain momentum and achieve its intended outcomes.

 The Bank team was proactive and made substantial efforts to navigate an unstable political environment
 and COVID-19 disruptions, maintain contact with local counterparts, and provide technical assistance to
 the PIU (even though implementation shortcomings remained).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, there were deficiencies in project M&E design with significant gaps seen in what was planned at
 appraisal (in the PAD) and reported by the ICR. The M&E system at project design planned for project
 results to be monitored using surveys and administrative data including data on chronic disease indicators
 like blood pressure through Peru's National Institute of Statistics and Informatics’ (INEI) annual health
 surveys, and to monitor the delivery of first-level healthcare services/ public sector service delivery in the
 Lima Metropolitan Area through the already existing Health Information System (HIS). The SUIS would
 track project implementation indicators, including usage of the health information system itself, with
 MINSA and the Vice Ministry of Health Services to compile and produce service delivery and investment
 progress indicators.

 In the design phase, the impact of the project service delivery was to be monitored through trend analysis
 with several proposed evaluations like a pre- and post-evaluation of healthcare utilization patterns; surveys
 of health personnel to assess the implementation of the RIS model in context of health personnel training;
 use of standardized/ simulated patients to measure care quality and clinical practices in first-level care, as
 well as patient satisfaction surveys through the SUIS. MINSA was to use feedback to adjust the RIS model
 as needed (PAD, p.29-30).

 The ICR does not refer to follow-up on M&E design described at appraisal (in the PAD and mentioned
 above) but only offers a critique of the project results framework including selection of indicators both at the
 IRI level and the PDO level.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



 Hence even though an M&E system was established early in the project implementation cycle, it was not
 followed through in implementation and not reported on in the ICR indicating significant gaps between M&E
 design at the beginning and end of the project timeframe.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E function of the project was not effectively implemented or used. The PIUs (i.e., first PRONIS
  and subsequently the dedicated PCRIS PIU) were responsible for monitoring progress, tracking
  indicators, and preparing reports, but many PDOs and IRIs relied on new data that the PIU needed to
  collect and this posed challenges.

  Progress was mainly tracked through PIU reports and the procurement plans, with weekly meetings for
  coordination and support. However, due to the limited progress in implementing components, the M&E
  system was not fully utilized. Specific challenges in data collection are not mentioned by the ICR.

  The project's results framework was not updated, indicators were not refined or added, and neither were
  targets adjusted through restructuring. M&E data were not collected or analyzed in a consistent and
  robust manner through an M&E system that was established early in the project implementation cycle.
  ISRs did not collect data as the project progressed.



c. M&E Utilization
  Overall, available data on project results and performance were inadequate to measure achievement of
  the PDO. The ICR rightfully reported that the Results Framework/ RF was of little utility given the lack of
  implementation across the three project components. The RF provided no data and only explained
  how data were to be collected. The latest ISR of July 2023 does provide data, but for several indicators,
  the baseline and actual achievement at project closing are the same with the value zero indicating there
  was no change during project implementation. Insights from M&E data and analysis also reflected that
  after the MTR, no changes were made by the implementing entities.

  The project did not produce sufficient M&E data to inform decision making, and to make changes in
  implementation. There was no utilization of M&E findings as suggested by the ICR, and hence the
  project did not inform subsequent policies and interventions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered four safeguard policies of the World Bank: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
   Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), the Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary



                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) policies. The project was classified as a category B based on the temporary
  nature of its anticipated adverse impacts, and had a Social Risk Rating of Moderate (PAD, p.41-43).

  Various safeguard instruments were prepared to identify and then mitigate related risks. For example,
  MINSA developed three key frameworks related to the RIS (Component 1) and regional warehouses
  (Component 3) with undefined project locations. These were: (i) an Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) which included an environmental screening checklist as a tool for evaluating existing
  conditions to identify potential environmental risk and social impact for mitigation measures once the
  investments are defined; (ii) Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF), to guide the preparation of
  Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) through consultation, risk mitigation, and protection of indigenous
  communities if affected; (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), for creating Resettlement Action Plans
  (RAPs) if displacement occurs. For the three known project locations (Lima, Trujillo, and Huancavelica),
  MINSA developed site-specific Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA) and their respective
  Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP), in compliance with World Bank and national
  standards. These locations which included data centers and a Lima warehouse were considered urban and
  were not supposed to provide direct services to the public.(PAD, p.42). These frameworks for the known
  and unknown locations were published in November 2018 on both MINSA/PRONIS and World Bank
  websites.

  Due to the lack of civil works execution, the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
  and related policies (RPF and IPPF) were not fully implemented. Although the Environmental and Social
  Management Plans (ESMPs) were developed and complied with World Bank and national standards, many
  planned civil works (e.g., healthcare facility upgrades and construction of data centers and warehouses)
  were not carried out, resulting in no environmental impacts (ICR, p.21). The limited implementation of these
  plans was due to poor coordination within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and slow progress in the
  project overall.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The Financial Management Assessment (FMA) for the project highlighted the
  need for a dedicated Project Implementation Unit/ PIU (PRONIS), to manage project funds and report to
  PRONIS' General Coordinator. Key requirements for the project’s financial management included the
  adoption of an Operational Manual by PRONIS (a condition for loan effectiveness) and the hiring of
  procurement and financial management specialists within 90 days of loan effectiveness. The challenges
  identified in the PAD included building the PIU staff’s experience in implementing World Bank-financed
  projects, recruiting skilled fiduciary staff familiar with WB guidelines, and ensuring timely submission of
  financial reports. Additionally, the PIU would need to collaborate with subnational governments, which
  could introduce delays. As a result of these challenges, the fiduciary risk for the project was rated
  Substantial (PAD, p.35-36).

  There were several financial administration challenges through the project timeframe. Only 6.5 percent of
  the loan proceeds were disbursed during the project, and the annual budget implementation averaged only
  3 percent. Political instability and changes in decision-making further hindered disbursements and
  implementation. A request from the Government during negotiations to exclude taxes (e.g., VAT) from loan
  financing also impacted the budget. However, despite challenges, the PIU submitted financial reports and
  audits on time, with auditors providing an unqualified opinion. The financial management specialist

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



   remained consistent throughout the project. But the ICR assesses the financial management rating as
   Negligible due to the overall lack of coordination within the PIU, and minimal progress in project
   implementation. (ICR, p.21).

   Procurement: On procurement, the risk was assessed as Substantial due to gaps in the PIU capacity to
   implement procurement activities. A capacity assessment (WB assessment, November 2018) findings
   showed that staff working in procurement had limited qualifications and experience to local laws and
   procedures, procurement planning systems, and PRONIS or the PIU had low capacity to meet WB’s
   procurement requirements (PAD, p.39).

    The ICR rates the procurement performance as Negligible due to several factors, including lack of defined
   procurement activities, inexperienced PIU staff in procurement processes, and delays in the selection
   processes for contracts. Although the PIU participated in World Bank training and specialized sessions, the
   lack of clarity on procurement activities led to many planned actions not being executed on time or at all,
   with the procurement plan frequently needing modifications. Delays were exacerbated by low bidder
   participation and the PIU's failure to resolve issues promptly, requiring repeated extensions for deadlines.
   Political instability further discouraged participation due to concerns about contract compliance.
   Additionally, documentation issues (e.g., improper uploads to the STEP system) caused discrepancies
   between the Bank’s and Government's records, complicating contract management and milestone
   validation (ICR, p.22).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   -----



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory       Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 There is no disagreement as
                                                                                 both ICR (p. 24) and ICRR rated
                                                                                 Bank Performance as
                                                     Moderately
Bank Performance                Unsatisfactory                                   Moderately Unsatisfactory. It
                                                     Unsatisfactory
                                                                                 appears that the ICR’s rating
                                                                                 was incorrectly uploaded into the
                                                                                 Operations Portal.
Quality of M&E                  Negligible           Negligible


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



Quality of ICR                    ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 24-26) offered several useful lessons, including the following lessons restated by IEG:

        Early and sustained consensus-building among key stakeholders, clear roadmaps,
         and adequate preparation for institutional and technical capacity, can pave the way for
         successful implementation of complex public health system reforms, like the
         establishment of Integrated Healthcare Network. . This includes thorough consultations
         with end users (e.g., healthcare providers, patients, managers) to ensure the reforms align
         with healthcare needs on the ground. Additionally, addressing governance, financial
         incentives, and infrastructure, along with adequate political and institutional stability, is
         crucial. In the absence of these elements, ambitious health reforms may struggle to succeed,
         even with technical assistance and external financing.

        A detailed and robust theory of change is essential for identifying gaps, ensuring
         implementation readiness, and achieving desired outcomes, which in this case could
         have revealed major shortcomings in the Government Program as well as the lack of project
         implementation readiness. Also, clear linkages between activities, outputs, and outcomes
         can show necessary reforms and foundational steps, such as in adjustments to provider
         payment mechanisms and public financial management. Ultimately, a well-constructed
         theory of change would ensure alignment between project design and implementation,
         improving efficiency and effectiveness.

        A well-supported, stable Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with dedicated full-time
         staff is crucial for implementing large-scale, complex reforms. While the original design
         of relying on existing Ministry of Health (MINSA) staff for implementation aimed at
         sustainability, it ultimately failed due to insufficient capacity and high turnover among ministry
         staff. Furthermore, the lack of external oversight and accountability - in this case, not vetting
         PIU appointments through the World Bank (as they were financed through the National
         Budget) led to an opaque structure and ineffective management. Therefore, a more flexible
         and pragmatic approach that incorporates external support for the PIU and ensures
         consistent staff stability and accountability is essential for the success of large, multi-faceted
         projects.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR




                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Peru Integrated Health Networks (P163255)



The ICR was clear, reasonably concise, and its narrative was generally aligned with the PDO. The ICR focused
on results and was candid in identifying project shortcomings and the lack of evidence in several places. It
offered lessons derived from project experience, and is rated 'Substantial' in quality.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                               Page 17 of 17
