     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024317

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P160642                                     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                               Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-63830                                   13-Mar-2024                                         17,000,122.20

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Mar-2019                                 13-Mar-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               15,999,042.12                                             0.00

 Actual                                           17,000,122.20                                             0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Rosen Asenov                 Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres               IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the April 19, 2019, Financing Agreement (p. 4), the project’s development objective (PDO) was
   "to: (a) improve higher education management; (b) increase enrollment in professional programs; and (c)
   improve the quality and labor market relevance of degree programs of participating public tertiary education
   institutions.” This statement is consistent with the one provided in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p.
   17). The PDO statement remained the same throughout the life of the project. While project restructuring led



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



   to decreased project ambition, a split rating would not affect any of the ratings, and therefore a split evaluation
   of the project will not be applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  25-Jun-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening Tertiary Education Management (estimated cost: US$13 million; actual
   cost: US$5.89 million). The component aimed to contribute to the government’s modernization of tertiary
   education governance by helping the government to identify and adopt the necessary requisites for granting
   more autonomy to public tertiary institutions. The component had four subcomponents:

         Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting the establishment of a Performance-based Contracts (PBC)
          system of subgrants. This subcomponent aimed to establish a PBC system for subgrants under
          the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research (MESRS). It involved providing technical
          assistance for the contracting process, developing manuals of procedure, training, and creating
          monitoring and evaluation tools.
         Subcomponent 1.2: Reinforcing Education Sector Management Capacity. This subcomponent
          focused on enhancing the analytical, planning, and evaluation capacities of the MESRS, and
          strengthening institutional management capacities of all six participating universities and National
          Polytechnique Institute Houphouët-Boigny (INPHB) by training and capacity building for university
          staff, including training in strategic planning, financial management, and project implementation.
         Subcomponent 1.3: Establishing a new Quality Assurance System. To support the MESRS in
          establishing a new Quality Assurance (QA) Agency and QA units in each university, this
          subcomponent was to provide resources for formulating self-evaluation and external evaluation
          guides, establishing the internal quality units, and carrying out pilot evaluations.
         Subcomponent 1.4: Project Management: This subcomponent was to finance capacity-building
          for MESRS departments working on the project, including technical assistance (TA), study tours,
          training, and equipment.

   Component 2: Enhancing short duration professional programs (estimated cost: US$32 million;
   actual cost: US$0.34 million). Aiming to enhance graduate employment, the component intended to
   improve short tertiary programs by financing the creation of demand-driven professional programs and
   reviewing existing ones for opportunities to bring them in line with job market demands.




                                                                                                      Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



      Subcomponent 2.1. Creation of Higher Institutes of Professional Training and Technology
       (ISFPTs). The subcomponent was to finance the creation of two new ISFPTs to offer alternative
       tertiary education programs that prepare new tertiary students for work and higher degrees.
      Subcomponent 2.2. Reviewing and Upgrading Higher Technician Certificate.

Component 3: Enhancing Graduates' Employability in public universities and INPHB (estimated
cost: US$55 million; actual cost: US$10.77 million). Under this component, the project was to provide
grants to six public universities and to INPHB based on PBCs with the aim to help public tertiary institutions
make the transition to the LMD (Bachelors, Masters, Doctorate / Licence - Master – Doctorat) system and
support measures to enhance the quality and relevance of their programs.

      Subcomponent 3.1. Improving the Quality and Relevance of Public University Programs. The
       project aimed to enhance the quality and relevance of learning in the PBCs through academic
       program improvement and the establishment of Doctoral Schools. These efforts, along with the QA
       system in Component 1, were intended to facilitate the transition to the LMD system. Academic
       program improvements involved financing TA, workshops, training, materials, equipment, lab and
       facility renovations, and printing services. The creation of Doctoral Schools aimed to enhance
       applied research by providing funding under the subcomponent for TA, workshops, training, and
       printing. The project also envisaged supporting via PBCs the establishment of Doctoral Schools in
       universities. It was to fund TA for curriculum development, equipment, renovations, partnerships,
       and exchange programs. Gender equity initiatives under the subcomponent focused on creating
       through PBCs safe environments, raising awareness of gender-based violence (GBV), and
       increasing girls' enrollment in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) through
       campaigns, scholarships, courses, and tutoring in sciences and mathematics.
      Subcomponent 3.2: Upgrading the Institut National Polytechnique Houphouët Boigny
       (INPHB). The subcomponent aimed to elevate INPHB into a top-tier engineering school in Côte
       d'Ivoire, which was important for promoting STEM education in the country. It focused on financing
       initiatives to modernize governance based on increased autonomy for and better integration of
       member schools, improve academic programs' quality and relevance, strengthen research, and
       foster research-based entrepreneurship. Activities included autonomy enhancement, faculty training,
       curriculum modernization, international collaborations, research infrastructure improvement, and
       start-up support. Quality and management-enhancing activities under the subcomponent involved
       modernizing instructional approaches; institutionalizing QA self-assessments; building soft skills and
       industry links; and upgrading university administrative processes and systems.

Revisions to components

At the time of the June 25, 2021, restructuring, to accommodate reduced funding, project components were
modified as follows:

Component 1: Strengthening Tertiary Education Management (the allocated amount was reduced
from US$13 million to US$8 million). Subcomponent 1.1, which focused on establishing a PBC system,
with a reduced budget of US$0.75 million (from US$1 million), was to cover existing commitments and pilot
PBCs at two universities instead of seven tertiary institutions, as originally planned. Subcomponent 1.2,
aiming to strengthen education sector management capacity, with a reduced budget of US$2.25 million
(from US$6 million), was to continue to implement a select number of activities aimed at improving the
financing system, efficiency, and good governance across the country’s higher education system.
Subcomponent 1.3, focused on establishing a new QA system, and Subcomponent 1.4, dedicated to

                                                                                                 Page 3 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



  project management, each had their budget reduced from US$3 million to US$2.50 million, requiring the
  original costs of some of the activities under the two subcomponents to be updated.

  Component 2: Enhancing Short Duration Professional Programs (reduced cost from US$32 million
  to US$5 million). Subcomponent 2.1, aimed at creating Higher Institutes of Professional Training and
  Technology, was canceled (US$25 million). Subcomponent 2.2 regarding the review and upgrading of the
  Higher Technician Certificate remained unchanged in terms of activities but saw a decrease in allocated
  funds from US$7 million to US$5 million, leading to reduced costs for activities like workshops,
  communication strategy, reviewing of higher technician certificates curriculum, and trainings. The project
  continued to support the government in reforming the Higher Technician Certificate (BTS) to reach a
  significant share (over 50 percent) of students in higher education.

  Component 3: Enhancing Graduates’ Employability in Public Universities (reduced cost from US$55
  million to US$17 million). Subcomponent 3.1, focusing on enhancing the quality and relevance of public
  university programs, had its budget reduced from US$30 million, to US$17 million, with the government to
  continue to expand doctoral schools as a key element of the LMD system (US$1 million), finance the
  implementation of the PBCs by the Félix Houphouët-Boigny University (UFHB) (US$13 million), and finance
  the implementation of the PBCs by the Nangui Abrogoua University (UNA) (US$3 million). UFHB, which
  enrolled over 30 percent of higher education students, was the most appropriate pilot for future actions for
  other universities, while UNA's specialization in STEM made it a strategic investment for promoting STEM
  programs and increasing girls' enrollment in STEM careers. Subcomponent 3.2, aimed at upgrading
  INPHB with a budget of US$25 million, was canceled due to other donors supporting INPHB.

  At the time of the October 17, 2023, restructuring project components were modified as follows:

  Component 1: Strengthening Tertiary Education Management (reduced cost from US$7 million to
  US$ 5.73 million). Under Subcomponent 1.2, the following activities were canceled: (i) deployment of the
  management information system and (ii) dissemination and communication around the new Higher
  Education law. Under Subcomponent 1.3, the following activities were canceled: (i) rehabilitation and
  functioning cost of the National Quality Assurance Agency building; (ii) definition of the operating manual of
  the National Quality Assurance Agency; (iii) georeferencing of the private higher education institutes; and
  (iv) higher education institutes certification-related activities.

  Component 2: Enhancing Short Duration Professional Programs (reduced cost from US$7 million to
  US$0.52 million). Under Subcomponent 2.2 (reviewing and upgrading Higher Technician Certificate),
  activities related to the implementation of the Higher Technician Certificate reform were canceled.

  Component 3: Enhancing Graduates' Employability in Public Universities (reduced cost from US$16
  million to US$10.71 million). PBCs with universities remained unchanged, but all activities related to
  doctoral schools were cancelled.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost. The total project cost was originally estimated at US$100 million equivalent. Final costs were US$17
  million equivalent, reflecting the government’s partial credit cancellation of a total of US$83 million
  equivalent (of which US$70 million equivalent was cancelled on June 25, 2021, and further US$13 million
  equivalent was cancelled on October 17, 2023). At the end of the project grace period, 99.51 percent

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



   (US$17 million equivalent) of the total revised project cost of US$17,083,610,000 equivalent had been
   disbursed, with US$83,610 in exchange rate gains, of which US$40,000 was disbursed, and the
   undisbursed US$43,610 was returned to the Bank.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed by an IDA credit. Of the original
   credit amount of US$100 million equivalent, US$17 million equivalent (17 percent) was disbursed. No
   contribution from the Borrower was planned or delivered.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on March 22, 2019, and became effective on July 12, 2019. A mid-
   term review was not conducted. The project closed on March 13, 2024, as originally planned. To reflect the
   scaled down activities due to the cancellation of project funds, the project was restructured twice: on June
   25, 2021, when targets for three PDO indicators were revised downward, one PDO indicator was dropped,
   and three intermediate results indicators (IRIs) were modified (see ICR, Table 2, p. 9); and on October 17,
   2023, when two IRIs were cancelled.

   At the time of the first restructuring (August 2021), US$9.24 million equivalent had been disbursed, or 54
   percent of total actual disbursements (US$17 million equivalent) and the PDO had been consistently rated
   Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). At the time of the second restructuring (October 2023), US$14.26 million
   had been disbursed, or 84 percent of total actual disbursements, and the PDO continued to be rated MU.
   The 2021 restructuring was in response to the government’s request to cancel US$70 million equivalent (of
   the total US$100 million equivalent) of project funds to redirect resources to the health sector to combat the
   negative effects of COVID-19. The request for reprogramming and reduction of 70 percent of the project's
   resources was also due to delays caused by low stakeholder ownership. With the 2023 restructuring, the
   government cancelled further US$13 million equivalent to free up financial resources for a development
   policy operation [Côte d’Ivoire Second Investment for Growth Development Policy Financing - DPF
   (P179006)], which was being prepared with the World Bank. At the time, the project had disbursed
   US$14.26 million equivalent (or 47.5 percent of the remaining US$30 million equivalent approved financing
   under the 2021 restructuring). With only five months to the project's closure on March 13, 2024, and
   minimal progress in implementation, the government sought to ensure that the remaining uncommitted IDA
   resources were efficiently used for the DPF operation under preparation (ICR, p. 8).

   With the 2021 restructuring, the project's logic remained unchanged, although its scope was considerably
   reduced, with activities still focused on strengthening tertiary management, introducing PBCs, enhancing
   capacity, and improving short-term programs, particularly in the Higher Technician Certificate (Brevet de
   Technicien Supérieur - BTS) program, where most tertiary students were enrolled. However, the October
   2023 restructuring affected the overall theory of change and achievement of the PDO, reducing the overall
   ambition of the project through cancelling quality assurance activities and reducing management
   information system activities (related to Outcome 1); cancelling the upgrading of technician certificates for
   BTS programs and Higher Institutes of Professional Training and Technology (ISFPTs) (related to Outcome
   2); and cancelling activities related to developing doctoral schools and upgrading the Institut National
   Polytechnique Houphouët Boigny (INPHB) (related to Outcome 3).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 5 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



The PDO were highly relevant to current country conditions. Tertiary education supply in Côte d’Ivoire
is insufficient to meet the expected-to-triple number of high school graduates by 2030 due to population
growth and anticipated higher Baccalauréat exam pass rates. Participation in tertiary education is
characterized by gender, income, and regional disparities. Between 2005 and 2016, gender disparities were
evident, with male enrollment at 10.1 percent compared to female enrollment at 6.7 percent. Girls had
better access to tertiary education if they completed secondary education, with 76 percent of girls
continuing to tertiary education compared to 65 percent of boys. The proportion of girls ranged from 33
percent in public universities to 51.4 percent in private universities. Income-based disparities were also
pronounced, with only 7 percent of the poorest students enrolling in tertiary education in 2015 compared to
41 percent of the richest. Also, of a total of 288 tertiary institutions across the country, 218 are located in
Abidjan, making higher education participation more difficult for those living outside Abidjan. Many
programs, particularly BTS (Higher Technician Certificate / Brevet de Technicien Supérieur) programs
offered by private tertiary institutions, lack quality and relevance to labor market needs. All these challenges
contribute to the current unemployment and underemployment among youth in Côte d’Ivoire. In addition,
around the time of project appraisal, the lack of a comprehensive method for monitoring graduate
employment made it challenging to align university programs with labor market needs. Universities faced
challenges in establishing the License Master-Doctorate (LMD) system stipulated in the Bologna Process,
which aims to ensure comparability in the standards and quality of higher education qualifications. Finally,
there is a need for more favorable sector-wide governance, a sustainable financing strategy, and improved
management of the country’s higher education system. Performance-based management instruments and
processes are lacking. There is a lack of essential data for evaluating internal and external efficiency and
overall institutional performance. Basic monitoring data collected by the MESRS focus mainly on
enrollments and teachers, neglecting important factors like access, retention, and achievement rates. Côte
d’Ivoire, like most Sub-Saharan African countries, must deal with severe financial tensions in balancing
quantitative expansion, quality improvements, and research and development strengthening within tertiary
education. Research funding in the country has drastically declined in recent years, with public spending on
university research dropping from 0.03 percent to under 0.02 percent of gross domestic product between
2012 and 2015. This lack of funding hinders universities from significantly boosting research efforts. Also,
considering that social transfers (scholarships, meals, and dormitories) represent 37 percent of recurrent
spending, this leaves few resources for the non-salary spending that is crucial for creating a favorable
learning environment and operating and maintaining science labs and computers. Importantly, public
tertiary institutions have little institutional autonomy, with budgets and staffing being managed centrally and
public universities lacking control over the number of students they must enroll, the tuition fees they may
set, the use of self-generated income, and permission to autonomously address their pressing needs or
introduce innovations to improve program quality and relevance. Recent changes in the higher education
law have aimed to grant autonomy to public tertiary institutions and establish a new governance system.

The PDO were also aligned with the development priorities of the country. The PDO supported the
country’s Vision 2030 on human capital development through higher quality education and improved youth
employability. The project also supported the government’s National Development Plan (NDP 2016–20),
aiming to transform tertiary education into a high-performing system that can train a qualified and adaptable
labor force, generate new knowledge, and adapt global knowledge to local use, contributing to economic
and social development (PAD, p. 16). The project objectives remained relevant to the government’s NDP
2021-2025, which, like the NDP 2016-20, aims at institutional strengthening, improved governance,
accelerated human capital development, and structural transformation of the economy through
industrialization (ICR, p. 13). The project objectives were also in line with the Education Sector Plan 2016-
2025, aimed at making Côte d'Ivoire an emerging country with a solid industrial basis, which included
matching qualified workers with the structural transformation objective to make the economy more

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



               competitive by creating new Higher Institutes of Professional Training and Technology (ISFPT), improving
               access to quality programs, and developing a pool of national researchers for technological innovation.
               Moreover, the project supported the process of transitioning to the LMD system, launched by the
               government in 2009 and aiming to enhance system and institutional efficiency (ICR, p. 4).

               The PDO are aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) for Côte d’Ivoire, both
               the one in effect at the time of appraisal (CPF for FY16-FY19, extended until FY22) and the
               subsequent one currently in effect (CPF for FY23-FY27). The PDO was aligned with the CPF FY2016-
               FY2022’s Focus Area 2 (building human capital for economic development and social cohesion) and Focus
               Areas 3 (strengthening public financial management and accountability). More specifically, the project was
               aligned with Focus Area 2’s Objective 5: Improve education service delivery and youth employability and
               Focus Areas 3’s Objective 8: Improve Allocative Efficiency and Quality of Expenditures. The PDO is also
               aligned with the CPF for the period FY2023-FY2027, and more specifically, its focus on strengthening
               public financial and debt management and accountability for improved service delivery (Objective 1);
               expanding equity of, and access to, improved quality basic services, particularly for youth and women
               (Objective 2); and developing skills for a competitive private sector (Objective 10), partly based on skilled
               labor availability, building on the CPF 2016-2022 Objective 5. The project objectives also remain consistent
               with achieving the WBG’s Twin Goals of eliminating poverty and fostering shared prosperity on a livable
               planet through skills development and youth employment, human capital development, and social inclusion.

               The project is part of the WBG’s long-standing support to Côte d’Ivoire’s education sector. The Bank
               has been supporting Côte d'Ivoire's education sector for nearly a decade, focusing on various education
               sub-sectors. The Bank and the AFD, the country’s main development partners, coordinate their support
               through the Local Donors Group. In basic education, the Bank's recently closed Education Service Delivery
               Enhancement project (P163218) - which is the second post-crisis recovery operation financed by the Global
               Partnership for Education - aimed to ensure equitable access to quality pre-primary and primary education
               in lagging regions through learning assessments and teacher training. The closed Second Fiscal
               Management, Education, Energy and Cocoa Reforms Development Policy Operation (P163284) aimed to
               improve the efficiency and transparency of resources allocated to basic education, particularly in teacher
               deployment and clearer regulation of subsidies to private education. The closed Emergency Youth
               Employment and Skills Development Project (P122546) provided training and support to youth who had not
               finished school or could not find decent employment.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve higher education management in Côte d’Ivoire.


                                                                                                                       Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)




Rationale
As originally designed, the first project component was to provide support for: (i) the establishment of PBCs,
leading to a results-based financing system; (ii) capacity development of MESRS and tertiary institutions
regarding strategic planning, benchmarking, M&E, income diversification and fund-raising; and (iii) the
establishment of a new QA agency and QA units in supported universities. These activities were directly
supportive of the first objective of the PDO statement: to improve higher education management in Côte
d’Ivoire, the achievement of which – as per the project’s ToC (ICR, p. 5) – was expected to ultimately
contribute to the higher order, long-term objectives of increased number of trained and employed public and
private workforce, and long-term stability of Côte d’Ivoire.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      The number of tertiary institutions supported by the project with new management bodies as set by
         the revised law on tertiary education increased from a baseline of 0 in 2019 to 2 in 2024, not
         reaching the original target of 7 tertiary institutions, and reaching the revised target of 2
         tertiary institutions. The new management bodies established the PBCs for both institutions to
         support modernization of university governance. Within UFHB, these included, among other activities,
         capacity development workshops, establishing an M&E steering committee for PBC implementation,
         development and implementation of a communications policy for UFHB, and strengthening campus
         security. Within UNA, these included establishing an M&E steering committee for PBC
         implementation, and establishment and implementation of a digital transformation policy, a quality
         assurance unit, a communications strategy, and a campus security system. UNA needed additional
         security measures and equipment as it was in an area where there were security issues.
        A tertiary education statistical yearbook was published, as originally planned (as compared to no
         tertiary education statistical yearbooks published before the project, such yearbooks were published
         for academic years 2020-2021, 2021-2022, and 2022-2023).
        There was no functioning National Quality Assurance Authority, not achieving the original
         unchanged target (the indicator was dropped because the related activities were cancelled at the
         2023 restructuring. There was no progress on the indicator at the time of restructuring).
        There was no tertiary education graduates tracking report published, not achieving the original
         unchanged target (the indicator was dropped because the related activities were cancelled at the
         2023 restructuring. There was no progress on the indicator at the time of restructuring).
        Additionally, as stated in the ICR (p. 15), the project supported several activities related to improving
         the management of the higher education system. The project involved the finalization and validation of
         studies related to the Professional Integration of Higher Education Graduates (OIPDES), the
         diagnostic study for the reform of the Basic Training System (BTS), the financing of higher education
         along with a short-term strategy on its sustainable financing, and strengthening the National Higher
         Education Management Information System (SIGESN). The project also supported the development
         of decrees on doctoral schools' creation and organization, and the implementation of the law on the
         National Agency for Quality Assurance of Higher Education (ANAQ-ESR), as well as the appointment
         of experts for the revision of the LMD course.

Outcomes

The two tertiary institutions supported by the project achieved at least 80 percent of the annual targets set in
the performance-based contracts (PBCs), not reaching the original target of seven tertiary institutions,
and reaching the revised target of two tertiary institutions. The PBCs focused on four axes: (i)

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



strengthening and modernizing governance; (ii) improving the quality of training to promote the profession
integration of graduates; (iii) promoting research and innovation for development; and (iv) improving university
life. Overall, by project closing, UFHB had implemented 80.4 percent of the 53 planned activities in its PBC
agreement related to the four axes, and UNA had implemented 81.2 percent of its 69 planned activities.
Three consultants were hired to support the institutions in the monitoring and implementation of the PBCs.

There were several important shortcomings affecting the achievement of the first project objective. Project
support for the dissemination of the new Higher Education Law was cancelled in October 2023 due to delays
in law approval; the M&E impact was limited due to delays in improving the SIGESN system, limiting data
availability; the impact of the National Agency for Quality Assurance of Higher Education (ANAQ-ESR) was
also limited due to delays in issuing the decree that was needed to allow for implementation of the law, and
by 2023 all activities related to establishing the quality assurance system under Component 1 were cancelled.
While Component 1 activities aimed at modernizing the governance of tertiary education nationally through
development of a financing system using PBC, this project support was eventually limited to two of the seven
institutions planned to be supported (achieving around 29 percent of the planned progress toward the original
outcome target). At the same time, under component 1, the project supported several additional activities
related to improving the management of the higher education system, while the project-supported PBC
activities in two universities benefited over a third of the higher education students in Côte d’Ivoire, including
students enrolled in STEM programs. As stated in the ICR (p. 10), one of the supported institutions (UFHB)
enrolled more than 30 percent of all students in higher education, and as a result, it was considered to be the
most appropriate pilot for future actions for other universities. The other supported institution (UNA) was
entirely specialized in STEM, and therefore financing UNA was considered strategic for the promotion of
STEM programs and girls’ enrollment in such programs (ICR, p. 10).

The achievement of objective 1 is rated Modest under both the original and revised outcome targets, given
the (i) non-achievement of the original outcome target; (ii) achievement of one of two original IRI targets; (iii)
achievement of the revised outcome target; (iv) the piloting of PBCs at two tertiary institutions having
supported some institutional autonomy and demonstrated the potential of results-based financing to enhance
institutional capacity and autonomy; and (v) overall achievements under component 1 having laid a
foundation for reform of the higher education system.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase enrollment in professional programs.

Rationale
As originally designed, the second project component was to finance the creation of a new category of short
professional programs that will be more relevant and demand-driven; and review existing Higher Technician
Certificate (BTS) programs and adjust them to labor market needs. Together these interventions were directly
supportive of the second objective of the PDO statement: to increase enrollment in professional programs,



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



the achievement of which was expected to contribute to the higher order, long-term objectives of increased
number of trained and employed public and private workforce, and long-term stability of Côte d’Ivoire.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      There were no students enrolled in ISFPT, not achieving the original target of 1,000 students, of
       which 50 percent female students (the indicator was dropped because the related activities were
       cancelled at the 2021 restructuring).
      There were no existing BTS programs revised under the project, not achieving the original
       unchanged target of 70 percent of existing BTS programs revised under the project (this
       indicator was introduced under the 2021 restructuring). The target for this IRI was not met because
       the implementation of the BTS activities was delayed and then cancelled in 2023.

Outcomes

There were no students enrolled in professional programs (short-term degrees) supported by the project, not
achieving the original target of 5,600 students (of which 50 percent female students) or the revised
target of 2,000 students (of which 50 percent female students). This PDO indicator was revised
downward due to cancellation of project funds that led to a reduction in the number of project-supported
tertiary institutions from 7 to 2, and the objective was not achieved because the reform program for
professional diplomas was only started in 2023. The reform program was to be developed and then new
students were to be enrolled, which did not happen during the project period.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the quality and labor market relevance of degree programs of participating public tertiary
institutions.

Rationale
As originally designed, the third project component was to provide PBCs to six public universities to improve
academic programs and develop doctoral schools, and to upgrade the Institut National Polytechnique
Houphouet Boigny (INPHE) engineering school to enhance STEM programs. These activities were directly
supportive of the third objective of the PDO statement: to improve the quality and labor market relevance of
degree programs of participating public tertiary institutions.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      The percentage of girls enrolled in STEM increased from a baseline of 14 percent in 2019 to 26.3
       percent in 2024, surpassing the original unchanged target of 25 percent.
      The percentage of public universities supported by the project having an internal QA unit increased
       from a baseline of 0 percent in 2019 to 100 percent in 2024, achieving the original unchanged


                                                                                                Page 10 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



     target of 100 percent. The QA units within both institutions trained members of the Internal Quality
     Review Unit (CIAQ) and organized self-evaluation assessments, among other activities.
    The percentage of institutions supported by the project with interface structures for the acquisition of
     professional skills increased from a baseline of 0 percent in 2019 to 100 percent in 2024, reaching
     the original unchanged target of 100 percent. Within UFHB, related activities included: (i)
     development and implementation of an internship and professional integration policy document; (ii)
     development of eight professional courses in communication; and (iii) organization of a career day
     with UN agencies. Within UNA, activities included: (i) development of a strategy for the
     operationalization of an internship and professional integration service; (ii) organization of workshops
     to validate the strategy and action plan to raise awareness of stakeholders; (iii) organization of career
     days and professional consultation fora on the UNA website; (iv) establishment of a UNA alumni
     network; and (v) establishment of an incubator in the field of animal and plant production.
    There were no programs in public universities supported by the project that meet minimum standards
     set by the National Quality Assurance Authority, not achieving the original unchanged target of 75
     percent. The target for this IRI was not achieved due to the lack of quality assurance minimum
     standards during project implementation, as the decree for implementing the ANAQ-ESR law was
     approved only eight months before project closure.
    A total of 3,250 students, of whom 970 female students, benefited from direct interventions to enhance
     learning, falling far short of the original target of 25,000 students, of whom 12,500 female
     students, and not achieving the revised - due to reduced number of beneficiary institutions - target
     of 10,000 students, of whom 5,000 female students. The target for this IRI was not met because
     only 3,250 students from UFHB and UNA benefited from services associated with this IRI, such
     as insertion and curriculum vitae writing.
    100 percent of the received grievances (including on GBV) were addressed in line with time
     stipulations in the operations manual, exceeding the original unchanged target of 90 percent (the
     overall GRM system was established at UFHB and UNA).
    Additionally, the PBCs for UFHB and UNA included support for improving the quality and relevance of
     training programs and research and development. Some of these activities were the following:
           o Relevance of teaching and training. Within UFHB, activities included: (i) review of 31
             bachelor’s and master’s degree courses according to the LMD approach as well as course
             validation workshops; (ii) pedagogical training for 250 teachers and researchers; (iii) provision
             of pedagogical materials to pedagogical units; and (iv) provision of scholarships to women for
             STEM programs. Within UNA, activities included: (i) revision of two curricula; (ii) development
             of procedures to UNA student pathways for study; (iii) pedagogical training for teachers; (iv)
             training for teachers for online teaching; and (iv) establishment of a recording studio for on-
             line/distance learning.
           o Promoting research and innovation for development. Within UFHB, activities included: (i)
             training of 40 teachers and 435 research teachers in proposal writing and intellectual property;
             (ii) training for 241 students in scientific writing; (iii) conducting inventory of all laboratories and
             assessing ongoing laboratory equipment needs; and (iv) assessment and evaluation of
             existing partnership agreements. Within UNA, activities included: (i) development and
             dissemination of a research policy; (ii) revitalization of research labs through renovation of labs
             and organization of scientific days; (iii) scientific writing training workshop for researchers; (iv)
             organization of a training workshop on fundraising; (v) creation of a database of UNA research
             results/products; (vi) organization of a training workshop on intellectual property; (vii)
             development of a manual of procedures and management for university-based small


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



                                           incubators; and (viii) organization of the monitoring and evaluation of the activities of the
                                           production units.

                            Outcomes

                                  There were no existing programs in public universities supported by the project with at least 10
                                   percentage points increase in graduates’ employment rates, not reaching the original unchanged
                                   target of 75 percent of existing programs in public universities supported by the project with at least
                                   10 percentage points increase in graduates’ employment rates.
                                  There were no INPHB programs supported by the project that met international accreditation
                                   standards, not achieving the original target of 75 percent (this PDO-level indicator was dropped
                                   because the related subcomponent was cancelled at the 2021 restructuring, as other donors were
                                   supporting INPHB at the time).

                            The third project objective was not met because the survey to determine its achievement was cancelled in
                            2023. At the same time, most IRI targets associated to the third objective were either met or surpassed.
                            Additionally, as stated in the ICR (p. 16), the UFHB PBC and UNA PBC contributed to the third project
                            objective, as their successful implementation demonstrated how autonomy, under the new higher education
                            law, could improve the quality and labor market relevance of degree programs. Based on that, the
                            achievement of Objective 3 is rated Modest.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the PDOs was Modest, based on modest achievement of the first objective (improved
                            higher education management), negligible achievement of the second objective (increased enrollment in
                            professional programs), and modest achievement of the third objective (improved quality and labor market
                            relevance of degree programs of participating public tertiary institutions).

                            During the November 08, 2024, meeting between the Bank team and IEG, the Bank team shared its views of
                            the project's attribution/contribution and counterfactual as follows.

                            Attribution. While development partners like the AFD (France), the Islamic Development Bank, and others
                            also provided support across the higher education sub-sector, the project support was distinct and
                            complementary. In this regard, the project supported areas such as defining the new higher education law,
                            establishing a national quality assurance agency, and implementing performance contracts for universities,
                            that were not supported by other development partners but were critical for improving the quality and labor
                            market relevance of public university degree programs, and therefore improvements in the quality and
                            relevance of project-supported public universities’ higher education degree programs are to be largely
                            attributed to the project. Also, the UFHB and UNA project-supported performance contracts covered SEA/HS

                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



  awareness-raising and scholarships for females to pursue STEM studies, which contributed to the reported
  increase in girls’ enrollment in STEM programs.

  Counterfactual. Despite its Moderately Unsatisfactory overall performance, the project implemented
  activities - such as revising the higher education law or establishing a national quality assurance agency - that
  were instrumental for aligning the higher education sub-sector with modern standards and enhancing
  institutional capacities, which in the absence of the project were either unlikely to be implemented or would
  have been completed within a substantially longer timeframe.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                     Primary Reason
  Modest                                                      Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency. The project's cost-benefit analysis at appraisal provided a strong rationale for investing in
higher education in Côte d’Ivoire. The analysis found that returns on an additional year of schooling are positive
and increase with schooling duration, and individuals with higher levels of education are more likely to engage in
higher-paying economic activities. The analysis showed that the project was economically cost-effective, with
Net Present Value (NPV) of US$1.5 billion (discounted at 8 percent rate) and Economic Rate of Return (ERR) of
11.3 percent. The economic analysis conducted at the June 2021 restructuring confirmed the project's cost-
effectiveness with an NPV of $495 million (discounted at 10 percent) and an ERR of 11.9 percent, but this
analysis was not updated at the time of the October 2023 restructuring. The end-of-project cost-benefit analysis
indicated that the measurable benefits of the project investments were not economically cost-effective. Using the
same discount rate as the one used by the cost-benefit analysis at the 2021 restructuring (10 percent), the end-
of-project analysis assumed that the project's impact would remain constant over time, and that the average
yearly future earnings of beneficiaries would be at least the average yearly income from the 2021-2022
Harmonized Survey on Households Living Standards. The analysis found that with investment total cost of
approximately US$17.77 million, and discounted benefits estimated at US$9.17 million over 36 years, the NPV
of cashflows is -US$8.32 million, and the associated Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) is 0.5. The ERR of this
investment is 2.2 percent. These results (negative NPV, BCR less than 1, and ERR less than the discount rate)
indicate that the project was not economically viable.

Implementation efficiency. It took less than four months after approval for the project to reach effectiveness,
and the project closed on time and in an orderly process, with near full disbursement (99.5 percent) of the actual
total financing of US$17.08 million. The project’s overall implementation efficiency was affected by several
factors - within and outside the project’s control - that had a negative impact on the project's efficacy, timeliness
of its delivery, and the amount of support that was planned to be provided. The COVID-19 pandemic, which
broke out six months after the project effectiveness, affected the government’s and the Bank’s ability to support
project implementation, leading to some initial delays. Project implementation was also affected by frequent
changes within the government. Between 2019 and 2021, three different ministers of education and several top
officials within the MESRS left their posts, leading to institutional instability and limited stakeholder ownership of
the project, resulting in significant implementation delays, particularly in the review and adoption of the new law
on higher education and scientific research. The project aspects related to QA, LMD system, and doctoral
schools could not move forward without approval of the new law on higher education and scientific research.
Additionally, key studies needed to guide the new law were delayed. The appointment of the Technical
Committee (TC) was also delayed due to changes in ministers, meaning that trained and experienced TC

                                                                                                        Page 13 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



members were replaced with new members who were not familiar with the project. All these delays and changes
in TC appointments led to delays in the implementation of the performance-based contract activities that were
the main responsibility of the TC. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was not under the umbrella of the
MESRS, resulting in the MESRS having limited influence over certain decisions made by the PIU, which also
affected the project’s implementation efficiency. Given the limited stakeholder ownership of the project and the
competing needs of the country due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the government requested a US$70 million
cancellation of the credit to use the resources for COVID-19 recovery actions, at which time only 8.7 percent of
the originally approved credit had been disbursed. Throughout the project period, the implementation delays
persisted due to ongoing institutional instability, limited stakeholder ownership, and continuing discussions over
how to best articulate the new higher education law. These continuous delays led to the October 2023
restructuring and cancellation of further project funding. By project closing, the project's objectives were not
achieved, fewer beneficiaries were reached than anticipated, and only US$17 million (or 17 percent) of the
approved credit of US$100 million was disbursed. At the same time, as part of the Bank's corporate strategy
policy to assist clients in addressing the adverse effects resulting from the COVID-19 epidemic, the Bank
backed the 2021 restructuring. Additionally, considering project delays, low disbursement of project funding, and
little time left until the project end, the Bank’s approval of the October 2023 restructuring freed up IDA funding
for addressing other Côte d'Ivoire development needs.

The project was economically inefficient largely due to the significant reduction of project funding. Moreover, the
calculation of the project’s economic efficiency did not consider the unquantifiable project benefits. At the same
time, despite numerous delays and cancellation of key activities, positive aspects of the operation’s
implementation efficiency included timely project effectiveness, nearly full disbursement of the project’s actual
funding, timely project closure, and – given delays, low disbursement of project funds, and low stakeholder
ownership – the appropriate decision of the Bank to restructure the project and reprogram the bulk of project
funds (83 percent) to help the government to address the COVID-19 emergency (which was a priority for both
the Bank and the government) and address other development needs of Côte d’Ivoire by funding a development
policy operation that was being prepared with the Bank [Côte d’Ivoire Second Investment for Growth
Development Policy Financing - DPF (P179006)]. Based on that, the operation’s overall efficiency is rated
Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                 11.30
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                              2.20
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated high; efficacy is rated modest for the first objective and the third objective,
and negligible for the second objective; and efficiency is rated modest. These ratings produce an Outcome
rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory, reflecting significant shortcomings in the operation’s preparation,
implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project contributed to limited institutional strengthening in the field of higher education, mitigating the
risks to achieved outcomes under the project. This includes (i) providing support for the development of the
higher education law, policies, and decrees that serve as a foundation for further improvements within the
higher education system; (ii) piloting of PBCs at two tertiary institutions that support some institutional
autonomy and demonstrate the potential of results-based financing to enhance institutional capacity and
autonomy by creating and implementing plans with quantifiable indicators for the use of resources; and (iii)
supporting studies that can inform future institutional higher education reforms, which included the produced
research on the OIPDES, BTS reform, SIGESN strengthening, ANAQ-ESR development, and the
development of a higher education financing system. If further implemented, these achievements can lead to
additional institutional improvements in the higher education sub-sector. However, as stated in the ICR (pp.
25-26), the risk that the project’s development outcome will not be sustained is high, related to stakeholder
support for the reforms that the project-supported legislation and research have articulated, combined with
financial commitment to related reforms -- specifically, the continued use of PBCs. The government has
stated that these contracts will not be continued due to limited resources and ongoing debates on university
autonomy. At the time of the ICR, there were no follow-on projects in the pipeline, and the MESRS had not
stated that activities supported by the project would continue to be financed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Project design was based on international evidence from successful higher education interventions and
  lessons learned from higher education operations in Africa. The project components were clearly
  structured, and the activities were comprehensive, complementary to each other, relevant to the country
  and sector context, and selected in close collaboration with the government. The choice of financing
  instrument was adequate given the limited institutional capacity of the implementing agency (the MESRS)
  and the country’s post-crisis recovery situation, as Investment Project Financing facilitated the provision
  of technical assistance in support of institutional strengthening, and the country met the minimum
  requirements of the World Bank Policy and Directive for Investment Project Financing. The project
  objectives were clear, outcome-oriented, relevant, and appropriately pitched for government capacity and

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



  the development status of the higher education sub-sector in Côte d'Ivoire. The results framework (RF)
  contained baselines and indicators that enabled tracking progress towards project outcomes. The project
  risk was adequately assessed as substantial given the volatile political and social environment;
  permanent risks associated with institutional changes, such as changes in ministers; risks associated
  with stakeholders’ commitment to reforming tertiary education; and risks related to institutional capacity
  for implementation, as this was the first WBG-supported higher education project to be implemented by
  the MESRS. Mitigation measures were centered on continuous consultations to promote buy-in from
  stakeholders; provision of technical assistance for development of policies, conducting studies, and
  capacity building; incorporating financial management (FM) procedures into the project implementation
  manual (PIM); and utilizing the experience from the Africa Center for Excellence Project (ACE - P15311)
  on control mechanisms for direct transfers of funds.

  However, overall risk mitigation measures – addressing political and institutional risk – were inadequate.
  A major issue with project design was the inclusion of activities that required government approval of the
  Higher Education Law, which had not been approved when the project was approved and over which the
  project had no control. This design flaw ultimately led to delays in project implementation and affected the
  achievement of outcome targets. Also, the fact that the PIU was not under the umbrella of the MESRS
  resulted in the MESRS having limited influence over certain decisions made by the PIU (ICR, p. 26) – an
  issue that could have been addressed by a proper institutional analysis at the project design
  stage. Additionally, some university staff members perceived the implementation of performance
  contracts as an added burden with limited financial or other incentives to take them on (ICR p. 27),
  indicating a flaw in the stakeholder analysis during project design.

  The project implementation plans involved using government structures to create more ownership of the
  project’s intended reforms and to strengthen the capacity within the MESRS. The project created a
  Steering Committee led by the Minister of the MESRS and consisting of representatives from the
  ministries responsible for the economy and finance, budget, education, employment, and public
  administration. It also included university presidents, representatives of the private sector and private
  education providers, the director of INPHB, and the Technical Committee (TC) coordinator. The TC was
  to be established within MESRS and was responsible for preparing project implementation documents
  and managing the entire performance contact process. The participating tertiary institutions were
  responsible for project activities within their own institutions, including support for the LMD system,
  academic and professional programs, and quality assurance. Each participating university was to benefit
  from PBCs and was to set up PBC management teams. The PIU was to coordinate project day-to-day
  activities, manage all fiduciary aspects of supervision, manage environmental and social safeguards
  aspects, and support institutional capacity building. The PIU was part of the BCP-Employment Monitoring
  and Evaluation Unit, which was used to implement the fiduciary aspects of WBG-supported projects in
  Côte d’Ivoire and was tasked to ensure that all project activities conformed to WBG procedures and
  fiduciary standards.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                   Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



 Regular supervision missions - staffed with education specialists, fiduciary and safeguards staff, and
 consultants – provided the needed technical expertise to support project implementation. The supervision
 teams worked with the PIU and consistently reported on FM, procurement, and safeguards progress during
 supervision missions, and systematically documented project progress in aide memories, back-to-office
 reports, and Implementation Status and Results Reports, keeping Bank management informed on progress
 and providing the foundation for the ICR's analysis. Given the challenges faced by changes in education
 ministers and the departure of staff from the MESRS, the Bank regularly and actively engaged with the
 government to try to make progress towards implementation. The Bank supported the project’s 2021
 restructuring as part of its corporate strategic policy for supporting clients to address the adverse effects of
 the COVID-19 pandemic. When the government asked the Bank to restructure the project due to
 implementation delays, the Bank worked with the government to restructure the project so that IDA
 resources from the project could be reprogrammed to the government's COVID-19 recovery plan in the
 health sector, which became the government's priority. At the same time, the Bank worked closely with the
 MESRS to ensure that the project's ambition was maintained. The Bank held virtual meetings with the PIU
 to ensure continued project implementation despite the COVID-19-related interruptions and delays. Also,
 given the continued project implementation delays and the little time left until its closing (only five months),
 in October 2023, the Bank approved the government’s restructuring request to reprogram further project
 resources to the DPF - P179006, enabling IDA resources to be freed up for other development needs in
 Côte d’Ivoire. In both restructurings, the Bank worked with the government to ensure that IDA resources
 could be used effectively within the government/WBG lending portfolio. As reported by the Bank team in an
 interview dated 11-08-24, there was no formal MTR for this project due to the following reasons: (i) the
 process that led to cancelling US$70 million of the project's financing with the 2021 restructuring involved
 regular and detailed discussions between the Bank and the government that lasted around one year, which
 enabled reassessing the project’s design and implementation approach, thus making a formal MTR at the
 time unnecessary; and (ii) the rescheduled for August 2023 MTR did not take place, as - given the project’s
 continued MU performance at the time - discussions between the Bank and the government focused on the
 projects’ potential closure or partial cancellation, ultimately resulting in the government’s request in October
 2023 to cancel further project financing and restructuring. As reported by the Bank team, despite the lack of
 a formal MTR, the government and the Bank – with staff based in Côte d'Ivoire - consistently worked
 together toward enhancing the project's implementation pace and development outcomes.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was clearly articulated at the outset and did not change. The PDO-level indicators that were
 chosen were clearly defined and provided good measures of outcomes. The PAD identified baselines and
 targets, as well as data sources, frequency of reporting, data collection methodology, and responsible
 authorities for each indicator (PAD, pp. 40-47). The M&E arrangements included regular monitoring and

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



 reporting by the PIU. Additionally, at appraisal, it was envisaged that the project’s M&E would involve
 creating a National Higher Education Management Information System (SIGESN), as well as support for
 producing statistical yearbooks and establishing a labor market observatory (OIPDES) that would help
 gather information on: (i) labor market trends; (ii) labor market insertion of graduates and trainees of the
 skills training programs; and (iii) feedback from employers. This was to be accompanied by a graduate
 tracking survey. Each institution that developed a PBC was to establish a project unit responsible for
 monitoring the PBC.



b. M&E Implementation
  At the time of the last Implementation Status and Results Report (dated 06-16-2023), M&E was rated
  Satisfactory. Reporting of M&E data was carried out during the entire life of the project. The RF was
  revised to refine indicators, both targets and definitions. Statistical yearbooks were produced to provide
  higher education statistical information on enrollment, graduation rates, etc. The OIPDES study was
  validated in June 2023, but the OIPDES was not established during the project period due to delays.
  Similarly, the SIGESN system was validated in June 2023 and a masterplan for its rollout was submitted
  in December 2023, but the system was not implemented during the life of the project. Activities related to
  the establishment of the National Quality Assurance Authority were cancelled during the 2023
  restructuring. The graduate tracking survey was not conducted during the project period, while PBCs
  were implemented only at UFHB and UNA.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used to update the results framework and - together with data on the PBCs’
  implementation - to inform the analysis of the ICR. Although statistical yearbooks were produced
  and made available, there was no evidence that the data were used to inform policy decisions related to
  higher education or change the course of implementation. The expected MESRS M&E institutional
  strengthening was not achieved due to delayed or cancelled MESRS activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was rated as Category "B" partial assessment, activating three safeguard policies: OP4.01 -
   Environmental Assessment; OP4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources; and OP4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement,
   based on adverse environmental and social impacts associated with new ISFPT classrooms’ construction
   and PBC renovation activities that were manageable to an accepted level, as they were generally less
   adverse, small-scale, and site-specific. An environmental assessment was carried out during project
   preparation, which led to the development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF and RFP were disclosed on time in the
   Bank's InfoShop and in the country. The project had adequate safeguards capacity at the PIU level, with a

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



  full-time Social and Environmental Safeguard specialist, experienced in environmental/occupational health
  and safety and GBV, who closely monitored implementation and regularly updated the Bank's safeguards
  team. Regular quarterly reports were provided on environmental and safeguards performance. Most of the
  environmental and social work monitoring focused on monitoring the rehabilitation works in UNA and UFHB,
  which adhered to the ESMF's environmental and social safeguard measures. There were no project
  activities that physically and/or economically relocated anyone due to the cancellation of the originally
  planned construction activities. Overall, the project was compliant with all established and applicable
  environmental and social safeguards. A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was developed, and the
  safeguards team reported regularly on GRM activities. The GRM actors and committees were trained on
  issues of sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment, as well as handling sensitive complaints. By the
  project closing, six complaints were received and properly handled, with two sensitive complaints referred to
  the national platform for GBV care.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. FM arrangements were adequate and remained the same over the project's life.
  The project's Financing Agreement's provisions were followed throughout project implementation. In terms
  of financial reporting, the BCP-Employment Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (BCP-Emploi) complied with
  financial reporting requirements as follows: (i) unaudited interim financial reports were deemed satisfactory
  and timely; (ii) the hiring of external auditors was completed by the project's closing; and (iii) external
  financial audits were successfully completed, timely, and of unqualified opinion (clean reports), highlighting
  the fact that the project's financial resources had been judiciously managed and used for their intended
  purposes. FM supervisions identified areas for improvement during implementation such as updating the
  procedures manual to include performance-based contracts, and correlated the staff performance
  scorecards with accounting years, which were all resolved without negative impact.

  Procurement. The Bank's procurement team conducted regular implementation support missions and
  found that project performance was satisfactory throughout project implementation. The procurement staff
  was well trained and part of the BCP-Emploi. Procurement consultants helped UFHB and UNA follow the
  Bank's procurement procedures. Procurement staff routinely prepared, received approval, and submitted
  realistic procurement plans aligned with the budget. The BCP-Emploi used the World Bank’s Systematic
  Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement for managing procurement contracts. The Bank's procurement staff
  worked closely with project implementation entities to resolve any challenges during implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  None reported.



d. Other
  Gender. Relevant indicators were gender disaggregated, ensuring continued efforts to improve gender
  equity in tertiary education. While the gender disaggregated indicator objectives were not reached, the
  project contributed to girls’ increased enrollment in STEM (more than envisaged) and creating of safe

                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



   environments. The project’s safeguards team developed and validated a manual for the management of
   complaints related to sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment (SEA/HS), and a GRM was established to
   facilitate the reporting of GBV complaints. Also, the UFHB and UNA performance contracts covered
   SEA/HS awareness-raising and scholarships for females to pursue STEM studies.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    Based on Moderately
                                                                                    Unsatisfactory Quality at Entry
                                 Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance                                                                    and Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                 Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                    Outcome rating, consistent with
                                                                                    IEG guidelines.
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 26-27) presents several lessons generated through this project:

In a volatile political environment, careful and detailed political economy analysis is an
essential part of project preparation. As the experience of this project showed, even when there
is initial support, leadership changes can impede project success, especially when project objectives
are closely tied to the vision of a specific government official, and a change in leadership causes the
vision to become misaligned, consensus to be lost, or priorities to shift, which can undermine the
reform agenda. To maintain a project on track, it is important to engage new officials proactively,
build institutional mechanisms to protect reforms from political changes, and ensure project design is
flexible enough to adapt to shifts in leadership while maintaining focus on core objectives.

Implementing performance contracts in universities can be improved by providing more
incentives and empowerment to staff. Incentive structures are crucial in reform efforts and can
drive long-term behavioral and institutional changes. For a project to be successfully implemented, it
is therefore important to identify and embed incentives in project design. In the case of this project,
some university staff members perceived the implementation of performance contracts as an added
burden with limited financial or other incentives to take them on, suggesting that providing additional
incentives and empowerment to select staff, which could be phased out as performance contracts
become "standard practice," could have led to better overall implementation.

Aligning institutional oversight and reporting structures can reduce the likelihood of
conflicts and promote effective coordination in multi-agency projects. The PIU – which had
prior experience in implementing WBG projects - was overseen by the Ministry of Youth Promotion


                                                                                                      Page 20 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Cote d'Ivoire Higher Education Project (P160642)



and Civic Service, which had been established under the Emergency Youth Employment and Skills
Development Project (P122546). The fact that the PIU was not under the umbrella of the MESRS
resulted in the MESRS having limited influence over certain decisions made by the PIU.
Consequently, MESRS did not feel empowered or in control of the project, leading to unnecessary
tensions.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, with its various parts logically linked and coherent. It was candid about
implementation delays and provided an overall adequate, critical assessment of the project's main
achievements and shortcomings, as well as detailed explanations of the project’s changes introduced at the two
restructurings. Key factors affecting implementation, Bank performance, and M&E were well assessed. The ICR
contained a robust cost-benefit analysis. The lessons presented in the report were clear and useful. The ICR
adhered to the guidelines overall, with some minor shortcomings, such as (i) the ICR did not mention that the
CPF for FY16-FY19 was extended to cover the period until the CPF for FY23-FY27 was adopted in order to
confirm whether the PDO remained relevant to the Bank’s country priorities throughout the entire project period;
(ii) the ICR’s discussion of efficacy lacked an assessment of attribution/contribution and the counterfactual; (iii)
there were some gaps in the ICR’s presentation of the project’s original theory of change (Figure 1, p. 5), which
did not include some expected outputs of Component 2 activities (i.e., two ISFPT created, BTS curriculum
revised, trainers of new BTS curriculum trained), while an intermediate result indicator (‘’Increased number of
students enrolled in ISFPT’’) was presented as an output; and (iv) some important information in the ICR’s
lessons section should have been included in the ICR’s efficacy and efficiency discussions. These, however,
were largely addressed by the Bank team on 11-08-24.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 21
