     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024307

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P122219                                  ILAS Project

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Croatia                                  Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-80860,IBRD-89000                    31-Oct-2015                                          41,848,508.60

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Aug-2011                              16-Jan-2024

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         23,800,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                          47,870,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                      41,848,508.60                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Fernando Manibog           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 4) is:

   " To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the efficiency,
   transparency and cost effectiveness of government services ".



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



   The PDO did not change with the Additional Financing (AF) for the project.

   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR), the PDO is unpacked as follows:

   PDO 1. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the efficiency of
   government services.

   PDO 2. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the transparency of
   government services.

   PDO 3. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the cost effectiveness of
   government services.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Apr-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 6-7).

   A. Land Registration System Development. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.18 million. With
   AF, the cost was US$10.98 million. The actual cost was US$9.69 million. Activities in this component
   planned to improve and automate the land registration system in the municipal courts under the Ministry of
   Justice and Public Administration (MoJPA ) and the Land Registry Office (LRO). Activities included
   developing a land registration strategy, scanning and digitizing land registry documents and improving the
   legal framework and land registry data for migration to the Joint Information System (JIS).

   B. Spatial Information and Cadaster System Modernization. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$2.84 million. With AF, the cost was US$6.14 million. The actual cost was US$7.78 million. Activities in
   this component aimed to improve the quality of spatial and cadaster data maintained by the State Geodetic
   Administration (SGA) and implement national spatial data Infrastructure (NSDI). Activities included
   supporting the SGA with its restructuring (including improving the physical premises of regional offices and
   preparing a strategy for SGA)), improving the Geoportal and supporting the SGA digital archive and
   scanning of cadaster documents.

   C. Improving Digital Services. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$7.75 million. With AF, the cost
   was US$12.55 million. The actual cost was US$13.36 million. Activities in this component aimed to support
   developing the Joint Information System (JIS) and rolling out the JIS to all cadaster land registry

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ILAS Project (P122219)



  offices, training and financing hardware, establishing a structure to manage the JIS operation over the long
  term and strengthen institutional capacities for transforming digital cadaster map sheets to a unified, geo-
  referenced cadaster map.

  D. Project Management, Training, Public Awareness. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.70
  million. With AF, the cost was US$5.30 million. The actual cost was US$4.40 million. Activities in this
  component aimed to support a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for fiduciary and monitoring and
  evaluation, training programs for SGA and land registry staff, educational programs for geodetic and legal
  faculties and public awareness campaigns.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal (including from non World Bank sources) was US$50.61
  million. With AF of US$ 23.80 million, the total revised estimate was US$64.15 million. The actual cost was
  US$58.13 million.

  Financing. The project was financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
  loan of US$24.07 million. AF of US$23.80 million was approved on August 1, 2018. With this, the total Bank
  financing for the project was US$47.87 million. The amount disbursed was US$41.84 million. There was
  parallel financing for complementary activities via the European Union's (EU) Instrument for Pre-Accession
  (IPA).

  Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$2.74 million was planned at appraisal. Their actual
  contribution was US$16.28 million.

  Dates. The project was approved on August 4, 2011, became effective on November 15, 2011 and was to
  close on October 31, 2015. AF was approved on August 1, 2018. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held
  on November 6, 2013. The project closed on January 16, 2024.

  Changes. There were four level 2 restructurings for the parent project. There were two level 2
  restructurings following the AF. The changes made during the project lifetime are listed sequentially.

        Funds were reallocated between disbursement categories through the first restructuring on
         January 16, 2014.

  The main change through the second restructuring on August 7, 2015.

        The closing date was extended by eighteen months from October 31, 2015 to April 30, 2017, to
         compensate for the delays in rolling out the JIS.

  The following changes were made through the third project restructuring of April 24, 2017:

        The target for reducing transaction time for land registry and cadaster was reduced .
        The closing date was extended by a year from April 30, 2017, to April 30, 2018, to provide time for
         cadaster and land registry offices to reduce transaction processing times using the new services
         provided by the JIS.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



   The closing date was extended by eight months from April 30. 2018 to December 31, 2018 through the
   fourth project restructuring on April 24, 2018, for fully disbursing the original loan.

   These changes were made with the AF for the project on August 1, 2018.

         The scope was scaled up for components A, B and C activities. The activities included: (i) scaling up
          the percentage of requests for land sector services lodged online: (ii) expanding investments in the
          digital services of SGA, MoJPA and the LROs: (iii) support to the LROs that were underperforming in
          processing transaction times and relocation of the Zagreb LRO: (iv) implementing a joint cadaster
          and land registration strategy: and (v) scaling up efforts to increase the number of harmonized
          cadastral parcels in the JIS.
         The AF project was to close on January 16, 2022.

   The following change was made through the fourth project restructuring on April 23, 2021.

   The closing date of the AF loan was extended by a year to January 16, 2023, for completing the ongoing
   activities that were delayed due to a combination of factors caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the
   2020 earthquakes.

   The following change was made through the fifth project restructuring on December 29, 2022.

   The closing date was extended by an year from January 16, 2023 to January 16, 2024 for completing the
   ongoing AF activities.

   Split rating. The PDO remained unchanged throughout the project. Although the target for one indicator
   was reduced, the target was revised at a relatively early stage in the project, when 17% of the Bank
   financing was disbursed. Given that revisions were made at an early stage in the project when the amount
   disbursed was relatively low, this review is not based on a split rating to derive overall project outcome.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
County context. When this project was under preparation, Croatia had met the political criteria for
European Union (EU) entry and made substantial progress on introducing the rule of law. As Croatia
entered the final stage on EU accession, further reforms were necessary for Croatia to complete its
transition to a market economy. Specifically, reforms were required for improving land tenure security and
strengthening Croatia's land administration and management system. (Croatia became an EU member on
July 1, 2013).

Sector context. At appraisal, Croatia's land administration had been moving towards digital transformation,
with progress made towards functional integration between the Ministry of Justice and Public Administration
(MoJPA) responsible for overseeing Land Registry Offices (LROs), and the State Geodetic Administration
(SGA) responsible for Cadaster offices (COs). The MoJPA and SGA had developed a Joint Information
System (JIS) - a central database of cadaster and land registry information - for harmonizing data. JIS was
piloted in 2010 and had to be rolled out to COs and LROs. Further, institutional restructuring of the SGA

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



and the land registry function at MoJPA and improving the quality of land registry and cadastral for
ensuring interoperability of JIS with other key registers (such as the e-government platform) were required
in the sector context.

 The Government also needed to develop the national spatial infrastructure (NSDI) and geospatial
information in line with the EU's Infrastructure for Spatial Transformation (INSPIRE) Directive. As Croatia
prepared to enter the EU, geospatial information - recognized globally as necessary for environmental
monitoring, agricultural subsidies, regional and municipal planning and transportation planning and other
government services - was deemed necessary for improving government service delivery.

Government strategy at appraisal. At appraisal, the PDO was fully aligned with the Government's
Strategic Development Framework (SDF) for 2006 - 2013. The SDF identified developing a fully digital land
registry as a priority for enhancing transparency in public administration.

Current Government strategy. The PDO is relevant to the current government strategy outlined in
National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP) for 2021 - 2026, the National Development Strategy (NDS)
2030 and EU-level Inspire Directive. Under NRRP, the project's activities directly contributed to the
"Economy Pillar", through its investments in providing e-services. The project supported the NDS goals,
particularly those related to effective and efficient judiciary, public administration and digital transformation
of society. Finally, the project's investments in establishing the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI)
would help in aligning Croatia's with the EU's Inspire Directive for making geospatial information
interoperable among EU member states.

World Bank (WB) strategy at appraisal. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with two pillars of the Country
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2009 - 2012: Pillar two: Strengthening private-sector led growth and
accelerating EU convergence. and Pillar four: Increasing the sustainability of long-term development.

WB current strategy. The PDO continues to be relevant to WB strategy for Croatia. The PDO is well-
aligned with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Croatia for 2019 - 2024. The PDO was relevant
to the Focus Area 1. Enhancing Public Sector Performance and Institutions and the CPF objective of
"improving efficiency of public administration to implement strategy and deliver services': and Focus Area 3.
Strengthening market institutions to enable a dynamic enterprise sector and the CPF objective of
"improving business climate and increasing the private sector's role in the economy". The CPF highlighted
the need for "reducing land transaction processing times", "increasing the percentage of applicants per
annum lodging land registration requests online" and "increasing the use of spatial data by government
agencies/ministries.

Relevance of the PDO. When this project was prepared, the Bank had completed the first phase of
the Real Property Registration and Cadaster Project in 2010. The outcomes of this project represented the
initial steps of land registry and cadaster reform in Croatia towards simplifying procedures, improving
efficiency of government services, increasing transparency, developing joint procedures and integrating
land database under the JIS.

This project aimed at continuing the land administration and management reforms by rolling out the JIS to
all cadaster and land registry offices and by developing the national spatial development infrastructure
(NSDI) and geospatial information in line with the EU's Directive. The development objective, was aligned
with the current Bank strategy and directly responded to the country's requirements. The PDO objectives



                                                                                                       Page 5 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ILAS Project (P122219)



               were appropriately pitched at the outcome level of the results chain to address the identified problems. The
               relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the efficiency of
                             government services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The project activities aimed at addressing the challenges associated with the limited
                             integration of land registry offices (LROs) and cadaster offices (COs) to support digital transformation in the
                             land sector. The outputs of activities such as scanning paper archives of the LROs, formulating a land
                             registration strategy, preparing the legal framework, and developing software applications and data entry
                             processes in cadastral municipalities, were likely to aid in reducing transaction processing times for Croatia's
                             land registry offices and cadaster offices. The causal links between the inputs (project activities), outputs and
                             outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

                             Outputs.

                                        The JIS was operational in 113 COs as targeted, and 109 LROs, exceeding the target of 107.
                                         Customers could access land registry and cadaster information at either a LRO or a CO and access
                                         information about a property in any part of Croatia regardless of the official jurisdiction of the LRO or
                                         CO.
                                        67.5 million pages of land records were scanned, with digitized information made available to LRO
                                         and CO staff via the JIS. This indicator was monitored without a specified end-target, as this activity
                                         was no longer under the project, but financed by the EU.
                                        The scanning center was constructed in Vinkovci as targeted for digitizing analogue and cadastral
                                         maps and spatial information for uploading into the JIS and harmonization with the land registry
                                         data. Two central archives - one for the MoJPA in Gospic and one for the SGA in Gina were
                                         constructed in line with EU standards. These facilities are now the main caches for paper and land
                                         registry and cadastral records in Croatia. The Zagreb LRO and three regional COs were constructed
                                         for streamlining businesses practices in accordance with Croatia's broader judicial reform and digital
                                         transformation initiatives.
                                        435 women from the MoJPA and 461 from the SGA were trained under the project. Targets were not
                                         specified for this indicator.


                                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ILAS Project (P122219)



Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to lead to two outcomes: (i) reduce transaction processing times
for land registration and cadaster services; and (ii) increase customer satisfaction with the land administration
services.

      Following the MoJPA and SGA's efforts to roll out the JIS to all LROs and COS, develop a template
       for the consolidation of technical and human capacities at LROs and COs, the processing times for
       LRS reduced from 46 days at the baseline to 8.08 days (primarily for sales and mortgages), exceeding
       the revised target of ten days and close to the original target of seven days.
      The processing time for cadaster services dropped from 30 days at the baseline to six days,
       exceeding both the revised and original targets of ten and seven days respectively.
      Customer satisfaction surveys carried out in 2016, 2018 and 2021 revealed high satisfaction rating,
       with the 2021 survey having overall scores of 4.8 for COs and 4.7 for LROs on a scale of one to five.
       The surveys collected information about the users' understanding of services, service accessibility and
       performance of the LRO and CO staff.

Although the intended outcomes were either exceeded, achieved or almost achieved, the extent to which the
outcomes were attributable to the project cannot be ascertained, given the interdependencies between this
project and the complementary project financed by the EU. Efficacy of the PDO is hence rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the transparency of
government services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project activities aimed at improving the transparency of the land registration
process. The outputs such as constructing a scan center, scanning and indexing paper records in selected
places, constructing and renovating office premises for serving the public, institutional strengthening of the
State Geodetic Office (SGO's) and public awareness campaigns, were likely to aid in the outcome of
increasing the transparency of the land registration processes. The causal links between inputs, outputs and
outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      Besides the outputs described above, which were also relevant to this PDO, the project aided in
       introducing the JIS's One-Stop Shop (OSS) for land services. This output provided citizens and
       businesses with an online platform for accessing information and submitting queries concerning land




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ILAS Project (P122219)



       and property in Croatia. Overall, the nine-web services provided by the JIS gave the users information
       ranging from land registry extracts, cadastral map copies and public notary services.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above, were expected to contribute to transparent land service transactions monitored
through the percentage of customers lodging land services on line.

      68.23% of customers lodged land requests online, far exceeding the target of 20%. The ICR noted
       that achievement of this figure was incentivized by the Government's Land Registration Act of 2019
       that mandated online submission of land transactions.
      There were 6,769,000 requests for information processed online via the Geoportals (as compared to
       850,000 requests at the baseline). End-target for this indicator was not specified. The ICR (para 38)
       noted that cadastral surveyors now actively use the JIS's e-services concerning geodetic elaborates,
       which are updated sketches of any new constructions that occur on a cadastral parcel and that 100%
       of all new geodetic elaborates are now submitted in a standardized digital form through the JIS.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, given that the outcomes were exceeded or achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3. To modernize the land administration and management system to improve the cost effectiveness of
government services.

Rationale
Theory of change. The project aimed at digital transformation at the MoJPD and the SGO. The outputs of
activities such as purchasing hardware for Geoportal development, harmonizing and georeferencing digital
cadastral maps for municipalities, harmonizing LRO data for making them interoperable with Croatia's
personal identification number register and the tax administration system and rolling out the JIS to LROs and
COs were likely to aid in improving the cost-effectiveness of service transactions. The causal links between
inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

The theory of change for the PDOs were predicated on the these assumptions: One, the government
continues to prioritize land sector reforms: Two. there is adequate capacities of the implementing agencies:
and three, there is sustained stakeholder engagement on the benefits of e-services. These explicitly stated
assumptions proved to be realistic for achieving the intended outcomes.

Outputs.

In addition to the outputs described above, the following outputs were relevant for this objective.



                                                                                                      Page 8 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ILAS Project (P122219)




                                  The cadastral maps of 2,498 municipalities were homogenized for ensuring their consistency to a
                                   uniform standard, far exceeding the target of 400. The field surveys conducted as targeted in ten
                                   additional cadastral municipalities, increased coverage of updated information in Croatia's
                                   cadaster. The project contributed to the harmonization and transfer of 1,640,381 parcels to the land
                                   database maintained in the JIS as targeted.
                                  The project aided in providing capacity building for 1,598 and 4,736 technical staff of the MoJPA and
                                   SGA respectively.
                                  On December 18, 2013, the Government enacted the JIS Management and Coordination Decision to
                                   appoint a JIS Coordinator, a JIS Management Working Group and a JIS Manager as targeted to
                                   ensure sustainability of the JIS (This was a Legal Covenant).

                            Envisioned activities regarding the transfer of harmonized cadaster parcels from 50 cadastral municipalities
                            where surveys were completed could not be completed due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.

                            Outcomes.

                            The outputs described above were expected to lead to the outcome of increasing the cost-effectiveness of
                            government services monitored by the increased use of spatial data by government
                            agencies/ministries. Even though there was no explicit indicator to measure the cost-effectiveness, when the
                            project closed, 152 government agencies/ministries were using shared spatial data, exceeding the target of
                            30 agencies which seemed to indicator cost efficiency.

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, as the targeted outcome was achieved.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The three project targeted outcomes were substantially achieved, and the target values were exceeded or
                            largely realized. The extent to which the project outcomes can be attributed to this project cannot be precisely
                            ascertained, given the interdependencies of this project with the parallel project financed by the EU. However,
                            it is reasonable to assume that the project contributed to robust technical dialogue and knowledge transfer
                            with the World Bank on best practices for JIS development. The project also laid the groundwork for a follow
                            on project. This project's links with the follow on project would likely help in ensuring the sustainability of
                            development outcomes. The overall efficacy is therefore rated as substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ILAS Project (P122219)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted for the efficiency gains from project activities
accounting for 76% of the appraisal estimate (original project) and 83% of actual cost (original + the AF project).
The efficiency gains were measured through indicators such as the number of information inquiries to the land
registry per year (a proxy for improved accessibility to the spatial data), reduction in transaction processing time
for COs and LROs and economic data on historical wages. The indirect project benefits that were not factored in
the economic analysis included the benefits arising from the transparency of the real estate markets and their
impact on the mortgage and catastrophe insurance markets.

The ex ante analysis assumed time savings of 15% at most for both COs and LROs resulting from the average
reduction in time needed to process land requests. While the ex ante analysis assumed efficiency gains only for
the first four years and at a constant level after, the data for ex post analysis appropriately linearly interpolates
the data for 2013-2023.

The net present value at appraisal using a 10% discount rate was EURO 16.3 million. The NPV at project
closure was EURO 57.0 million. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was 136% as compared
to the ex ante EIRR of 31%. The reason for the significant divergence in efficiency gains between the ex post
EIRR and the ex ante EIRR was due to the underlying assumptions and the rigorous and sound methodology
followed in calculating the efficiency gains at project closure.

Operational issues during implementation. The project was implemented over twelve and half years. The
original project closed three years beyond the original closing date of October 31, 2015. This was mainly due to
the delays in the roll out of the JIS system in the initial years. The project scope was expanded with the AF for
the project. Although the closing date for the AF project was extended by two years, the delay was partly due to
factors beyond the control of the project in the latter years such as the physical restrictions in the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the 2020 earthquake in Croatia.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial, as the project demonstrated positive net benefits that significantly
exceeded the estimated benefits at the appraisal stage.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        76.00
 Appraisal                                                   31.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ILAS Project (P122219)



                                                                                         83.00
ICR Estimate                                                  136.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy is rated as High. Although the
outcomes were not fully attributable to the project, overall efficacy is rated as substantial, given that the targeted
project outcomes were exceeded or achieved. Efficiency are rated as Substantial, given the high economic
returns for the project. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is rated as satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR rates the risk to development outcome as Low (ICR, para 82).

Government commitment/ownership. The Government commitment to digital transformation of the land
management system was demonstrated by the enactment of the Land Registration Act of 2019 that
mandated online submission of land transactions. The ICR noted that with the enactment of multiple new
laws in Croatia concerning topics such as physical planning and construction and environmental protection,
there is increasing pressure on Croatia's land registry and cadaster in the form of new incoming cases. With
the need to develop new land registry and cadaster services in support of these sectors, the Government
continues to utilize EU financing and has requested further support from the Bank through the ongoing
Justice for Business project.

Technical risk. There is low risk to the technical sustainability of the JIS. The ICR noted that government
fully recognizes that full functionality of the JIS is crucial for sustainability of Croatia's land administration
system. This was demonstrated by the government's enactment of the JIS Management and Coordination
Decision to appoint a JIS Coordinator, a JIS Management Working Group and a JIS Manager.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experiences and lessons from Bank-financed land
  administration and management projects in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Georgia and from the previous
  Bank-financed project in Croatia, as many project activities represented continuation of activities financed
  under the previous project. The components and activities were well-aligned with the objectives and this
  allowed the project to absorb the AF without changing the objectives. The design appropriately included a

                                                                                                         Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



  legal covenant that the Government would establish a management organization for the JIS to
  ensure sustainability. The Bank prepared this project in collaboration with the EU, which was financing
  complementary land sector activities under the EU's Instrument for Pre-Accession (IPA) 2008 and 2010
  annual programs.

  The Bank retained the implementation arrangements of the previous Bank-financed project which had
  been proven to be effective: (i) The MoJPA was overall in charge of land registration and SGA in charge
  for cadaster activities; and (ii) A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) was responsible for fiduciary and
  monitoring and evaluation functions. (PAD, para 20) .The arrangement proved to be effective for this
  project.

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal including risks related to the inter-dependency of project
  activities with EU IPA financing for complementary issues which would raise attribution issues and risks
  of delays in developing the JIS and Information Technology (IT). With mitigation measures, the overall
  project risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, para 35). The arrangements made at appraisal for
  fiduciary and safeguards compliance were appropriate (discussed in sections 10).

  There was a minor shortcoming with M&E, with one of the original key outcome targets unrealistic
  (discussed in section 9).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank's supervision was done by a country-based staff, including previous Task Team Leaders (TTLs)
 and Bank-staff overseeing the project's safeguards and fiduciary requirements. The Bank agreed at
 Government request to provide AF for scaling up the project activities and maintain dialogue and technical
 support to other activities financed by the EU. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary and
 safeguards compliance. The supervision team was proactive in ensuring that delays were addressed as
 they arose and worked closely with the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to ensure that all activities were
 completed prior to project closing.

 The quality of supervision was rated as satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory



                                                                                                  Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was logical and the key outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project
 performance (discussed in section four). The indicators were also flexible to accommodate the later
 inclusion of AF activities. The framework also had a set of intermediate indicators without defined end
 targets. For example, the indicators " number of services provided by the Geoportal " and " Number of
 requests processed online via the Geoportal " were not subject to the control of project interventions.
 However, the indicators would serve as a proxy for decision makers to determine whether or not new e-
 services that integrated systems such as the eLR-book web portal and Geoportal were actually being used.
 Also, there was no explicit indicator to measure cost-effectiveness, a key aspect of the PDO.

 SGA and the MoJPA were in charge of M&E. Both entities had built substantial capacity under the previous
 Bank-financed project to provide the data for monitoring performance. The PIU was responsible for
 administering the customer surveys every other year.

 One minor shortcoming with the M&E framework was that the target for reducing transaction time for land
 registry and cadaster had to be reduced based on the realities on the ground (The target was reduced to
 account for the additional time required for COs and LROs to adjust to changes in their business operations
 (transition from analogue to digital) as a result of the JIS.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 71) noted that the PIU collected, recorded and analyzed data in a sound manner
  throughout the project. Data collection improved significantly y with the nationwide roll-out of the JIS. The
  Bank supported the PIU in developing methodologies to track progress, such as the amount of time
  required for the LRO to process a transaction that took into account what was within the control of the
  LRO.

  Customer surveys were conducted during implementation period to monitor progress. The indicators
  were modified when the AF was approved for the project, to take into account the expanded scope.
  During implementation, selected intermediate indicators were appropriately dropped if they were no
  longer deemed relevant, such as the various core land administration indicators that were initially
  included to meet requirement of the Bank's then existing policy, but were later deemed to be redundant
  given that other indicators were already measuring progress.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E was utilized to monitor performance and to focus on areas that did not meet expectations. The PIU
  maintained a dedicated M&E specialist during the life of the project to compile information provided by
  the MoJPA and SGA,

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial. Although there were minor shortcomings, the results framework
  presented a sound instrument for measuring the achievements of the project and was adjusted based on
  changing circumstances.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
   Two safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); and Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) (PAD, page vi).

   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The environmental safeguards policy
   was triggered due to the anticipated rehabilitation of buildings, primarily cadaster offices and data facilities.
   The safeguards on physical cultural resources was triggered as some buildings were in historic, cultural
   areas. The potential environmental impacts were expected to be local, manageable and temporary. An
   Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was completed and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to
   address issues relating to safeguards (PAD, para 54).

   The project complied with the safeguards requirements (ICR, para 75). The project activities were not
   located in areas of historical or cultural significance. An issue regarding Occupational Health Safety
   (OHS), necessitated corrective measures that were executed promptly upon identification.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The Bank conducted an assessment of the FM capacity of the PIU at
   appraisal. The assessment concluded that the FM arrangements were adequate. The overall FM risk was
   rated as moderate (PAD, para 42). The FM was satisfactory throughout the project lifetime (ICR, para 78).
   Unqualified project audits were submitted in a timely fashion.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted an assessment of the procurement capacity at
   appraisal. The assessment concluded that the PIU had adequate experience to carry out the procurement
   policies related to the project. Overall procurement risk was rated as moderate (PAD, para 46). The
   project's procurement performance was consistently rated as satisfactory (ICR, para 77). The project used
   the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) for tracking procurement and two
   experienced specialists were trained in using STEP. The ICR (para 77) notes that few complaints were
   raised during the project, none of which led to changes in procurement decisions.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.


                                                                                                       Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ILAS Project (P122219)




d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two main lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

1. The project timeline and instruments needs to be carefully assessed in land administration
projects. Bank's experience with land administration projects is that such projects take a long period
of time to ensure successful outcomes. The reforms implemented under this project took about
twelve years. The lesson is that the Bank can take advantage of Investment Project Financing and
Additional Finance (AF) tools for projects supporting sectors that take inherently long periods of time
to ensure outcomes, and that task teams working on land administration projects may also wish to
consider financing tools such as the use Multi-phase Programmatic Approaches for land
administration projects.

2. Functional integration and interinstitutional cooperation can raise the potential for success
in land administration projects. When this project was under preparation, Croatia maintained land
registry and cadaster under separate entities. For many years, conventional wisdom has been to
integrate land registry and cadaster agencies in a single government entity for promoting
effectiveness. This project demonstrated how functional integration of agencies can occur through
harmonizing operational procedures. The development of the Joint Information System and its
improvements in this project were crucial to the cooperation between the Ministry of Justice and
Public Administration (MoJPD) and the State Geodetic Administration (SGA). The lesson is that
functional integration can be a viable alternative to consolidating land records under a single agency
for other countries, particularly for those countries where the political economy is not conducive for
discussions about institutional reforms.



13. Assessment Recommended?


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ILAS Project (P122219)




  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear, concise and well-written. The theory of change expounded in the ICR clearly articulates the
causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and the intended outcomes. The ICR explicitly states the
assumptions under which the desired outcomes are likely to be realized. The ICR provides ample evidence to
assess project performance and the ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing
this project. The economic analysis provided in the Annex provides a clear and convincing exposition of the
efficiency gains of the project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 16
