      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024449

1. Operation Information



 Operation ID                                Operation Name
 P174367                                     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF

 Country                                     Practice Area (Lead)
 Kazakhstan                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment



  Non-Programmatic DPF

  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                   Total Financing (USD)
                                                                                                364,851,780.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  09-Dec-2021

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                               Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

  Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                              0.00

  Actual                                                   0.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 William F. Steel            Donna Kaidou Jeffrey         Donna Kaidou Jeffrey            IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The stated program development objective (PDO) was “to support institutional and policy changes for: (i) a
more competitive economy driven by a more vibrant private sector and accountable public sector; and (ii) a
more sustainable economic transition” (program document [PD], para.41; the Implementation Completion and
Results Report [ICR] [para. 11] substitutes “recovery” for transition). For clarity in assessing achievement of


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



specific objectives, and to correspond more closely to the policy actions supported this Implementation
Completion and Results Report review (ICRR) unpacks the objectives as follow:

PDO1: A more vibrant private sector.

PDO2: A more accountable public sector.

PDO3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The stated pillars were (PD, paras. 42-43): (1) a more competitive economy driven by a more vibrant private
sector and accountable public sector; and (2) lay the foundation for a more sustainable economic transition.
For the purpose of this ICRR, the pillars and policy areas are broken down as follows:

Pillar 1: A more vibrant private sector:

      Competition;
      Telecommunications and digital economy;
      Banking sector.

Pillar 2: A more accountable public sector:

      Procurement;
      Corruption.

Pillar 3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition:

      Energy efficiency and emissions;
      Renewable energy;
      The environment.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The Kazakhstan Private-Sector-Led[1] and More Sustainable Economic Recovery Development Policy Financing
(DPF) operation was financed through an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan of
EUR 345.7 million (US$400 million equivalent), which was: approved on December 9, 2021; effective five months
late on December 2, 2022; and closed as scheduled on December 31, 2023 (ICR, p. ii).

Although it was a standalone operation, this ICRR refers to it as DPF2 when needed to acknowledge it as the
delayed successor to the 2015 First Macroeconomic Management and Competitiveness Programmatic
Development Policy Loan, referred to here as DPF1 (originally intended as a programmatic series of two
operations).




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



[1] As stated in the Loan Agreement. The program document and ICR use “private-sector led.” (“Private sector-
led” would be preferable.)


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context

 DPF2 represented a resumption of reforms that had been initiated in 2015 under DPF1 to adjust to the steep
 decline in oil prices. High oil prices during the 2010-14 recovery from the 2009 global financial crisis had
 enabled the “Government of Kazakhstan (GoK)…to reduce the tax burden on the private sector, expand the
 role of the state sector, and more than double the [foreign exchange] assets of the Oil Fund, the National Fund
 of the Republic of Kazakhstan (NFRK)” – but also contributed to a delay in structural reforms (PD1 for DPF1,
 p. 1).

 Annual GDP growth of 4.4 to 7.5 percent over 2010-14 had driven Kazakhstan to middle income status,
 reduced income inequality, dropped the poverty rate to 13.5 percent (from 54 percent in 2006), halved
 unemployment, and doubled real wages (PD1 for DPF1, para. 203 and Figure 2). But the drop in oil prices
 exposed overdependence on oil revenues and state-owned enterprises (SOEs), with the non-oil deficit rising
 to 9.1 percent of GDP (against 3.4 percent over 2000-2007) and made pegging the tenge to the US dollar no
 longer sustainable (PD1, paras. 5 and 16).

 The resulting urgency of fiscal and institutional reforms to place Kazakhstan on a more sustainable growth
 path through macroeconomic adjustment and strengthened private investment provided an opportunity for
 World Bank (WB) technical and financial support, including a DPF series that would “support the WB’s twin
 goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity” (PD1, para. 7).

 The DPF program was designed to support “the reform of the exchange rate, an increase in non-oil revenues,
 a reduction in low priority investment expenditures, and improving the effectiveness of social assistance
 programs,” with a focus on “private sector development, improving the external terms of trade to favor
 tradables other than oil, strengthening the banking and financial sector, and enhancing the policy environment
 for competition and business regulation” (ICR, para. 2).

 The planned second operation, however, was cancelled in 2017 in the wake of a debt crisis ensuing from
 depreciation of the tenge, rising external borrowing, and a downgrade in Kazakhstan’s sovereign credit rating
 (PD2, footnote 11).

 GoK relaunched the reform program in 2020 to address multiple crises: the COVID-19 pandemic; falling oil
 prices; inflation; and flagging public confidence in the government (ICR, para. 3). Key “constraints to
 competitiveness included economic concentration, the dominance by a few large state-owned and state-
 connected enterprises (SOCEs), unequal application of business regulations, opportunities for corruption,
 inadequate access to finance, and weak accountability of the institutions of governance” (PD2, para. 3).
 Overuse of subsidized hydrocarbon resources “has made Kazakhstan the largest per-capita greenhouse gas
 (GHG) emitter in Europe and Central Asia,” necessitating climate change and environmental measures (ibid.).



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



Relevance of objectives

The stated objectives of “a more competitive economy” and “a more sustainable economic transition” were
relevant to the constraints of a state-dominated economy and excessive use of and emissions from
hydrocarbon-based energy. They related directly to the objectives of Kazakhstan’s National Development Plan
2025 (adopted in 2018 and amended in 2020) and the sector strategy for Kazakhstan’s Transition to Green
Economy 2050 (adopted in 2013), which underpinned “the country’s transition to a more inclusive, sustainable
and greener growth model” (PD1, Box 5). They were also well aligned with the 2020-2025 Country Partnership
Framework (CPF; underpinned by the 2018 Systematic Country Diagnostic), which stressed “the need for
Kazakhstan to implement a new development model to deliver more inclusive and sustainable growth…. for
markets to work efficiently and … management of policy and natural wealth to build economic resilience and
support environmental and growth sustainability” (PD2, para. 119).

Nonetheless, the objectives as stated were broad in relation to the actual focus of the policy actions (as noted
in the ICR, para. 12) and represented downstream outcomes rather than the more directly related expected
outcomes of the policy measures being undertaken. For the purpose of this ICRR, the “competitive economy”
objective has been disaggregated into its distinct objectives of improving certain aspects of the private sector
environment and making the public sector more accountable. Similarly, the “sustainable economic transition”
objective has been narrowed to “a more sustainable energy and environmental transition” to reflect the actual
focus.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Most of the nine prior actions (PAs) specified sub-actions or measures that addressed identified constraints
relevant to the objectives. Although the PD (and the ICR) did not provide an explicit overall theory of change, it
laid out an implicit results chain for each PA through a detailed discussion of the rationale, substance, expected
results and next steps. The actions generally addressed constraints identified in prior analytical work and made
substantive, credible contributions to achieving the stated objectives.

Table 1: Objectives, Policy Areas and Prior Actions (PAs) for Kazakhstan Private Sector-Led and More
Sustainable Economic Recovery DPF

 PDO 1: A more vibrant private sector
 Competition
 PA1: To foster competition and level the playing field for all enterprises in the economy, the
 Borrower has created and operationalized the Agency for the Protection and Development of
 Competition as an independent state authority with powers to, inter alia,

 i. investigate and prevent anti-competitive practices and mergers; and

 ii. impose sanctions.
 Telecommunications and digital economy




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



PA2: To strengthen the enabling environment for telecommunications and the broader digital
economy and to attract private investment into the sector, the Borrower has:

i. Adopted amendments to legislation on digital technologies to enhance the regulatory
environment for personal data protection and facilitate the development of private sector led
data-driven technology; and

ii. Adopted amendments to legislation on licensing of wireless broadband internet services to
simplify the requirements and promote investment by introducing the technological neutrality
principle in the license and reducing by 90 percent for at least five years the fees for the use of
radio frequency spectrum.
Banking sector
PA3 [PA4 in ICR]: To support market discipline and fair competition in the banking sector, the
Borrower has, through the Agency for Financial Regulation, resolved regulatory non-
compliance of three commercial banks in accordance with the Law on Banks and Banking.
PDO 2: A more accountable public sector
Procurement
PA4 [PA3 in ICR]: To improve open competition, transparency, and accountability in public
procurement, the Borrower has:

i. submitted to Parliament amendments to the Public Procurement Law to: (a) Set open tender
as the default procurement method; (b) Reduce single sourcing and clarify the exceptional
circumstances where it can be permitted; and

ii. Submitted to Parliament amendments to the Public Procurement Law (PPL) and adopted
new procedures to reduce the right to use single sourcing procurement by the SOEs.
Corruption
PA5: To reduce corruption and improve accountability in the public and quasi-public sector, the
Borrower has:

i. Restricted all civil servants, persons subject to anti-corruption restrictions, and members of
their families from accepting gifts, remuneration and services in exchange for actions or
inactions within their official powers, and from opening and owning foreign bank accounts.

ii. Expanded liability to all persons authorized to perform public functions, including the
management of the quasi-public sector for corruption offenses; and

iii. Strengthened the enforcement of anti-corruption legislation by requiring the creation of anti-
corruption compliance services across the quasi-public sector.
PDO 3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition
Energy efficiency and emissions
PA6: To improve energy efficiency and reduce GHG emissions, the Borrower has submitted to
Parliament amendments to the Energy Saving and Energy Efficiency Act of January 13, 2012,
that:

i. Expand energy consumption reporting to include all state -owned and budget sector entities.


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



ii. Update the reporting requirements to enable better tracking of energy consumption.

iii. Require procurement of goods and services by all public entities to include energy efficiency
requirements; and

iv. Adopt a new certification system for individual energy auditors.
PA7: To strengthen the Emission Trading Scheme (ETS), a key instrument for meeting
Kazakhstan’s NDC commitment to reduce GHG emissions, the Borrower has:

i. Adopted a requirement to allocate emission allowances by benchmarking the emission
intensity of production process for all enterprises under the ETS.

ii. Strengthened the operation of the ETS with regard to the trade in carbon units and the
operation of the carbon unit registry.
Renewable energy
PA8: To increase the installed capacity of renewable energy generation, the Borrower has
adopted amendments to the Renewable Energy legislation of July 4, 2009 (No. 165-IV) that:

i. Institute rules for determining the renewable energy surcharge in consumer billing, starting
from July 1, 2021.

ii. Strengthen state support to assure payment for renewable energy to renewable energy
suppliers selected through competitive auctions.

iii. Allow 20-year Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) based on renewable auctions held after
January 1, 2021; and

iv. Establish waste-to-energy pricing methodology and standard PPA templates for waste-to-
energy auctions.
The environment
PA9: To protect, conserve, and restore the environment, the Borrower has adopted legislation
that introduces:

[a. Emissions/Pollution]

i. Requirements for permits and reporting on emissions from facilities with a harmful impact on
the environment, including flaring and venting of associated gas, with administrative penalties
for misreporting and for exceeding permitted limits.

ii. Requirements for a national standard on Best Available Techniques to prevent pollution and
minimize anthropogenic impacts on the environment in selected economic sectors.

[b. Environment/Climate]

iii. Requirements for mandatory Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of government
projects and the territorial development program; and




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



iv. Requirements for climate vulnerability assessment and adaptation planning for agriculture,
water management, forestry, and civil protection.

Source: ICR, Table 2

PDO1: A more vibrant private sector

PA1: Establishment of an independent Agency for Protection and Development of Competition was an essential
step to redress the constraint on private enterprise imposed by the dominance of state-owned enterprises,
whose presence in 20 out of 29 sectors impaired the ability of private firms to compete on a level playing field
(PD2, para. 45). With sanctioning powers, this Agency was critical to follow through on previous steps, including
the 2015 Competition Law and a new privatization law decree for 2021-25 (PD2, paras. 46-47). It drew on a
2016 report by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on Reforming
Kazakhstan, the 2017 Private Sector Diagnostic, and a 2019 WB study on competitiveness and diversification
(PD2, Table 5). Relevance of PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA2: Kazakhstan had progressed in terms of internet utilization (82 percent of the population) and affordable
mobile tariffs, but further development and technological advance was constrained by the dominance of the
state incumbent controlling two of the three mobile operators, a complex regulatory environment, and lack of
trusted personal data protection (PD2, para. 53). PA2 sought to address these constraints through amendments
to legislation on digital technologies and licensing of broadband internet services. These represented first steps
that were intended to “contribute to attracting private sector investment into the digital economy of Kazakhstan
and also help accelerate the adoption of digital technologies,” though their effectiveness would depend on
further amendments and support measures (PD2, paras. 54-58). The action drew on the WB’s technical
assistance (TA) and 2019 Assessment of the Digital Enabling Environment. Relevance of PA2: Satisfactory
(S).

PA3 [PA4 in ICR] was intended to address the constraint of contracting credit to the private sector, especially
small and medium enterprises (SMEs), and stalled financial deepening (PD2, para. 67). The action to resolve
regulatory non-compliance of three commercial banks was a partial step toward improving the banking
regulatory environment, drawing on a 2020 internal assessment by the WB. While making a moderate
contribution to banking sector stability, thereby setting the stage for further financial deepening, the PD (para.
75) noted that “further engagements” would be needed “to carry the financial policy stream forward” and
actually achieve the goal of increased credit to the private sector. Relevance of PA3: Moderately Satisfactory
(MS)

PDO2: A more accountable public sector

PA4 [PA3 in ICR] addressed the inefficient and anti-competitive dominance of single-source procurement,
which accounted for over 80 percent of government and SOE procurements, which in turn represented 13
percent of GDP (PD2, paras. 59-60). The 2019 WB/OECD Assessment of Public Procurement Systems, as well
as the 2018 Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability review, highlighted the importance of mandating
open tender as the default method (PD2, para. 60 and Table 5). PA4 would contribute significantly to “improving
transparency and accountability within the public sector” (ICR, para. 21). Relevance of PA4: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PA5 recognized “new anti-corruption measures set forth in recent amendments (to the Law on Countering
Corruption, the Criminal Code, and the Civil Code)” that addressed the constraint of Kazakhstan’s historically


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



low ranking in the Corruption Perceptions Index, as documented in the OECD’s 2017 report on anti-corruption
reforms and the IMF’s 2019 Article IV consultation (PD2, paras. 76-77 and Table 5). By restricting public
officials from gifts, services, and foreign bank accounts, and strengthening anti-corruption enforcement, PA5
was expected to make an essential contribution to building “a culture of transparency and integrity among public
servants, particularly in…relationships with the private sector” (PD2, para. 80). Relevance of PA5: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PDO3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition

PA6: With energy-related activities “accounting for 85 percent of the country’s total GHG [greenhouse gas]
emissions” (PD2, para. 83), PA6 appropriately focused on improving energy consumption reporting, efficiency,
and certification in pursuit of the objective of improving sustainability in energy emissions and the environment,
consistent with Kazakhstan’s 2016 Nationally Defined Contribution (NDC) toward the Paris Agreement on
climate change. Monitoring and reporting energy use was seen as a critical first step toward getting businesses
and organization to prioritize energy efficiency, as noted in the 2017 WB report on Energy Efficiency
Transformation in Astana and Almaty (PD2, paras. 84-85 and Table 5), while recognizing that additional by-
laws and actions would be needed to operationalize the new monitoring system and achieve the objectives
(PD2, para. 87). Relevance of PA6: Satisfactory (S).

PA7: As the largest GHG emitter per capita in Central Asia, with emissions continuing to rise steadily since
2013, Kazakhstan set a target under the Paris agreement of reducing GHG by at least 15 percent by 2030
(PD2, para. 88). PA7 sought to strengthen the Emission Trading Scheme (ETS) as a key instrument for meeting
that commitment. The ICR (para. 25) pointed out that, while relevant, improving the ETS is inadequate to
achieve the objective of reducing emissions without complementary reduction of the high emission caps.
Furthermore, the ETS “does not regulate emissions from smaller installations, transport, and agriculture
accounting for about 60 percent of total GHG emissions” (PD2, para. 88). Relevance of PA7: Moderately
Unsatisfactory (MU).

PA8 supported the objective of transitioning toward renewable energy, away from reliance on coal-fired power
plants, which accounted for 65 percent of electricity production and a major share of GHG emissions (ICR,
para. 26). The WB’s 2017 power sector study and the UNDP’s 2018 report on renewable energy investments
highlighted the importance of improving markets and power purchase agreements (PPAs) with private investors
(PD2, Table 5). The amendments supported under PA8 made an essential contribution to improving the
environment for achieving renewable energy objectives. Relevance of PA8: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA9: Amendments to the Environmental Code made in 2021 and other measures supported under PA9 were
intended to lay the groundwork for Kazakhstan’s “green economic transition” (in line with the global community)
and sustainable economic recovery, in line with the OECD’s 2017 Kazakhstan Multi-Dimensional Review and
the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe’s 2019 Environmental Performance Reviews (PD2, para.
109). The first two sub-actions [designated as PA9(a) in Table 1] promoted reporting of emissions and use of
Best Available Techniques to address the problem of excessive gas flaring, a major source of GHG and
pollution (PD2, para. 110). The second two sub-actions [PA9(b)] mandated strategic environmental
assessments (SEAs) for government programs and “climate vulnerability assessment and adaptation planning
for agriculture, water management, forestry, and civil protection” (PD2, para. 114). These measures made a
critical contribution by establishing a policy framework that supports the objectives of a more sustainable energy
and environmental transition in the context of climate change, even though the PD (para. 115) anticipated that




                                                                                                    Page 8 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



 the results would “be realized in the medium to longer term” and would need to be followed by a five-year
 implementation framework. Relevance of PA9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

 Rating

 Satisfactory



Rating

Satisfactory


4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

Most of the results indicators (RIs) directly tracked implementation of the associated PAs, and many
captured outcomes relevant to achievement of objectives. Only three were less than satisfactory.

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status and
achievement
                                                                 Actual
                                                                            Actual as
                                  RI        Baseline Target                           RI
                       Associated                                           % of
Results indicator (RI)                                           (2022)               Achievement
                       PAs                                                  targeted
                                  Relevance (2020)   (2022)                           rating
                                                                            change
PDO1: A more vibrant private sector
 Competition
RI1: Number of
investigations on
                                                                      95
anticompetitive
                          PA1     HS           0          5                        1900%     High
practices that were
                                                                      170 (2023)
resolved by issuing a
decision
Telecommunications and the digital economy
RI2: Share of                                  83%                    93%
population using the PA2          HS                      88%                      200%      High
internet                                       (2019)                 (2023)
RI3: Share of
                                                                      13%
electronic commerce
                          PA2     HS           1.8%       3%                       933%      High
in total volume of retail
                                                                      (2023)
trade.
 Banking sector
RI5: Number of banks                                                  1            67%
                          PA3     S            3          0
which have violated

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



three or more times
over the preceding 12-
month period any                                                0            100%   High
capital adequacy
ratios or liquidity                                             (2024)              [delayed]
coverage ratio.
PDO 2: A more accountable public sector
Procurement
RI4: Procurement                                                75%
contracts by value
awarded through an PA4          HS       35%      >50%          76%
open competitive                                                             273%   High
method.                                                         (2023)
Corruption
RI6: Annual National
Anti-Corruption Report
detailing progress of
                                         Not pub-
anti-corruption        PA5      MS                Published     Published    100%   [High]
                                         lished
measures both across
the public and the
quasi-public sector.
PDO 3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition
Energy efficiency and emissions
                                                                0.29 GCal/
                                                                m2
RI7: Heat
consumption in                           0.26    0.24 GCal/
                       PA6          S                       0.28 GCal/ -200%        Negligible
budgetary                                GCal/m2 m2
                                                            m2
organizations.
                                                                (2023)
                                                                5 (2023)     50%
RI8: Accounts opened
to register carbon
                       PA7          MU   0 (2019) 10                                [Substantial]
offset projects in the
carbon registry.
                                                                13 (2024)    130%
                                                                2400MW
RI9: Renewable
                       PA8          HS   1635 MW 2400 MW        2903 MW
energy capacity
                                                                             166%   High
                                                                (2023)
                                                                -73.9%
RI10: Reduction in
flaring volume relative PA9(a)(i)   S    -25%      -50%         -74.2%
to 2014.                                                                     148%   High
                                                                (2023)
The environment


                                                                                           Page 10 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



RI11: Green                                                              Established
technology service                              Not
                       PA9(a)(ii)
operator established
                                    MS                     Established
and staffed to provide                          Estab-
                       PA1                                               Operational 100%      [High]
business incubation                             lished
services.                                                                (2023)
RI12: Strategic
Environmental
                                                                         100%
Assessment initiated
                     PA9(b)         S           0          10%                         1000%   High
for government
                                                                         (2024)
programs launched
after July 1, 2021.

Source: ICR, Table 2

Note: RI achievement ratings note achievement of the targeted change for the RI. RI achievement ratings
in brackets reflect ratings that may have been adjusted based on weak relevance of the results indicator
(discussed in efficacy section).

PDO1: A more vibrant private sector

RI1 was directly attributable to establishment of the Agency for the Protection and Development of
Competition under PA1, reflecting its ability to “exercise its power and enforce competition rules” (ICR,
para. 33). It was relevant to the objective of a more vibrant and competitive private sector in terms of
resolving anticompetitive practices. It was readily measurable. Relevance of RI1: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

RI2 and RI3 were relevant to the objective of making the private sector more vibrant and competitive
through increased investment in and use of the internet and digital technologies. They were reasonably
attributable to PA2 in that improved privacy protection was expected to encourage greater usage of the
internet and simplification of licensing was expected to facilitate increased private investment in digital
technologies, both of which would lead to increased electronic commerce. They were measurable, and
the PD2 (para. 147) indicated that data could be obtained from the relevant line ministry for monitoring
during implementation. Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS); RI3: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI5 was directly attributable to the measures to address regulatory non-compliance of banks, as
supported by PA3. It was relevant to the objective of a more vibrant private sector in that reduction of non-
compliance and improved stability of the banking sector were expected to facilitate increased investment,
liquidity, and credit. It was readily measurable. However, the three banks targeted by this RI accounted for
less than 1 percent of banking sector assets, so a complementary indicator of stability in the banking
sector as a whole would have been desirable (ICR, para. 40). Relevance of RI5: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: A more accountable public sector

RI4 was directly attributable to PA4 amendments to the Public Procurement Law and highly relevant to
making the public sector more accountable by reducing excessive use of non-competitive contracts.
Measurement was straightforward. The only limitation was that it focused just on general administration


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 19
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



               procurement, as “it was not feasible to combine outcomes from procurement by general administration
               and SOEs” (ICR, para. 38). Relevance of RI4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

               RI6 referred only to the publication of an Anti-Corruption Report, which was not directly related to the
               specific measures supported by PA5. It was, however, a reasonable measure of progress toward the
               objective of improving public sector accountability. Measurement was straightforward. Relevance of RI6:
               Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

               PDO3: A more sustainable energy and environmental transition

               RI7 measured the expected outcome of the reporting and other requirements of PA6 (“a needed first step
               to have credible movement toward efficient energy use”; PD2, para. 84) in terms of actual reduction of
               heat consumption in affected organizations, thereby promoting the objective of increasing energy
               efficiency and sustainability. It was measurable, with data evidently available through the line Ministry
               (PD2, para. 147). Relevance of RI7: Satisfactory (S).

               RI8 related to sub-action (ii) of PA7 regarding trade in carbon units, but not to sub-action (i) regarding
               emissions. While perhaps simpler to measure, it did not adequately track the critical outcome of actual
               reduction in emissions. Relevance of RI8: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

               RI9 was directly attributable to the measures taken under PA8 to facilitate increased capacity of
               renewable energy generation, and it was highly relevant to the objective of a more sustainable energy
               transition. Measurement was straightforward. Relevance of RI9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

               RI10 was reasonably attributable to sub-action (i) of PA9 to require permits and reporting on emissions,
               especially flaring (although flaring volume would also depend on market and other factors). Reducing
               flaring was measurable and highly relevant to the objective of a more sustainable energy transition.
               Relevance of RI10: Satisfactory (S).

               RI11 was indirectly related to PA9 sub-action (ii) insofar as establishing a green technology service
               operator was one of the measures taken under revision of the Environmental Code to establish a national
               standard on Best Available Techniques (PD2, para. 114). The service was expected to help incubate
               green investments that would contribute to the objective of a more sustainable (and less polluting)
               environmental transition. As such, it measured a step toward, but not the actual desired outcome.
               Measurement was straightforward. Relevance of RI11: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

               RI12 was directly attributable to the measures under PA9(b) to require SEAs. It related more to
               implementation of the PA than to measurement of the intended outcome (ICR, para. 31). Measurement
               was straightforward. Relevance of RI12: Satisfactory (S).



   Rating

   Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
A more vibrant private sector

Rationale
RI1 was substantially exceeded within the original time frame (2022), and the number of anti-competitive
cases resolved continued to rise through 2023, reflecting unexpectedly rapid operationalization of the new
agency (ICR, para. 33). This set the stage for needed further steps, especially privatization of subsidiaries of
major holding companies, to reduce the dominance of SOEs in the economy (ICR para. 34). Achievement
Rating: RI1: High.

RI2 and RI3 substantially exceeded their targets within the original time frame. The already-high share of the
population using the internet continued to rise, and the substantially increased share of electronic commerce
in retail trade (starting from a very low base) indicated increasing private sector activity in e-commerce (ICR,
para. 36). The PD (para. 54) noted a gender gap in internet usage in rural (though not urban) areas, but no
indicator or data was included in the ICR (though para. 20 reported a rising overall gender gap in internet
usage to 94.1 of males and 91.8 percent of females). Achievement Rating: RI2: High; RI3: High.

RI5 was fully achieved with a delay of nearly two years beyond the initial target date of end-2022, in that one
of the three banks was still out of compliance as of end-2023 (due in part to sanctions related to Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine), but subsequently met the capital adequacy and liquidity requirements. Achievement
Rating: RI5: High.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
A more accountable public sector

Rationale
RI4 was substantially exceeded, with three-quarters of public procurement other than SOEs contracted
through open competition. Achievement Rating: RI4: High.

RI6 was achieved through publication of a national anti-corruption report that set forth new measures to
capture illicit enrichment, expanded coverage of officials, protection of whistleblowers, and creation of
compliance service units (ICR, para. 42). A subsequent report in 2023 provided further details on the
government’s anti-corruption measures. The rating of RI6 is downgraded due to the MS relevance rating of
the PA. Achievement Rating: RI6: Substantial.



Rating



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
                         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                         Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



                      Satisfactory


                      OBJECTIVE 3
                      Objective
                      A more sustainable energy and environmental transition

                      Rationale
                      RI7: Not only was the targeted reduction of heat consumption in budgetary organizations not achieved, but
                      consumption actually increased substantially as of 2022 (with a slight improvement in 2023). One implication
                      is that simply improving reporting is insufficient to actually change behavior. The subsequent DPF series
                      (approved in 2024) included efficiency requirements for the top 100 energy-intensive enterprises and
                      extension of stricter standards to the second tier (ICR, para. 45). Achievement Rating: RI7: Negligible.

                      RI8: The targeted number of accounts opened to register carbon offset projects was only half-realized as of
                      2023, though exceeded by 2024. However, the low relevance of the indicator to implementation of PA7
                      regarding the ETS and to achievement of the emissions objective meant that RI8 was rated MU, and thus the
                      achievement rating is restricted to Modest. Achievement Rating: RI8: Modest.

                      RI9: The targeted increase in renewable energy capacity was met on time and exceeded in 2023, reaching
                      5.9 percent of total energy production from a combination of 58 wind power plants, 46 solar power plants, 39
                      hydroelectric power plants, and 3 bio-fuel power plants (ICR, para. 50). Achievement Rating: RI9: High.

                      RI10: The targeted reduction in flaring volume was substantially exceeded on schedule, with a further slight
                      reduction in 2023 to nearly a quarter of the 2014 level, directly supporting the energy and environmental
                      objectives. Achievement Rating: RI10: High.

                      RI11 was achieved in that a green technology service operator was established on schedule in 2022 and
                      operationalized in 2023. This was a step toward promoting the objective of increasing investment in green
                      projects. The rating of RI11 is downgraded due to the MS relevance rating of the PA. Achievement Rating:
                      RI11: Substantial.

                      RI12: The targeted 10 percent increase in government programs with an SEA was substantially exceeded in
                      that they were made mandatory as of January 2024 for all government programs launched after July 1, 2021.
                      Achievement Rating: RI12: High.



                      Rating

                      Moderately Satisfactory


OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale



                                                                                                                      Page 14 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



PDOs 1 and 2 (disaggregated from the original single PDO) were rated HS and S, respectively while PDO3 was
rated MS due to the Negligible rating of RI7. Seven of the twelve RIs had High achievement.



Overall Efficacy Rating
Satisfactory


6. Outcome

Rationale

Relevance of PAs and Efficacy are both rated Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR (section V), highlighted the following the risks to sustaining development outcomes:

Macroeconomic risks. The main downside risk to maintaining strong economic growth (6 percent in 2023) is
slowdown of Kazakhstan’s key trading partners, China, and Russia. Investment prospects may be
constrained by continued tight international financial conditions due to inflation concerns, although some
countries have loosened somewhat. These risks are mitigated by Kazakhstan’s strong economic
management and sound National Fund, as well as continued improvement of fiscal risk management under
the programmatic DPF series approved in March 2024 (ICR para. 69).

Institutional capacity. Effective implementation depends on operationalization and performance of several
newly-established agencies, which can take time. These include the Agency for Strategic Planning and
Reform, a competition agency, and green technology service providers. The competition agency performed
well in exceeding the RI4 target. Capacity building and TA by the WB and IMF (including through DPF
series) can help to mitigate these risks (ICR, para. 70).

Governance. Kazakhstan has a history of weak rule of law, and the rule of law and judicial impartiality are
often at risk in transition economies. Cabinet reshuffling under the new prime minister in February 2024
could complicate implementation. Further reforms and capacity-building to strengthen governance, including
in SOEs, would help mitigate these risks (ICR, para. 71).


 8. Assessment of Bank Performance

 a. Bank Performance – Design


                                                                                                 Page 15 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



Rationale


Prior experience and analytical work

The design drew on lessons from the previous DPF series, for which the second operation was
suspended, and benefited from “years of policy engagement through analytical work by the WBG, including
in the fields of environment, climate change, budgetary operations and public expenditures, productivity,
competition, procurement, and the financial sector,” complemented by “analytical work by other institutions,
including the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), the IMF, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), and the United
Nations Development Program (UNDP)” (PD2, para. 44 and Table 5).

Results chain and indicators

Although the PD did not provide an explicit overall theory of change or results chain, for each PA it did
provide a detailed explanation of the rationale and substance and how implementation would lead to the
expected results. Most of the RIs directly tracked implementation of the associated PA, and many captured
outcomes relevant to achievement of objectives.

Identification and mitigation of risks

The PD (paras. 149-151) considered the overall risk as moderate, except for the institutional capacity for
implementation – given the challenges of responding to new legislation (especially regarding procurement
and corruption) and the context of limited coordination across government (especially regarding
environmental issues). Responsibility for mitigation rested heavily on the President’s Supreme Council for
Reform and the new Agency for Strategic Planning and Reform, supported by WB TA, analytical work, and
targeted lending operations (particularly regarding the financial sector [in collaboration with the IFC]),
justice sector, decarbonization, and energy efficiency improvements.

Consultation with stakeholders and development partners

The PD (paras. 123-4) noted that legislation supported by the operation followed Kazakhstan’s “well-
defined process for public consultation on new law concepts, new laws, and the engagement of civil
society,” including publication of information and public hearings. The ICR (para. 76) stated that the
operation “greatly benefited from closely collaborating with the ADB, the French Development Agency
(AFD), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), (UNDP), and United States
Agency for International Development (USAID) on the policy reform agenda in energy efficiency and
renewable energy,” as well as with the UNDP on the environment and OECD on SOE governance and
private sector.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory




                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Adaptation

There were no changes during implementation that would have warranted adaptation (ICR. Para. 15).

Monitoring

The program was adequately monitored, with the support of WB TA and preparation of follow-up operations.
However, some of the RIs reflected only implementation of the PA, requiring additional monitoring to capture
progress toward PDOs, and some data sources proved challenging due to “reshuffling of government officials
and lack of awareness” (ICR, paras. 67-68).



Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

The design was well grounded and robust, with strong consultation/collaboration and TA support.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in pollution and resilience to climate change.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



c. Gender

There were no gender-specific aspects, and only a possible indirect impact on internet access by rural women (for
which the available data do not provide a sufficiently detailed breakdown).



d. Other

n.a.




10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provided strong, evidence-based analysis of the results, with exceptional documentation of sources in
footnotes. Although the ICR (like the PD) did not provide an explicit overall theory of change or results chain, it
thoroughly discussed each PA, indicating the intended results. It was appropriately critical, e.g., of the
relevance of some of the RIs in terms of measuring achievement of objectives.

It was well written, clear, logical, and consistent with the guidelines. The lessons were rooted in the analysis
and relevant to the design of future operations.



a. Rating

High

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreement/Comments
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                   The design was well grounded
                                                                                   and robust, with especially
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   strong consultation and TA
                                                                                   support.
Relevance of Results
                                 ---                    Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                   ---                    High




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Kazakhstan PSSER DPF (P174367)



12. Lessons

The ICR set forth several lessons (section VI), and IEG highlights the following two:

A standalone DPF can advance reforms in a broader context of commitment to reform. The second DPF
in the 2015 Macroeconomic Management and Competitiveness series was cancelled in 2017 under excessive
debt burden and currency depreciation. Nonetheless, the GoK resumed reforms in 2020 to help cope with the
crises of the COVID-19 pandemic and falling oil prices (ICR, para. 3). The desire to transition to more private-led
and sustainable growth motivated resumption of the reform agenda supported by the DPF under review (ICR,
para. 6). Although it was a standalone operation, it also provided a basis for supporting further reforms in the
DPF series approved in 2024.

When actions represent only a first or intermediate step toward an eventual outcome, articulation of the
assumed results chain is desirable to demonstrate the operation’s support to achieve stated objectives.
Monitoring and evaluation is more effective when RIs reflect both implementation of PAs and the intended
outcomes. Whereas the RIs in this operation were well aligned with actions under the PAs, indicators of
progress in achieving the objectives were sometimes lacking (ICR, para. 75).


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 19
