     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024219

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P132748                                    Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-A4256                                  30-Apr-2022                                          17,075,789.52

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Mar-2017                               31-Oct-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            17,800,000.00                                   17,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                             17,075,789.52                                   17,075,789.52

 Actual                                         17,075,789.52                                   17,075,789.52




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Sriram                     Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Balasubramanian




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the ‘Developing market-based energy efficiency program in
   China’ project as articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 6) was identical to the one stated in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 13) and aimed to " support development and implementation of
   China’s priority energy efficiency and environment programs, with a focus on improving the results
   measurement and verification system and developing market based mechanism."



                                                                                                  Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



   Parsing the PDO. This ICR Review will assess the following specific and monitorable objectives that are
   realistic to implement within the short implementation timeframe and resource envelope of this small technical
   assistance project (TA) project:

        1. To improve the results measurement and verification system, in support of the development and
          implementation of China’s priority energy efficiency and environment programs
        2. To develop market-based mechanisms, in support of the development and implementation of China’s
          priority energy efficiency and environment programs.

   Supporting the development and implementation of China’s priority energy efficiency and environment
   programs is considered as the over-arching, long-term objective that is outside the limited timeframe of this
   TA project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components


   The project's components are the following (actual costs are from the ICR, page 10):

   Component 1: Supporting market-based priority energy efficiency (EE) and coal cap control
   programs (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$8.8 million; Actual cost at completion: US$8.28 million. The
   component consists of 4 sub-components which includes supporting the development and implementation
   of priority EE and coal cap control programs for the 13th Five-Year Plan (FYP), improving the energy
   savings measurement and verification system, designing market-based mechanisms for energy savings and
   building the capacity of selected stakeholders in energy savings measurement, reporting and verification
   (MRV) and implementation of priority EE programs respectively.

   Component 2. Supporting results-based green energy financing in Jing-Jin-Ji (JJJ) Region
   (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$4.5 million; Actual cost at completion: US$4.32 million. This component
   consists of sub-components such as undertaking marketing and business development for green energy
   finance, verifying results for the JJJ Program for Results (PforR) operation, providing technical assistance
   for developing innovative financial products and models and building capacity for Hua Xia Bank (HXB), and
   disseminating lessons learned from the JJJ PforR .

   Component 3. Supporting results-based environmental program in Hebei Province (Estimated cost at
   appraisal: US$4.5 million; Actual cost at completion: US$4.48 million. This component consists of sub-
   components such as providing analytical studies and technical assistance to support the implementation
   and verify the results of Hebei Air Pollution Prevention and Control Program, capacity-building for the Hebei
   Government, and disseminating lessons learned from the Hebei PforR.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost and Financing. The project’s total cost was completely financed by a GEF grant of US$17.8 million that
   was revised to US$17.1 million (ICR, page 2)

   Borrower contribution. No borrower contribution was envisaged at appraisal,.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 16, 2017, became effective on September 5, 2017, and had an
   original closing date of April 30, 2022. Based on the June 2021 midterm review, and at the project’s one
   restructuring in April 2022, the closing date was extended to October 31, 2023 due to COVID pandemic-
   related delays that impacted the completion of certain indicator targets. Newer commitments related to the
   forecasted peaking of GHG emissions before 2030 were also incorporated. The results framework,
   implementation plan, intermediate indicators,and disbursement estimates were adjusted accordingly. (ICR,
   page 12)




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector context. China’s exponential economic growth in last few decades (1980-2015) has
resulted in a six-fold increase in energy consumption. The rapid growth trajectory of the economy has made
China one of the largest greenhouse gas emitters in the world. Given the expected doubling of its energy
consumption from 2015 to 2035, and its over-reliance on energy imports, it is imperative for China to
address the twin challenges of environmental sustainability and energy security.

In an effort to address challenges, the government of China undertook measures to improve energy
efficiency (EE).However, a credible energy savings monitoring and verification system was needed to
measure the progress associated with EE programs yet there were some barriers to the system including
lack of standardized operational guidelines and a valid accreditation process. There was also the issue of
severe air pollution that had engulfed Chinese cities. The World Bank had supported China's effort to
address air pollution and EE challenges through a numerous individual projects for many years. It is in this
context that the current project was conceptualized and implemented.

Alignment with Country Strategies. The project and its PDO are aligned closely with the country strategies.
These include the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for China (Report 117875-CN) for FY2020-2025.
For example, the PDO is consistent with Area 2: Promoting greener growth by facilitating the transition to a
lower-carbon energy path and by reducing air pollution. There is also direct alignment with China’s 14th
FYP, which aimed to ‘improve the dual control of total energy consumption and intensity, focusing on
controlling fossil fuel consumption’ (ICR page 12), and also reduce the national energy intensity by 13.5
percent (ICR page 13). The project also aligns well with the high-priority environmental programs in China
related to air pollution. These include state council initiatives that aim to reduce air pollution, which include
targets for the JJJ and Hebei province regions where the project is being operationalized. Lastly, the
objectives are also aligned with the Dual Carbon Goals initiative announced by the Chinese government in
2020 that aims to reduce carbon emissions in the medium to long term.



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



               However, minor shortcomings include the lack of specificity in the PDO formulation, which was too broad.
               The PDO outcome indicator makes it clear that the PDO formulation should have specified “in two selected
               regions.”


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the results measurement and verification system, in support of the development and
                             implementation of China’s priority energy efficiency and environment programs.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (TOC). The TOC for achieving Objective 1 was based on the need to improve the results
                             measurement and verification system to support the development and implementation priority energy
                             efficiency and environment programs. The key outcome indicators measure the roll-out of a standardized
                             energy savings measurement, reporting and verification (MRV) system, while the intermediate indicators
                             included the number of people trained, i.e., capacity built for the MRV system and development of energy
                             savings MRV methodologies and guidelines. The activities pursued by the project were expected to result in
                             (i) the establishment of a framework for energy savings MRV and (ii) improvements in the accreditation and
                             regulation of third party verifiers, thereby enabling better quality verification and greater standardization of
                             systems. These activities would credibly help in achieving the outcome of developing 29 energy savings M&V
                             methodologies and guidelines.

                             Furthermore, support was to be provided to the (i) results-based green financing in the JJJ region (specifically
                             by verifying results for the JJJ PforR) and (ii) results-based environmental program in the Hebel region
                             (through providing verifying results and building capacity for Hebel PforR)..These activities were expected to
                             lead to outcomes such as development of methodologies and guidelines for energy saving MRV, and
                             implementation of the JJJ PforR and Hebel PforR operations through verification of energy and environment
                             results..

                             Indicators used to measure the achievement of Objective 1 were consistent with the above results chain. The
                             outcome indicators measured the verification of energy and environment results and the development of
                             innovative financial products for green financing. Intermediate indicators included measuring number of
                             people trained for environmental results monitoring and development of relevant case studies for JJJ and
                             Hebei PforR respectively.

                             The TOC is robust and logical, with a credible causal chain. The specificity of the indicators supports the
                             assessment that the project's outcomes can be attributable to the project's interventions.


                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



Key assumptions included (i) Government of China’s sustained commitment to energy conservation, (ii) coal
consumption cap control and use of market based mechanisms for EE, (iii) long -term policy commitment to
prevention of air pollution and (iv) growing momentum of green financing in China. These assumptions have
largely materialized and played an important role in the achievement of the PDOs.

Outputs

      Capacities for environmental results monitoring improved with almost 720 people trained, which is
         higher than the original target of 480 people in April 2022.
        Case studies for the JJJ and Hebei Pebei PforR operations have been developed.
        Implementation support were provided for the JJJ PforR and Hebel PforR operations through
         verification of both energy and environment results. MRV activities—capacity building improvements
         and enhanced energy saving methodologies---played an important role in supporting
         project implementation.
        Two case studies were developed as targeted.
        Development of 29 energy savings MRV guidelines and methodologies as compared to the target of
         25.

Outcomes:

      Improvements in energy savings MRV system and greater standardization were implemented. An
       overarching framework for energy savings MRV was established based on extensive review of the
       legal, policy and technical standard frameworks of MRV systems in the European Union and the
       United States.
      Results measurement, verification and capacity-building for environmental results monitoring were
       improved and implemented. The Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) were all achieved for the JJJ
       and Hebei PforR operations, and the verification process was carried out through this TA project’s
       MRV systems.
      The completion of 22 TA activities supported the development and implementation of priority EE and
       coal cap control policies. The outputs of those TA activities have informed the design and formulation
       of many EE policies during the 13th and 14th FYP.

As a direct result of the project’s TA activities, MRV systems were completed to verify (i) green energy
financing and (ii) environmental programs in JJJ Region and Hebei Province. Sustainability of the MRV
systems is ensured since the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) has sought
opportunities to implement the improved energy savings MRV systems elsewhere. For example, NDRC’s
Department of Environmental Protection and Resource Conservation is coordinating with other NDRC
departments, as well as other government agencies including the Ministry of Environment and Ecology (MEE)
and the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), to roll out their own pilot activities. These include monitoring
energy consumption and savings of high energy- intensive enterprises, improving statistical reporting, or
using in the development of carbon emissions MRV systems to be used for the emissions trading scheme.

In addition to project-level benefits (notably the use of the MRV system to verify DLIs for two PforRs) and the
mainstreaming of verification across key institutions, this small TA project also had impacts at the national
level. It contributed to the design and roll-out of priority EE policies during the 13th and 14th Five-Year Plans.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



These achievements exceed the relatively more specific intent of the PDO (i.e., to improve the results
measurement verification system). Given these significant upstream and downstream benefits, efficacy for
Objective 1 is rated High.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To develop market-based mechanisms, in support of the development and implementation of China’s priority
energy efficiency and environment programs.

Rationale
Theory of Change (TOC). The TOC for this project was based on the need to develop market-based
mechanisms, in support of the longer-term development and implementation of China’s priority energy
efficiency and environment programs. The outcome indicators are market-based EE trading mechanisms that
have been designed and piloted. To achieve this outcome, the intermediate indicators are the capacity built
(number of people trained) for market-based EE mechanism and the number of energy trading schemes
designed and piloted.

As input activities, support would be provided to (i) results-based green financing in the JJJ region (through
marketing and business development for green finance and providing technical assistance for innovative
financial products for the JJJ PforR) and (ii) results-based environmental program in the Hebel region
(through providing technical assistance, and building capacity for Hebel PforR).These activities were
expected to lead to the operationalization of market-based mechanisms for energy savings and
implementation of JJJ PforR and Hebel PforR operations.

As in Objective 1, the close match between the activities and the targeted outcomes present a logical causal
chain and credible TOC. Consequently, the project's results can be attributed with confidence to the project's
interventions.



Outputs.

        Case studies for the JJJ and Hebei Pebei PforR operations have been developed.
        4 Innovative financial products for green financing were developed in comparison to the target of 3.
        Conceptualizing and piloting of market-based energy consumption EE trading schemes were
         implemented.
        Capacities were built for MRV system and market-based EE mechanism with actual completion of
         2,925 people trained, significantly exceeding the target of 1,200.




                                                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



                            Outcomes

                                    Greater standardization in procedures, manuals and implementation of energy savings MRV system
                                    Market-based mechanisms for energy savings (EE) and emissions trading (ET) were developed and
                                     piloted that is aligned with China’s current energy efficiency policies. For greenfield energy-intensive
                                     enterprises, three trading modality options include trading between provincial governments, among
                                     enterprises, and between provincial governments and enterprises. This was already cleared by NDRC
                                     and is under review by the State Council at the time of project completion.
                                    The project contributed to the four provincial/city-level pilot EE trading schemes. NDRC has
                                     authorized these four pilot EE trading schemes in Henan Province, Fujian Province, Shandong
                                     Province, Qingdao city (in Shandong Province) and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, which are
                                     testing various operational modalities.
                                    In addition, five provinces voluntarily introduced market-based trading scheme on energy savings,
                                     coal consumption savings, etc. The experiences and lessons from these provincial and regional pilots
                                     informed the development of the national energy consumption rights trading scheme.

                            Given the project’s success in going significantly beyond the PDO (i.e., to develop market-based
                            mechanisms) to actually roll-out and implement on a pilot basis the EE and ET mechanisms city and
                            provincial levels, with requisite approval from NDRC, the efficacy rating for Objective 2 is High.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            As seen from the above, the project substantially achieved or exceeded its PDO objectives within the
                            project’s timeframe and resource envelope. Progress was made in terms of supporting development and
                            implementation of China’s priority energy efficiency and environment programs Most indicators for Objective
                            1 and 2 surpassed their targets, there was clear progression towards the targets in line with the TOC, and
                            good evidence of continued performance. For the intermediate indicators, similarly targets were met or
                            exceeded, thus ensuring the results measurement and verification system and development of market based
                            mechanism for energy savings. The successful implementation of these activities have contributed to the
                            longer-term objective of supporting the priority energy efficiency and environment programs of China.

                            Based on the High ratings for the project's efficacy in achieving the two objectives, overall efficacy is rated
                            High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



  High



 5. Efficiency
Since this project is a technical assistance (TA) project funded by GEF, the traditional approaches to cost-
benefit analysis are not feasible. Two key parameters are used for evaluating efficiency: 1) Annual and
cumulative CO2 emission reduction and 2) GEF incremental cost. On 1), the ICR mentions that the cumulative
CO2 emissions reduction is approximately 28.76 million tons CO2 which is a 56 percent increase from the
original estimate of 19.69 million tons of CO2 at appraisal. On 2), the GEF incremental cost is calculated at
US$0.59 per ton of CO2 which is a 15.7 percent reduction compared to the appraisal estimate of US$0.7 per ton
of CO2. The reduction in costs have been attributed to increased efficiency of the project due to
two factors. First, cost efficiency has been accrued due to large number of critically important inputs that led to
the achievement of significant intermediate outcomes in a relatively small TA project. Second, the value added
created by supporting two PforRs is an important factor maximizing efficiency. (ICR, page 19)

On implementation efficiency, there were delays caused by the COVID pandemic. There were also delays in
specific sub-projects and activities which were important for the overall success of the project in two key
activities: (i) Reviewing MRV international experience and (ii) Developing MVR Principles and Guidelines.

The project was cost-effective in delivering results with high value added results that lead to the achievement of
the PDOs. Taking into account the delays, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project’s PDOs to the strategies of China and the Bank is High: the PDOs directly support
China’s long-standing priorities in energy efficiency and environment that cut across successive Five-Year
Plans. The project’s ratings for its efficacy in achieving the two objectives are both high: beyond achieving the
outcome indicators and exceeding some of the intermediate indicators, the project also succeeded—with NRDC

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



approval—in mainstreaming pilot MRV systems in other government entities and in rolling-out pilot market-
based mechanisms for energy efficiency and emissions trading at the city and regional levels. The project went
beyond “improvement” and achieved implementation, leading to an overall efficacy rating of High. Given these
significant achievements within the limited resource envelope of a relatively small TA project, while taking into
account some implementation delays, the project’s efficiency rating is Substantial. With a high rating for
relevance, high rating for overall efficiency, and substantial rating for efficiency, the overall outcome rating is
Highly Satisfactory.




a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Key risks to the project's developmental outcomes include (i) any potential threat to sustainability of the
energy saving MRV system, (ii) negative externalities from a market-based approach to reduce energy
consumption, and (iii) any weakening of the government’s air pollution policy. To enhance sustainability,
there is a need for continued investment and commitment to the initiatives supported by the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was based on the World Bank’s prior experience in China in the EE, clean
  energy and environmental sectors. This ensured that key lessons learned could be incorporated into
  some of the key project activities. Some examples include the need for multiple targets for EE, RE and
  carbon emissions, complementarity of EE and carbon trading schemes, improvement of the energy
  savings MRV scheme in line with international best practices and making it an integral part of the EE
  trading schemes. Another important feature of due-diligence to ensure quality at entry was the initiation of
  parallel technical assistance as an important feature of both the JJJ and Hebei PforR operations. The full
  usage of the GEF grant in business development, financial innovation, due-diligence on investment,
  verification of results and knowledge sharing are some examples of a good quality-at-entry.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision


                                                                                                      Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



 The ICR (page 26) mentions that there were three implementing agencies and 12 supervisory missions
 were carried out during the seven-year project implementation period. There were regular bi-monthly
 progress meetings with the implementation agencies to ensure progress and make necessary corrections if
 needed. An example of this has been the setting up of a project coordinator to correct slow disbursement of
 funds during the 2021-22 period. Besides these, there have also been several training events for project
 implementing agencies on fiduciary, environmental and social safeguards during implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design overall is adequate. As noted earlier, minor shortcomings in the PDO included the lack of
 specificity in the PDO formulation, which was too broad. The PDO outcome indicator makes it clear that the
 PDO formulation should have specified “in two selected regions.” Also, progress in the overall Chinese
 energy efficiency and environment programs, which are many times bigger in scale, size and complexity,
 cannot be measured within the resources and implementation time frame of this TA project The selected
 key performance indicators reflect the targeted outcomes though the targets for some could have been
 precisely defined (e.g. system improved). The TOC and the results framework have remained consistent
 from the design stage and during implementation. As designed, the application of the MRV system and the
 built-in tracking of disbursement-linked indicators in the JJJ and Hebei PforRs helped to ensure complete
 and timely reporting on results.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project M&E consisted of regular monitoring, quarterly progress reports, midterm reviews and project
  completion reports which all aimed to ensure a seamless implementation process. The M&E was
  thoroughly implemented as planned and reports were submitted on a regular basis. However, there were
  some components with delayed implementation due to outside factors such as the COVID 19 pandemic
  among others.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E utilization was extensive, in part driven by the monitoring activities to supposed the JJJ and Hebei
  PforRs, which also involved an audit and verification activity. Any implementation gaps were readily
  identified and decision makers were regularly kept informed about implementation progress. .




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 13
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)



  Overall, M&E quality is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The only safeguard policy triggered by the project is Environmental Assessment (EA) OP/BP 4.01. The
   project was classified as category B and no major EA instrument was required given the nature of the
   environmental TA project. According to the ICR (page 25), the environmental and social safeguards were in
   satisfactory compliance with domestic regulations and OP4.01 requirements with no reported OHS incidents
   during project implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement. The ICR rates procurement performance was Moderately Satisfactory, stating that
   procurement has been carried out in compliance with the Bank policies and procedures. Project
   procurement was mainly for small consultancy assignments. Three Project Management Offices (PMOs)
   were responsible for procurement and had specifically designated staff. The capacity of their staff was
   strengthened given the initial lack of experience with a Bank-financed project. Procurement was initially
   slow given the delays in organizing the review process for deliverables from consultants, and frequent staff
   substitutions and the task transfer times required. Procurement plans were updated regularly and
   consisted mainly of small consultancy assignments. Procurement was conducted in compliance with Bank
   policies and procedures.

   Financial Management (FM). The project’s FM system was adequate. Disbursement of the Grant
   proceeds was timely. Supported by the timely submission of accurate information, the FM system provided
   the assurance the GEF grant was being used for the intended purposes. The project accounting and
   financial reporting complied with the Ministry of Finance regulations and the GEF Grant Agreement
   requirements. He withdrawal procedure and funds flow arrangement were appropriate. There were no
   significant FM issues during project implementation.

   .




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
       ---

d. Other
       ---

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)




11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                Minor shortcomings in M&E
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial
                                                                                design
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Technical assistance (TA) projects could generate significant catalytic impact with limited
resources.

The experience in the project has been that small grants can play an important role in nudging
implementation to greater efficiency. Even small grants, when nimble and effective, have a
complementary effect to large lending programs. The inherent flexibility of TA projects ensures that
they could respond more quickly to a dynamic policy environment. Thus, small TA projects can cost-
efficiently support the achievement of larger and long-term impacts, such as the energy efficiency
and environment programs in China in this particular case.

Alignment of local developmental needs with global public goods can elicit strong buy-in
from key stakeholders.

The project successfully demonstrated the ability to align local development needs such as air
pollution management with the objectives of global public goods such as reduction in coal
consumption and carbon reduction. Given that the single biggest issue at appraisal was China’s air
pollution crisis, this alignment ensured that there was a strong buy-in for the project from local
stakeholders and government officials. The World Bank was able to successfully do this by
positioning the project as a climate mitigation initiative with GEF support from its climate change
window that would enable the delivery of significant GHG emission reductions.

Monitoring, reporting and verification systems (MRVs) can play an integral role in the
success of both energy efficiency and emissions trading schemes.

MRV systems play an important role in enabling an efficient market-based mechanism since it
provides the necessary credibility to the reporting of GHG emissions. The project has worked with
the Chinese government in improving energy consumption MRV and developing market-based
energy consumption rights trading scheme. Other complementary initiatives such as the expansion
of the market for China Certified Emission Reduction (CCER) and development of the green
electricity certificate (GEC) have helped enhance the market-based pricing mechanisms. These
highlight the importance of coordination of MRV stakeholders and the need to integrate MRV
systems across EE and emissions training schemes to achieve positive outcomes.


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Developing Market-based Energy Efficienc (P132748)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well written, concise and internally consistent. It provides sufficient detail on the project’s key
processes and implementation record. The report is focused on results and complies with the ICR
preparation guidelines. The quality of analysis and evidence provided are robust, credible and appropriately
referenced t and supported by quantitative analysis. The theory of change is valid in terms of establishing a
credible causal chain and demonstrating the attributability of project results to the project's components and
activities. The key lessons provided are clear, useful and derived from the project’s implementation experience.
Overall, the ICR's base of evidence adequately supports the performance ratings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
