     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024297

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161015                                    ESIP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Benin                                      Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                52,908,510.33

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Jun-2017

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Joel J. Maweni             Vibecke Dixon               Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project development objective (PDO) as stated at appraisal (PAD dated June 2,2017, p. 15 and
   Financing Agreement dated July 14, 2017, Schedule 1) was to improve SBEE’s operational performance,
   expand electricity access in targeted areas, and promote community-based management of forest resources.

   The PDO has three distinct parts as follows: (a) improve SBEE’s (Société Béninoise d’Energie Electriqu –
   Benin Power Utility) operational performance; (b) expand electricity access in targeted areas; and (c) promote
   community-based management of forest resources. However, for efficacy analysis the ICR has parsed the

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



   PDO into two parts by combining part (a) and part (b) to read: improve SBEE’s operational performance and
   expand electricity access in targeted areas. The ICRR follows the same approach because the two parts were
   supported by broadly the same activities under Components 1 and 2 of the Project – Improvement of SBEE’s
   Commercial Performance and Strengthening the Distribution Network in Targeted areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Improvement of SBEE’s Commercial Performance comprised preparation and
   implementation of a management improvement plan (MIP) for the SBEE and improvement of its customer
   service. Implementation of the MIP was expected to produce: (i) sustainable measures for prompt payment
   of bills for electricity consumption by government institutions, (ii) a metering and control system for the
   utility’s high consuming customers’ segment, (iii) an updated SBEE’s customer database, (iv) an
   established and trained electricity theft detection and inspection team. The improvement of SBEE’s
   customer service entailed: (i) the establishment and operationalization of a customer call center for
   customers to voice complaints and concerns and for SBEE to track responses, (ii) implementation of
   customer satisfaction surveys and the online publication of their results, and (iii) conducting of gender
   sensitive communications and awareness campaigns to regularize customer connections and to reduce
   electricity theft.

   Component 2: Distribution Network Strengthening in Targeted Areas. The objective of this component
   was to improve on-grid access. This was to be achieved by: (a) expanding medium (MV) and low voltage
   (LV) networks in target areas to rebalance loads, regularize unmetered connections, and connect new
   consumers in selected underserved areas, (b) the acquisition and installation of prepaid meters and
   required spare parts in substations; (c) upgrading selected power stations to reduce power outages; and (d)
   promoting energy-efficient street lighting through the acquisition and installation of light emitting diode lights
   (LED) on selected streets and conducting a study on sustainable management of street lighting.

   Component 3: Community-Based Management of Wood Fuels. This component's purpose was to
   improve community management of wood fuels by: (a) improving sustainable management of forest
   resources; and (b) developing improved cookstoves. Improvements in sustainable management of forest
   resources were to be supported in the Moyen and Oueme Haut regions through; (i) implementation of forest
   management plans in three selected municipalities, including provision of logistics support and training, (ii)
   preparing participatory forest management plans in five other municipalities, (iii) developing income-
   generating activities, such as bee-keeping; and (iv) provision of technical assistance for establishment of an
   inter-municipality association for the regulation of forest management bodies and wood fuel markets. The
   development of improved cookstoves was to be supported through; (i) a comprehensive quality assurance
   and value chain study of cook stove production and commercialization, (ii) development of a marketing and
   communication plan, and (iii) the upgrading of an improved cook stoves testing center through the provision
   of goods, training, and technical assistance.



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



   Component 4: Sector Development and Implementation Support. The objective of this component was
   to improve sector governance and project implementation. Improvement in governance was to be supported
   through an assortment of relevant studies and through strengthening the capacities of key Government of
   Benin (GoB) institutions in the sector – Ministry of Energy, Water, and Mines (Ministère de l’Energie, de
   l’Eau et des Mines, MEEM), Benin Rural Electrification Agency (Agence Beninoise de l’Electrification Rurale
   et de laMaitrise d'Energie, ABERME), Renewable Energy Agency (Agence Nationale de Développement
   des Energies Renouvelables, ANADER), and National Authority for the Regulation of the Electricity Sector
   (Autorité Nationale de Regulation du Secteur d’Electricité, ARE) – to enable them to fulfill their respective
   roles in power development planning, program coordination and oversight, rural electrification program
   supervision, renewable energy development, and regulations development and enforcement. The range of
   studies included generation and transmission least-cost studies and plans, detailed feasibility studies for
   priority investments, an access scale up plan and other relevant analytical studies. Through the PIU the
   component supported project coordination, management, and monitoring, including financial and technical
   audits, periodic evaluations, and provision of relevant goods, training, and consulting services.

   Revised Project Components

   There were two changes in project component 2. The first was the droppage of the rehabilitation of the
   Dassa MV/HV substation, one of three substations at the request of the GoB. The substation was dropped
   as it had been included under another project through which it could be implemented much more quickly.
   The droppage of the substation was handled through an exchange of letters with the GoB. The second
   change was the transfer of the rehabilitation of some distribution activities and construction of a transformer
   repair workshop to the Benin Electricity Access Scale-up Project (P173749) because they could not be
   completed within the original project implementation period. This change was implemented through a
   restructuring of the Project on December 22, 2023 which also included a cancellation of US$7.95 million
   equivalent representing the corresponding cost of the transferred activities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Total project cost at completion was US$53.2 million (Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR),
   p. 10 and Annex 3) compared to US$61.0 million estimated at appraisal (PAD, p. 18). At appraisal the
   financing plan comprised an IDA Credit of US$60.0 million and a GoB contribution of US$1.0 million. At
   completion the IDA financing totaled US$52.9 million, after considering a cancellation of US$7.95 million
   approved during the project restructuring on December 22, 2023. The GoB contribution was US$0.3 million
   compared to the expected US$1 million. The cancellation of part of the IDA Credit was at the request of
   the GoB based on an assessment of the amount that could not be disbursed within the time available
   before Project closure.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 23, 2017, and became effective on February 12, 2018. A mid-
   term review was conducted on November 9, 2020. The project was restructured once on December 22,
   2023, to cancel US$7.95 million that was likely to remain undisbursed by Project closure. In addition a
   reallocation of funds between disbursement categories was also made.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 16
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ESIP (P161015)




               Rationale
               The Project’s rating for relevance of objectives is High. The objectives were strongly aligned with the World
               Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013-2017 which was in effect at project preparation and
               with the subsequent Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY2019-2023 at project completion.
               Increased access to quality infrastructure services, one of the expected outcomes of the FY2013-2017 CPS
               pillar on “sustainable growth, competitiveness, and employment" was directly supported by the project’s
               electricity access expansion and quality of service objectives. The CPF reflected several aims of this
               project, including: (a) improving both generation capacity and administration of the system to improve
               performance and access; (b) maximizing finance for development for electricity generation; (c) producing
               greener energy through the implementation of community-based forest management; (d) building capacity
               for governance in the energy sector; and (e) supporting women’s economic empowerment in the energy
               sector. The Project’s support for improvements in electricity supply were also consistent with the objectives
               of the World Bank’s Energy Directions Paper which advocates helping client countries to secure affordable,
               reliable, and sustainable energy supply needed to meet the twin goals of poverty reduction and shared
               prosperity.

               The Project objectives were also aimed at addressing some key elements of the GoB Action Plan (2016-
               2021) for the sector, specifically those related to improving sector governance, increasing access to reliable
               quality electricity supply and enhancing SBEE’s operational performance to create conditions for private
               sector participation and economic growth.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve SBEE’s operational performance and expand access in targeted areas.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC): The theory of change for the Project was not included in the PAD because the
                             Bank’s guidelines and procedures did not require one at the time of project preparation. For the evaluation,
                             the ICR prepared a TOC (ICR, p. 3) based on the results framework in the PAD (Annex 3). The ToC shows
                             causal links from project activities to outputs, intermediate indicators, outcomes, and the long-term goals of
                             improving the performance of the country’s energy sector and the livelihoods and economic productivity of the
                             economy. The expected project outcomes were: (a) PDO #1 – improvements in SBEE’s operational
                             performance and electricity access expansion; and (b) PDO #2 – promotion of sustainable community-based
                             management of forests.


                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESIP (P161015)



Achievement of PDO #1 – increased operational performance and access expansion outcomes – was to be
measured by three PDO indicators as follows: (a) PDO indicator #1 – percentage reduction in distribution
losses; (b) PDO indicator #2 – percentage increase in revenues from targeted high-consuming customers;
and (c) PDO indicator #3 – the number of people provided with new or improved electricity service under the
project. In addition, there were 15 intermediate indicators to support tracking of the project’s progress towards
achievement of the PDO outcomes.

Achievement of PDO #2 – promotion of sustainable community-based management of forest resources was
to be measured by PDO indicator #4 – the number of hectares of forest covered by community-based forest
management plans. There were also three intermediate outcome indicators to support tracking of the project’s
progress towards achievement of PDO #2.

PDO indicators were appropriately aligned with the type of interventions supported by the Project and the
targets were set at reasonable levels. However, there are some shortcomings in the TOC. First, there was
uncertainty regarding the baseline and target values for the distribution losses reduction indicator (PDO
indicator #1). This was due to the lack of accurate baseline data and of capacity (including software) in
SBEE to model the impact of network strengthening activities on loss reduction. Second, while several
aspects of the project correctly focused on revenue collection (revenue protection program (RPP),
management information system development, theft detection and prevention prepaid metering, etc.) in
addition to billing an indicator was not included to measure improvements in collection efficiency at the PDO
or intermediate indicator level. The ICR correctly points the substantial improvement achieved in this regard in
raising collection efficiency from 90 percent in 2017 to 95 percent in 2023. Third, no indicators were included
at the PDO or intermediate level for some important activities such as the project’s support for improved
cookstoves and for tinter-municipality associations and local forestry management bodies. Fourth, in some
cases the description of project activities lacked specificity. This was the case with component 2 which did not
provide data on the physical quantities of MV/LV lines, or capacities of the substations/transformers planned
for rehabilitation or construction. Such data would have been useful for tracking implementation of the
progress and assessing the degree of project completion at project closure. The activities supported by the
Project in furtherance of each objective, the related outputs/intermediate indicators and the resulting
outcomes are summarized below under the relevant PDOs.

PDO #1: To improve SBEE’s operational performance and expand access in targeted areas.

Activities

    1. Development and implementation of an MIP for SBEE – Completed
    2. Acquisition and installation of smart meters for high revenue customers, and associated
         infrastructures & management information systems software – RPP meters and systems completed.
    3.    Establishment of a metering control center – Completed.
    4.    Installation and operationalization of a customer call center – Completed.
    5.   Construction of 60 MV/LV sub-stations and distribution networks (MV and LV) – some activities were
         delayed and transferred to another project.
    6.   Rehabilitation of 3 HV/MV stations – One substation dropped.
    7.   50,000 new electricity connections – Completed.
    8.   Acquisition and installation of street lighting using diode (LED) lamps – Completed.
    9.   Installation of transformer repair workshop and associated spare parts – Delayed and transferred to
         another operation.

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESIP (P161015)




   10. Acquisition a fault detection vehicle for SBEE – Completed
   11. Development of prospectus and a least-cost generation and transmission plan – Completed but donor
       conference pending GoB decision.
   12. Strengthening capacity of MEEM, its structures, and the actors of the sector – Completed

Outputs/intermediate outcomes

    1. Management Improvement Plan (MIP) developed, approved, and implemented – Achieved.
    2. Average duration of power outages per year in HV/MV substations rehabilitated by the project (hours)
         – Exceeded target (68 % reduction in average outage duration compared to target reduction of 50%)
    3. Implementation of a revenue protection program (RPP), 6,000 smart meters purchased of which 1,066
         were for the high consuming MV customers and were installed as planned– Completed.
    4.   Call Center installed and running at SBEE as targeted– Achieved and operational.
    5.   SBEE customer satisfaction survey was conducted, and a report was prepared by SBEE on how to
         address customers’ feedback as planned– Achieved.
    6.   Average annual voltage supplied to households in rehabilitated areas (Achieved – average annual
         voltage improved to 216 compared to target of 210)
    7.    MV/HV substations rehabilitated by the Project – 2 out of the targeted 3 substations completed, third
         was dropped.
    8.   Investment Prospectus for scale-up access developed – Developed but not submitted to a donors’
         conference as planned.
    9.   Institutional strengthening study conducted, and capacity building plan implemented – Achieved.
   10.   Staff trained through the project – target of 100 trained exceeded, actual was 357 persons.
   11.   Households provided with access to electricity services under the project (grid or off grid) (Actual was
         52 909 compared to target of 10,000)
   12.   Households provided with improved electricity connections (actual 22,091 compared to target of
         15,000)
   13.   Female-headed households provided with new or improved electricity connection as a percentage of
         the total number of households connected (Achieved – 16.2 precent compared to target of 10 percent)
   14.   Prepaid meters installed in targeted project areas (Achieved – 75,000 compared to 50,000)
   15.   MV/LV sub-stations installed in the project areas (Achieved – 99 compared to target of 60)

Outcomes

    1. Reduction of losses (%) – Partially achieved because losses were reduced from 24 percent to 22
         percent instead of 21 percent as targeted.
    2. Increased revenues from targeted high-consuming customers – increased by 14.3 percent compared
       to the target of 10 percent.
    3. People provided with new or improved electricity service (number) (Corporate Results Indicator) –
       420,000 compared to the target of 125,000.

PDO indicator #1 was partially achieved because losses were reduced by 2 percent instead of by 3 percent
as targeted. In addition to the uncertainties regarding the baseline figure of 24 percent and the lack of a
robust tool to model the impact of the distribution network investments on losses, the planned investments
had not been fully completed at project closure. These are likely to have contributed to further loss reduction
in 2024. The increase in revenues from high consuming customers and the number of people provided with


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 16
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ESIP (P161015)



new or improved access (PDO indicators #s 2 and 3 and) were both substantially exceeded. Overall PDO #1
is rated Substantial for efficacy.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To promote community-based management of forest resources.



Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC): As described above.

Activities

    1. Implementation of community-based forest management plans covering 300,000 hectares (ha)
       prepared under the IAME Project. – Completed
    2. Preparation of new participatory forest management plans covering 150,000 ha across three
       municipalities of the Ouémé Supérieur – Completed
    3. Development of income generating activities - Completed.
    4. Establishment of an inter-municipality association and installation of local forestry management bodies
       and rural wood markets – Completed.
    5. Development of Quality Standards for Improved Cookstoves - Completed

Outputs/intermediate outcomes

    1. New participatory forest management plans covering 150,000 ha across three municipalities prepared
       compared to a target of 150,000 ha – Achieved.
    2. Income generating activities developed – Planned: 8 honey production centers; 8 water boreholes;
       800 beehives constructed; and 280 trained beekeepers: Achieved: 14 honey production centers; 14
       water boreholes; 1,400 beehives constructed; and 140 trained beekeepers and 14,000 cashew plants
       produced and planted
    3. Increased revenues from beneficiaries of income generating activities funded by the project – 30.5
       percent increase compared to a target of 30 percent – Achieved.

Outcomes

    1. Hectares of forest covered by community-based forest management plans (number) - 300,000 ha
       compared to a target of 300,000 ha - Achieved.




                                                                                                Page 7 of 16
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                ESIP (P161015)



                            PDO indicator #4 was fully achieved. PDO #2 is rated Substantial for efficacy because PDO #4 was fully
                            achieved, but there was insufficient evidence on the impacts of the institutional and regulatory activities and of
                            improved cooking stoves on sustainable wood fuel management.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall Project efficacy rating is Substantial because of the four PDO indicators two exceeded their
                            targets (increases in revenues from high consuming customers and the number of people provided with new
                            or improved electricity services under the project), one achieved its target (the number of hectares covered by
                            community-based management plans) and another was partially achieved (the percentage of loss distribution
                            reduction).



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The assessment of Efficiency considers administrative/implementation efficiency, and economic and financial
   efficiency.

   Operational/Implementation efficiency. The project was implemented within the original timeframe of about 6
   years from Board approval. About 86 percent of the original allocated funds or the 100 percent of the net
   commitment after cancellation of about US$7.95 million was disbursed. The cancellation related to four major
   contracts which were transferred to another project as they could not be completed before the Project’s closing
   date. Implementation of these contracts had been delayed by failed bidding process which was compounded by
   force majeure events (COVID-19 pandemic, and the earthquake in Türkiye) during its implementation timeline
   and a failed bidding process.

   The cost associated with the postponement can be estimated as the difference in net present value (NPV)
   caused by the delay, which amounted to around US$5 million.

   Economic and financial efficiency. The ICR conducted economic and financial efficiency for the electricity and
   biomass components separately and did not aggregate the results.

   Electricity component. The economic cost stream comprises capital and operating costs component 1 while
   the benefit stream consisted of the benefits of increased access and technical loss reduction. The economic

                                                                                                                                Page 8 of 16
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ESIP (P161015)



benefits of increased access were evaluated according to the willingness-to-pay (WTP) criterion assumed at
US$172 per user per year in Benin. The economic benefits of technical loss reduction were valued at the
purchase price of energy purchased by SBEE from CEB, the bulk supplier to the regional distribution utilities.
The results yielded a NPV of US$91 million for project investment and operations costs, US$37 million for loss
reduction benefits, and US$82 million for WTP benefits at an 8 percent discount rate. Consequently, the project
generated net benefits of US$28 million (in present value); the economic internal rate of return (EIRR)
amounted to 14.4 percent, which is above the opportunity cost of 8 percent. For the financial efficiency, the NPV
was estimated at US$22 million and the FIRR at 14.6 percent. Both the economic and financial results are
robust, as they limit the WTP benefits and the new sales benefits to those new users associated with the project,
whereas the network investments are likely to support the connection of new users beyond project closure.
These positive results are not surprising given that the project consists of sensible investments using proven
technologies.

Biomass component/ Forestry subcomponent: The economic benefits of this component materialize with the
organization of managed charcoal markets that generate resources that are shared among stakeholders. The
forestry project had a cost of around US$850,000 and generated benefits of around US$1.5 million from 2020 to
2022, or around US$500,000 per year. This indicates that the activities supported by the project for improved
forest management are well justified. A comparison of the economic results with the appraisal values yields
similarly high EIRRs of 50 percent at appraisal and 63 percent at ICR.

Biomass component/enhanced revenues subcomponent. The component seeking to improve the revenues
of local populations through the support of honey-producing centers yielded a disappointing result, as the
investment of US$1.9 million resulted in a mere US$44,000 per year in revenues. To justify the investment
provided by ESIP, and assuming a 15-year lifetime, annual revenues of around US$200,000 at an 8 percent
discount rate are required. However, it is probable that, because the available data only cover recent years,
honey production can be expected to grow rapidly in the next few years, thereby improving the economic and
financial performance of the component.

The ICR concluded that the electricity components of the project—which account for the bulk of the investment
of ESIP—and the forestry subcomponent yield efficiency indicators in line or above expectations, but the
increased revenue activities did not yield the expected economic results, which appear to have been
overestimated at appraisal.

The EIRRs in the table below refer to the electricity component which constituted the bulk of the project costs.
Overall, the efficiency is rated as Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



                                                                                   81.00
Appraisal                                                15.00
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   78.00
ICR Estimate                                             14.40
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Project’s outcome rating is Satisfactory based on a High rating for relevance of objectives and Substantial
for both Efficacy and Efficiency. Project objectives were consistent with the Bank’s FY2019-2023 CPF for Benin
and the Government’s priorities for strengthening energy sector governance and performance essential for
economic growth and improvements in livelihoods. The SBEE operational performance and access expansion
objective was almost fully achieved while the objective of promoting sustainable management of forests was
achieved. Hence, the overall efficacy rating of Substantial. Overall administrative efficiency and economic/
financial efficiency of he project was good with minor shortcomings, hence a Substantial rating for Efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The Project achieved significant operational efficiency improvements in the areas of revenue collection, loss
reduction and in establishing community-based forest management systems. Reversal to these gains will
arise if SBEE does the installation of prepaid meters purchased under the project is not continued or the
smart meters installed for the RPP are not maintained and managed in accordance with the established
systems. In addition, capacities of the sector agencies built under the project, especially in MEEM and SBEE
will need to be maintained to ensure implementation of the generation and transmission investments and
access scale-up plans in a least-cost manner.

The Bank’s continued engagement in the sector through BEAS and other operations and alongside other
partners will help to manage the risks of reversals of outcomes achieved by the ESIP. The ICR notes that the
risks to the gains achieved under the sustainable management of forests are substantial and will require
continued support of donor in view of the financial fragility of the forest committees (p.24).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The design of the project was responsive to the country and energy sector conditions in Benin which
  called for strengthening of the governance and operational performance of the sector, improvements in
  electricity access which at 29 percent was below the Sub-Saharan Africa average of 35 percent, and

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



  enhancement of reliability of supply to support improvements in livelihoods and economic growth. The
  PDOs were, thus clear and consistent with country and sector needs. However, as discussed under the
  TOC there were some deficiencies in the selection of the indicators, the specificity of the project activities.

  The project design was also closely coordinated with other development partners, especially the US
  Millennium Challenge Corporation which was planning to support SBEE through a management contract
  and the AFD which was supporting distribution system networks and distribution information systems.

  Overall quality at entry was Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Project was supervised on a regular basis by the Bank’s Headquarters and field-based staff. Over the
 six-year period Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) were prepared every six months on
 average (12 ISRs in total). The ISRs, alongside mission aide memoires served to inform Bank
 management and senior GoB officials of critical issues affecting the project, thus providing a critical avenue
 for the task team to receive guidance.

 The task team’s field presence facilitated constant communication and supervision of the project even
 during the COVID-induced travel restrictions.

 The focused supervision of the Project facilitated its high degree of completion, especially the completion of
 the RPP and the expansion of access at a level more than double that anticipated at appraisal the
 anticipated. Overall, Project supervision is rated Satisfactory



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Institutional design and responsibilities for the M&E system: The monitoring of project implementation
 and of expected results and outcomes was vested in the PCU, which was expected to coordinate data
 collection from other agencies and to and consolidate it and issue progress reports. The results to be
 monitored, sources of data and frequency of collection and progress reporting were described in the
 detailed in the Project’s Results Framework (PAD, Annex 3). Project outcomes related to service

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



 improvement were to be assessed through surveys during and after project implementation. The PCU’s
 M&E specialist was charged with implementing and coordinating all M&E activities under the project. The
 World Bank was expected to supervise the project over its lifetime and monitor its results and outcomes on
 a regular basis to evaluate the achievement of the PDO and implementation performance. In addition, the
 Bank were to conduct a project midterm review two to three years after project effectiveness to thoroughly
 assess the overall project performance in achieving the development objectives and ensure that lessons
 learned thus far are taken into consideration in implementation over the remaining period. Any adjustments
 were to be discussed, agreed, and implemented, as necessary.

 M&E content: The results to be monitored, sources of data and frequency of collection and progress
 reporting were described in detail in the Project’s Results Framework (PAD, Annex 3). Project
 outcomes related to service improvement were to be assessed through surveys during and after project
 implementation. In addition to monitoring PDO related indicators, the M&E system was also well designed
 to monitor the implementation of safeguards and fiduciary aspects.

 To measure improvement in SBEE’s operational performance and access expansion the three selected
 indicators were distribution loss reduction, increased revenues from high consuming customers due to the
 implementation of the RPP, and the number of people with new or improved electricity services under the
 Project. There were some shortcomings in that: (a) while loss reduction is an important efficiency metric
 SBEE had no capacity nor software to model the impact of planned investments on losses which made it
 difficult to set a credible target; (b) the ICR (p.20) also casts doubt on the use of the increased revenues
 from high consumers as outcomes rather than an intermediate indicator – it can also be argued that the
 indicator can be impacted by factors other than improved metering, billing and collection (e.g. electricity
 price changes unless indicator it adjusted it is adjusted for such changes); (c) an important indicator as the
 ICR observes would have been the collection ratio; and (d) at the intermediate level the project had limited
 indicators to measure the progress of physical implementation which are normally incorporated in M&E
 systems for electricity distribution projects.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system as designed was well implemented and important issues were addressed during the
  missions. Over the duration of the project, 12 ISRs and aide memoires systematically reported on the
  status of the project implementation and Even during the COVID-19 pandemic the Bank’s supervision
  activities, 2 ISRs were filed during 2020, and a mid-term review was completed in January 2021.

  Furthermore, the Results Framework, which outlines the expected outcomes and indicators, was updated
  throughout the project’s implementation. On the GoB side the PCU implemented the M&E system and
  distributed progress reports on a regular basis.



c. M&E Utilization
  The progress reports generated by the M&E system, the ISRs, aide memoires and the midterm review
  prepared by the Bank supervision missions were utilized to track the project’s physical progress and
  trajectory towards meeting its expected outcomes. There were exogenous factors such as the COVID-
  19 pandemic, and the earthquake in Türkiye which impacted the utilization of the M&E because actions
  could not be taken quickly enough. This led to delays in implementation resulting in some contracts

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



  having to be transferred to the BEAS project as they could not be completed before the closure of the
  Project.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was assigned category B rating at appraisal because its impacts were expected to be small
   scale, localized, and manageable. Overall the project was expected to have positive environmental impacts
   because of energy savings from loss reduction, more efficient street lighting, and adoption of sustainable
   forest management practices. However, some environmental and social (E&S) issues could arise from civil
   works associated with network distribution subprojects, repair of transformer workshop, MV/LV substations,
   and implementation of community-based forest management plans. To guide appropriate management of
   such E&S environmental/social issues five policies were triggered as follows: OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental
   Assessment, OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.36 - Forests, OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural
   Resources, and OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement.

   Since the precise locations of the activities were unknown at appraisal an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared to guide the
   preparation, during implementation, of subproject specific environmental and social assessment impact
   (ESIA) and resettlement action plans, respectively.

   The ICR notes that during project implementation the PIU prepared an E&S screening, a Social Impact
   ESIA, and a RAP (where applicable) for seven contracts related to network strengthening, the transformer
   workshop, and the implementation of public lighting LEDs. An ESIA was prepared for each of nine forest
   management plans, and an E&S screening together with an ESIA was prepared for the implementation of
   the honey production centers (boreholes and beehives). Other cross cutting instruments included a
   Complaint Management Mechanism, an action plan for sexual abuse or harassment a procedures action
   plan for the biomass component. In total of 39 safeguard instruments were produced.

   The E&S safeguards were implemented by the PIU with support from the Benin Environmental Agency, the
   private sector contractors under the project, and the mayor’s offices of the beneficiary communities.

   The environmental safeguards remained in compliance throughout the project implementation period.
   During implementation, a total of 39 complaints were received and resolved. The project encountered
   challenges including a lack of proactivity in local committees regarding the management of complaints and
   opposition to the installation of transformers in two communities. Both instances were resolved
   satisfactorily.

   At project closure, the final ISR rated compliance with safeguards as Satisfactory




                                                                                                 Page 13 of 16
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ESIP (P161015)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management

  At appraisal responsibility for the project’s financial management was assigned to MEEM’s Project
  Coordination Unit (PCU). The financial management (FM) arrangements were based on the existing
  arrangements for the Increased Access to Modern Energy which were operating satisfactorily. The PCU’s
  FM staff comprised a FM Specialist and an Accountant, who were both experienced in the implementation
  of World Bank-financed projects. Agreed measures to reinforce the PCU’s FM capacity included: (a) hiring
  of an additional accountant; (b) recruitment of an experienced interim Internal Auditor conduct ex post
  reviews pending assignment of an internal auditor by MEEM’s internal Audit Department; (c) recruitment of
  an external Financial Auditor to audit the project’s financial statements yearly; and (d) the an updating of
  the current FM manual of procedures for the IAME Project to include the new project specific requirements.

  The Bank’s supervision missions were satisfied with the implementation of the fiduciary management
  arrangement which benefited from: (a) the installation of the project's FM software and user training, (b) the
  recruitment of an internal auditor, and (c) the regular performance of annual financial audits by an external
  audit firm.

  At project closure, there were no outstanding audits and the final ISR rated FM performance as
  Satisfactory.

  Procurement

  Procurement processing was initially slow because of long delays in obtaining no objections from the Benin
  National Directorate for the Control of Public Procurement and the Public Procurement Control Unit. The
  Procurement Plan was updated and approved via the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
  by the World Bank and the processing of procurement actions gradually improved reaching an average
  annual execution rate of above 80 percent. As of the project close, the status of implementation of the
  Procurement Plan showed an execution rate of 100 percent, with 70 contracts signed. However, a major
  setback occurred when the bidding process for four major contracts was unsuccessful due to the poor
  quality of the bids received. The relaunching of these contracts was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
  and they were eventually signed in early 2022 when there was not enough time to complete their
  implementation before closure of the Project. The contracts were, thus, transferred to the BEAS Project.
  Excluding these contracts, due to the setback encountered the final ISR rated procurement as rated
  Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  No unintended imapcts were identified.



d. Other
  Gender



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 16
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ESIP (P161015)



   Component 2 included communication and awareness campaigns to sensitize women, particularly in
   female-headed households on opportunities for using electricity and for participating in surveys of electricity
   users. The results framework included a gender intermediate indicator to measure the percentage of
   female-headed household connected to electricity by the project. The actual percentage was 16.2 (or 12129
   households) which exceeded the target of 10 percent.

   No cases of gender-based violence were reported under the project’s grievance redress mechanism (ICR,
   p. 17).



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR contains important project design and implementation issues which have possible
applicability for future operation in Benin and elsewhere. The following suggested lessons are meant
to provide additional perspectives on the substantives lessons already provided by the ICR:

    1. Efficiency in procurement is critical for efficient project management and sector
       development and merits examination of a range of innovative management options,
       including bulk purchasing of materials (especially for the distribution sector), use of
       separate supply and install contracts, and procurement reforms to streamline
       procurement and contracting procedures. In addition, simplified technical standards to
       reduce costs, the need for strong technical evaluation skills and sophisticated contractors
       may help to achieve improved efficiency in procurement.
    2. The robust design of results frameworks is critical for ensuring tracking of metrics
       that are most relevant to the expected outcomes such as revenue collection ratios in
       distribution sector operational efficiency improvement projects. Thus, cash collection
       be the central indicator around which a range of efficiency indicators such as reduction of
       losses, increases in revenues, customer growth could be organized. As the distribution
       sector is the source of cash for the upstream segments of generation and transmission
    3. As was done during preparation of the project among the MCC, the AFD and the Bank
       a coordinated approach among development partners helps to ensure coherence for
       support to the client while also providing the scope for synergies. The coordination
       yields better results when it is on an ongoing basis continuous at the sector level rather than
       when it limited to specific inventions


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 16
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ESIP (P161015)




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was detailed, analytic and substantive. The assessment of the project design shortcomings on
selection of indicators was candid and convincing.

There were some moderate shortcomings, including:

    a. services which is based on only those who received new services in Table 2 while para. 98, p. 24 refers
       to both those who received new and improved services (296, 026 compared to 420,000). The Project
       team confirmed that the correct number of people provided with new and/or improved electricity services
       was 420,000 based on 75,000 connections made under the Project. There was also an internal
       inconsistency within the results framework in that the project planned to install 50,000 prepaid meters
       which would have meant an additional 250,000 people were to be served instead of the 125,000 target
       for PDO indicator #3. The 50,000 prepaid meters is higher than total of two other indicators for the
       number of households that were to be provided with new electricity services (10,000) and with improved
       services (15,000). The latter two indicators were correlated with the number of 125, 000 people which
       was the target for PDO indicator #3.
    b. the sometimes-unclear distinction between intermediate indicators expected outcomes in the TOC
       graphic, p. 4 (for example distribution system loss reductions were shown as both an intermediate
       indicator and as outcomes).

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Substantial because of its robust analysis and candidness



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 16 of 16
