     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024314

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P123879                                     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Colombia                                    Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-83200                                                                                     49,463,806.44

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Dec-2013                                 31-Mar-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                       0.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                              55,201,956.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                          51,058,000.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator        Group
 Gloria Carolina             Judyth L. Twigg               Kandi Magendo                 IEGEC (Unit 1)
 Gutierrez Tejada




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 6), the Project
   Development Objective (PDO) was:

   “(i) to improve subnational governments’ (SNG) performance in core public management areas; and
   (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Borrower’s central government to manage the decentralization and
   territorial management framework.”


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



   For the purposes of this review, the PDOs are parsed as follows:

         PDO 1: to improve subnational governments’ (SNG) performance in core public management areas;
         PDO 2: strengthen the capacity of the Borrower’s central government to manage the decentralization
          and territorial management framework.

   The PDO remained unchanged over the project lifecycle, but three out of four outcome indicators were
   revised. One component was substantially reduced in scope and activities, and one was significantly scaled
   up. Some outcome indicators were either replaced or dropped because they were out of the project’s control,
   were not measurable, or were influenced by multiple factors beyond areas supported by the project. However,
   the new outcome indicators and targets retained roughly the same level of ambition as the original ones.
   Since the scope and level of ambition of the project remained the same, even as the approach to achieving
   outcomes was adjusted, a split rating is not implemented.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  17-Dec-2013

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Structuring Regional and Local Projects and Designing Long-Term Territorial
   Strategic Planning (Approved US$10 million; Actual US$24.9 million). This component aimed to support
   the National Planning Department (Departamento Nacional de Planeación, DNP) in establishing territorial
   strategic planning mechanisms and formulating policies that reconcile sectoral and territorial objectives;
   improving access to relevant information for regional planning; and identifying potential financing sources
   for regional development. Activities included support on analytical work to promote balanced regional
   development, designing regional development models and strategies for improving efficiency and reducing
   conflicts, and identifying national coordination mechanisms for consistent strategic planning. Activities
   related to access to information included compiling an inventory of territorial data, making information user-
   friendly and available in a timely manner for the SNGs, creating municipal statistical systems, and creating a
   territorial observatory on regional public management. Activities to support development financing included
   creating mechanisms like public-private partnerships for regional investment projects, prioritizing resources
   based on strategic plans, identifying potential areas of improvement in the investment-related legal
   framework, and creating a financing mechanism for feasibility studies of strategic regional projects (PAD,
   pp. 8-9).

   Component 2: Applying Incentives for Territorial Management (Approved US$11.5 million; Actual US$0
   million). This component aimed to assess SNGs’ public management capacity, establish Good Practice


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



Standards in key areas of subnational public management (tax administration, strategic planning, public
financial management [PFM], administrative control, financial reporting, and procurement); and creation of
an incentive framework to reward SNGs’ management performance. Activities on public management
capacity included assessing the inventory of statistical data on performance indicators; designing,
implementing, and disseminating appropriate monitoring indicators; surveying the performance of SNGs’
public management; and improving and harmonizing existing tools for measuring SNG performance.
Activities to establish good practices included analyzing national and international cases of good practice,
documenting and operationalizing these good practices, and creating a horizontal cooperation framework to
promote and disseminate these standards. Activities to implement the incentive framework included
adjustments to improve the distribution of the General Participation System (Sistema General de
Participación, SGP), implementing non-financial incentives for good performance, and implementing non-
financial incentives consisting of technical assistance packages to reward good performance (PAD, p. 9).

Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance Support to SNGs (Approved US$32.5 million; Actual
US$16.6 million). This component aimed to strengthen selected SNGs’ management capacity; strengthen
the capacity of the DNP and the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (Ministerio de Hacienda y Crédito
Público, MHCP) to ensure implementation and maintenance of the Territorial Management Model (TMM);
and improve citizen participation and social control in the processes of the public management cycle.
Activities included supporting territorial management (including investment action plan formulation and
monitoring/evaluation), and creating, implementing, and evaluating a methodology for carrying out
investment action plans and assessments in selected SNGs. Activities also included the conceptual design
of the TMM, including methodologies, procedures, and information systems to be used for its
implementation and monitoring; defining a service delivery scheme; implementing the TMM in selected
SNGs; and carrying out assessments and management and training activities on the TMM. Activities to
ensure full implementation and adequate maintenance of the TMM included signing and implementing inter-
institutional collaboration agreements with SNGs, and integrating the TMM (including its information and
reporting systems) with DNP’s and MHCP’s current management systems. Activities to improve citizen
participation and social control included developing a repository of successful methodologies and
approaches to achieve greater citizen participation and social control in said processes, and developing
instruments to increase transparency and facilitate citizen participation and control in territorial management
(PAD, pp. 9-10).

Component 4: Strengthening Control and Monitoring of Territorial Management (Approved US$5.7
million; Actual US$0.6 million). This component aimed to strengthen DNP and MHCP administrative control
over budget spending and public management capacity. Activities included reviewing and improving their
internal control management systems and processes; developing an information management model for
SNG; and issuing recommendations to the Comptroller’s Office and the Audit Office to enable the
adaptation of their processes to the new TMM. Activities to strengthen DNP's and MHCP’s public
management capacity included creating risk maps to ensure appropriate use of public resources, and
evaluating and improving existing public management indexes and control metrics (PAD, p. 10).

Component 5: Project Management and Administration (Approved US$10.2 million; Actual US$7.4
million). This component aimed to provide support to DNP and the Territorial Development Financing
Agency, FINDETER (Financiera de Desarrollo Territorial S.A.), on project coordination and management.
Activities included administrative, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, reporting,
auditing, and other operational activities required for effective project implementation (PAD, pp. 10-11).




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost at appraisal was US$70 million. At the time of the fifth restructuring, the total
  cost was decreased to US$55.2 million. The actual cost was US$51.08 million (ICR, p. i). The total
  disbursement was US$49.46 million (WB Portal), with the difference between the actual cost and
  disbursement attributed to exchange rate fluctuations.

  Financing: The project was originally financed by an IBRD loan of US$70 million. The actual project
  financing at closing was US$51.08 million. The final restructuring canceled US$14.7 million.

  Borrower Contribution: The Republic of Colombia did not intend and did not provide any counterpart
  funding.

  Dates: The World Bak (WB) approved the project on December 17, 2013, and the project became effective
  on January 24, 2014, with an original closing date of December 31, 2021. Over its implementation, the
  project underwent five restructurings to address various challenges and realign activities with changing
  priorities, and revising the closing date to March 31, 2024. The project’s mid-term review (MTR) was
  finalized on February 8, 2018.

  The PDO and components remained the same during the life of the project, but PDO indicators, outcome
  targets, Intermediate Results Indicators (IRIs), and component costs were revised. Component 2 was
  substantially reduced.

  The first restructuring was approved on September 22, 2015, after one year and nine months of
  implementation and 4 percent (US$2.7 million) of original funding (US$70 million) disbursed. This
  restructuring modified the implementation arrangements to transfer fiduciary functions from FINDETER to
  the Development Projects Financing Fund, FONADE (Fondo Financiero de Proyectos de Desarrollo), a
  public entity that had been managing projects financed by the Inter-American Development Bank. The
  change was necessitated by management weaknesses in FINDETER, which had affected project
  implementation (RES18787, p. 5, p. 8).

  The second restructuring (level 2) was approved on June 29, 2016, after two and a half years of
  implementation and 6 percent (US$4.4 million) of original funding disbursed. It adjusted the scope of
  components 1, 2, and 4, and revised the results framework to better capture the results that could be
  achieved following these changes, updating some IRIs and reallocating component costs, but leaving PDO
  indicators unchanged (RES23093, p. 6-7). The restructuring aligned project activities to the new National
  Development Plan 2014-2018 approved in July 2015 and the Havana Peace Dialogue, which emphasized
  the need for promoting equitable development across the regions, which had in turn increased the urgency
  of improving and updating the available tools for territorial planning.

  The following changes were made to project components (RES23093, pp. 6-7):

        Component 1 was revised to pilot a multi-purpose cadaster in 10 municipalities and implement a
         modernization program for municipal and departmental territorial land use plans (POTs). Activities
         such as creating municipal statistical systems, establishing a regional public management
         observatory, and conducting a normative analysis of investment resources were dropped.
        Component 2 was significantly reduced. Activities on the definition of performance indicators of
         SNGs and implementation of an incentive framework to reward SNG management performance

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



       were cancelled. DNP had already developed an index on subnational performance information
       (Índice de Desempeño Integral) and was working on devising mechanisms to reward well-
       performing SNGs. Activities aimed at supporting the definition of standards and good practice in
       subnational public management remained unchanged to support component 3.
      Component 3 remained the same.
      Component 4 had several activities cancelled, including improving the efficiency and scope of
       current government internal control management systems, developing an informational management
       model for SNGs, and improving DNP and MHCP internal control processes. DNP had already made
       progress in the design of tools and mechanisms for improving SNG control and monitoring, most
       recently on public investment management. Activities to improve public management indexes and
       control metrics were also dropped.
      The cost of Component 5 was reassessed in the light of the new subsidiary agreement between
       FONADE and DNP and new exchange rate projections.

As a result of these changes, the allocation for Component 1 nearly tripled, increasing from US$10 million to
US$28.24 million. Allocations for Component 2 and Component 4 decreased significantly, from US$11.56
million to US$150,000 and from US$5.72 million to US$306,000, respectively. Component 5 saw a slight
decrease, from US$10.19 million to US$8.76 million, while the allocation for Component 3 (US$32.53
million) remained unchanged (RES 23093, p. 5). IRIs were also adjusted in light of the changes to project
activities.

The third restructuring in May 2020, after six years of implementation and US$34.63 million (49 percent)
of the loan amount disbursed, introduced significant revisions to the results framework. Implementation
progress had been downgraded to moderately unsatisfactory in 2018 due to the low disbursement rate and
limited progress in the results indicators (RES3321, p. 4). Three of the four original PDO-level indicators
were replaced, IRIs were dropped or revised to better reflect the contribution of project activities to the PDO,
and funds were reallocated from Components 1, 2 and 4 to Component 3 to support the implementation of
new activities. New activities included developing and implementing a territorial association framework,
differentiated territorial strategies, and action plans for six pilot regions; revamping the technical
assistance strategy developed by the DNP; supporting the Decentralization Mission launched by the
government; and implementing a revised approach for the TMM. Component 5 remained unchanged
(RES3321, p. 5).

The following changes were made to PDO-level indicators (RES3321, Table 1 and Results Framework):

PDO indicator                        Target                      Reason
PDO Indicator 1 (dropped): Pilot
subnational governments have                                     Cannot be directly attributable to
                                     75 percent
increased local tax collection by at                             project activities.
least 10 percent.
PDO Indicator 1 (new):               50 percent of beneficiary
Beneficiary municipalities with an municipalities improved       To reflect the impact of the TA
improved management score in their score in the                  provided by the project to beneficiary
the Municipal Performance            management component        municipalities in core public
Measure (MDM) index                  of the MDM index by at      management areas.
(Percentage).                        least 10 points



                                                                                                      Page 5 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



PDO Indicator 2 (dropped):
                                                              No mechanism nor methodology in
Fulfillment of municipal
                                    75 percent                place to monitor the delivery of
development plan outputs goals
                                                              municipal plan outputs.
(Percentage).
                                                               To capture the implementation of a
                                    100 percent of
                                                               new methodology to prepare modern
PDO Indicator 2 (new):              beneficiary municipalities
                                                               Territorial Land Use Plans that was
Beneficiary municipalities with     have updated long term
                                                               developed by the project, as well as
updated long-term planning          planning instruments.
                                                               the development of planning tools by
instruments (percentage).
                                                               the DNP such as the Territorial
                                                               Toolkit.
PDO Indicator 3 (dropped):
                                                            Multiple factors influence budget
Budget execution (total budget
                                  75 percent                execution beyond areas supported by
execution as % of revised budget)
                                                            the project.
(Percentage).
                                  At least 80 percent of
PDO Indicator 3 (new):            beneficiary subnational
                                                            To capture the development and
Beneficiary subnational entities  entities have used
                                                            implementation of tools and
using instruments developed by instruments developed by
                                                            methodologies by the central
the project to strengthen the     the project to strengthen
                                                            government to support territorial
decentralization framework and the decentralization
                                                            management.
public management (Percentage). framework and public
                                  management.
                                                            The target is revised as described
PDO Indicator 4 (unchanged):
                                                            below to reflect the impact of the
Level of automation of
                                  75 percent (revised)      implementation of the TMM in the
administrative and financial
                                                            automatization of financial and
processes (Percentage).
                                                            administrative process.
                                  At least 210 beneficiary
                                  SNGs increased their
PDO Indicator 4 (unchanged):      automation level by 10
Level of automation of            points based on the
administrative and financial      Digital Government Index
processes (Percentage).           – Integrated Planning
                                  and Management (MIPG)
                                  Indicator I20 (new).

The changes to project components under the third restructuring were as follows (RES 3321, p. 9-10).

      Component 1 expanded its scope to finance the development of territorial association frameworks,
       including the formulation of Regional Strategic Plans (PER), and to support the development of a
       Regional Land Use Model (MOTR) for selected Administrative Planning Regions and a platform to
       formulate Territorial Land Use Plans.
      Component 2 was canceled. The government decided not to implement the characterization of
       additional municipalities and to allocate remaining resources to support the rollout of the revamped
       technical assistance strategy.


                                                                                                Page 6 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



         Component 3 was expanded to finance the implementation of DNP’s revamped technical
          assistance strategy, which included providing permanent on-line training to municipalities, and the
          enhancement of the Territorial Portal, which would provide tools to articulate local government plans
          with municipal development plans and provide a single access point for virtual training. The
          component also financed the development of tailored territorial strategies and action plans for six
          regions (Chocó, Buenaventura, Cauca, Tumaco, La Guajira, and San Andrés) to strengthen
          coordination of national government interventions. Additionally, it funded analytical studies to identify
          necessary adjustments to Colombia's decentralization framework.
         Unused resources from Component 4 were reallocated to support the implementation of the TMM,
          the development of territorial association frameworks, and the implementation of the
          Decentralization Mission.
         Component 5 remained unchanged.

   The fourth restructuring was approved on June 25, 2021, after seven and a half years of implementation
   and 53 percent (US$37.03 million) of the original funding disbursed. The restructuring extended the project
   closing date from December 31, 2021, to September 30, 2023, and reallocated resources across
   components to support new activities under Component 3. These activities aimed to implement the
   government’s Economic Reactivation Policy (CONPES) in response to COVID-19. To support CONPES,
   the project provided TA to strengthen territorial capacity in planning, investment, and financial management,
   fostering economic recovery at the territorial level (RES 47313, p. 3-4). The extension also addressed
   implementation delays caused by the pandemic and facilitated the completion of the TMM rollout in all 300
   target municipalities.

   The fifth and final restructuring was approved on August 23, 2023, one month before the scheduled
   closing date, when 70 percent (US$49.06 million) of the original funding disbursed. The restructuring
   extended the project’s closing date to March 31, 2024, and cancelled US$14.7 million of loan proceeds,
   resulting in an adjustment in the costs of Components 3 and 5.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: At the time of appraisal, Colombia's economic performance had been robust due to
favorable external conditions and sound policies. The economy quickly rebounded from the 2008-09 global
crisis, aided by high commodity prices and limited exposure to global financial markets. A strong
macroeconomic framework, a resilient financial sector, and effective regulatory measures helped mitigate
external shocks and supported economic growth, which, despite slowing in 2012, remained above regional
averages at four percent. Improved fiscal performance resulted in a positive primary balance for the
combined public sector in 2012, and social accomplishments resulted in a 17-percentage-point reduction in
the poverty rate compared to 2002 (PAD, p. 1).

Sector context: Decentralization reforms had aimed to find the right balance between central authority and
local autonomy, equity in resource distribution, and higher efficiency in public spending. In 2011, the 32
SNGs at the regional level and 1,102 municipalities accounted for 8.1 percent of gross domestic product
(GDP) in public expenditure but only generated 3 percent of GDP in tax revenues. Additional income for


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



SNGs came from the General Participation System (SGP), central government transfers, non-tax revenues,
and natural resource royalties (PAD, p. 2-3).

Constitutional reforms in 1986 and 1991 transferred responsibilities and resources to municipalities and
departments for the delivery of services. However, political pressures led to significantly higher transfers (45
percent of the central government’s budget by 1999), higher expenditures and debt, and reduced incentives
for SNGs to generate revenue (PAD, p. 2). New reforms between 1997 and 2003 aimed to reduce spending
and borrowing in SNGs through a new bankruptcy law (Law 550) for highly indebted SNGs and public
enterprises and a new subnational insolvency framework that limited the growth of transfers and imposed
budget constraints. A third set of reforms, approved since 2008, introduced performance-based transfers by
monitoring the services delivered by SNGs and controlling coverage, quality, and continuity required for
services financed by the transfer system. In 2011, Congress approved the royalty reform to introduce
results conditions and approved the Territorial Entities Land Management Law (Ley de Ordenamiento
Territorial) to reduce the risk of investment fragmentation and low-quality projects from SNGs (PAD, p. 3)

Since 2012, the government had taken a new approach to build SNG capacity, strengthen central
government monitoring and assistance to SNGs, and increase effective demand for SNG performance at
the local level. Therefore, the project’s objectives were highly relevant to the sector context and fully aligned
with the government’s approach to building SNG capacity (PAD, p. 4).

Government strategy. The PDO were well aligned with the government’s National Development Plan
(NDP) for 2010-2014 “Prosperity for All” which laid out a strategy for regional development and
convergence focusing on the need to tailor public policies and programs to the specific characteristics and
capacities of the regions. Two of the three strategic areas of the NDP were relevant to the PDO, (1)
Sustainable Growth and Competitiveness and (2) Equality of Opportunities for Social Prosperity, as well as
two of four cross-cutting themes, (1) Good governance and (2) Regional development and Integration. In
addition, the government had approved reforms for fiscal consolidation, including a new fiscal rule, a reform
of the royalties system, and reductions of tax exemptions and import tariffs, to consolidate the fiscal position
and manage windfalls from commodities production, which affected transfers to SNGs (PAD, pp. 1-2; 5).

Bank strategy: The PDO were aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for Colombia
FY2012-2016, in effect at appraisal, which supported “improved public sector management: good
governance and decentralization programs”, focusing on the national government’s management
institutions, the decentralization framework, and governance and public management capacities at the
subnational level of government. The project was also aligned with the goal of the Country Partnership
Framework at closing (FY2024-2027) in addressing Colombia’s deep-rooted regional disparities and
improving access to quality public services in remote, conflict-affected areas. Its High-Level Objective 1
(HLO 1) focused on promoting equitable territorial development and social inclusion, and HLO 2 (Objective
4) focused on strengthening institutional capacity at the national level and SNGs.

Previous Bank experience: The project built on years of WB engagement in Colombia, delivering
knowledge products and investment projects to address key challenges in decentralization and subnational
governance. Notable studies included topics such as Citizen’s Visible Audits to Improve Public Investment,
Transparency, and Accountability (TF096676), Installing Basic Management Capacity in Chocó
(TF091688), and "Until Debt do us Part” Study on Insolvency Frameworks – Colombia Case. Additional
studies examined coordinated service delivery among all levels of government in Colombia and reviewed
the country’s budget management and reform opportunities (PAD, Table 1). Previous investment projects
focusing on strengthening subnational institutions included the Public Financial Management Projects I and


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



               II (P040109), Consolidation of National Public Management Information Systems (P106628), Strengthening
               Public Information, Monitoring, Evaluation for Results Management (P099139), and the IDF Grant to
               strengthen the Legal Claims Management System (TF058311) (PAD, Table 1). Therefore, the project’s
               objectives were appropriately oriented and pitched for the development status and capacity in the country.

               The project’s objectives were highly relevant to the country and sector context and fully aligned with the
               Country Partnership Framework and the NDP. The project’s activities built on previous WB operations and
               ASAs and fully addressed the development problem and sought to contribute to its solution.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve SNG performance in core public management areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The original PAD did not include an explicit theory of change, but one was added in the ICR (Annex 7) for the
                             project at appraisal and at closure. The project aimed to improve Colombia’s SNG performance in core public
                             management areas. This objective was to be measured by PDO indicators 1) Beneficiary municipalities with
                             an improved management score in the Municipal Performance Measure (MDM) Index; and PDO indicator 2)
                             Beneficiary municipalities with updated long-term planning instruments.

                             These outcomes were to result from implementing a series of activities. The modern POT methodology and
                             POT plans (POTs) were expected to improve information for territorial planning. A new Multipurpose Cadaster
                             was to be piloted in 10 urban and rural municipalities before its deployment nationwide. The pilot was
                             expected to spearhead the use of regional operators to enable the development of a local ecosystem of
                             service providers to deliver cadaster update products to municipalities. In addition, the implementation of a
                             TMM (design is measured under PDO 2) was expected to modernize municipal management systems
                             through integrated technological tools consisting of three modules: Planning (module 1), Financial and
                             Revenue Management (module 2), and M&E for Development Plans (module 3). TA to SNGs on results
                             measurement, implementation of territorial development plans, financial and budget management, and
                             developing the monitoring system was expected to improve their MDM management scores.

                             The causal links between project activities (inputs), outputs and intermediate outcomes were clear. The links
                             to PDO outcomes were also clear, as capacity strengthening activities, a new modern POT methodology and
                             POTs, a multipurpose cadaster, and the modernization of municipal management systems through the TMM
                             were to provide information for regional planning decisions on land allocation, infrastructure, investments, and

                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



taxes, among others, to improve budget execution and lead to a more open government, which would in turn
result in better management scores and improved long-term planning instruments.

Outputs (ICR, p. 8-9, p. 26)

The project delivered the following outputs:

      New methodology for POT and Departmental Land Use Plan (Plan de Ordenamiento Departamental,
         POD) developed.
        9 PODs, 27 POTs (against a target of 39 POTs), and 1 metropolitan area plan were completed (total
         of 37) (ICR, footnote 14, p. 10).
        POTs and Multipurpose Cadaster embedded in national policy through CONPES documents, allowing
         for their ongoing scale-up across the country.
        Multipurpose cadaster piloted in 7 municipalities (Topaipí, Dibulla, San Carlos, Lebrija, Puerto
         Leguizamon, Puerto Gaitán, and Santa Marta). The pilots did not reach areas affected by conflict.
        TMM designed and implemented in 281 municipal governments (vis-à-vis a target of 280 for IRI 3.2)
         with modules 1 and 3.
        TMM implemented with all three modules in 40 municipalities.
        7,335 technical assistance sessions conducted across 365 municipalities (exceeding the target of 300
         municipalities for IRI 3.3).

The following Intermediate Results Indicators informed the achievement of PDO 1.

    1. IRI 1.1: Design and implementation of the territorial land use plans (POT) program. Baseline: 0 (April
       2016). Target: 69. Actual: 37 (March 2024). A total of 9 PODs, 27 POTs, and 1 metropolitan area plan
       were implemented (total of 37). (IRI 1.1: Partially achieved).
    2. IRI 1.2: Design and implementation of multi-purpose land cadaster pilot. Baseline: No pilots in any
       municipality (April 2016). Target: Pilots implemented in 7 municipalities (Topaipí, Dibulla, San Carlos,
       Lebrija, Puerto Leguizamo, Puerto Gaitán, and Santa Marta). Actual: Pilots implemented in 7
       municipalities (March 2024). All products from the cadaster have been delivered, and the cartography
       has been validated by IGAC. (IRI 1.2: Achieved).
    3. IRI 3.2: Implementation of the Territorial Management Model (TMM). Baseline: TMM not implemented
       (February 2014). Target: TMM implemented in at least 280 municipalities. Actual: TMM implemented
       fully (all 3 modules) in 40 municipalities (March 2024). (IRI 3.2: Partially achieved).
             o Module 2 (Financial and Revenue Management) was implemented in 40 municipalities.
                Modules 1 and 3 (Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation modules) were implemented in 281
                municipalities (ICR, p. 24). The ICR noted (p. 9) that this indicator lacked a clear definition or
                methodology, leaving ambiguity about whether full implementation required all three modules.
                ISRs indicated partial achievement, but the Borrower’s ICR from May 2024 considered the end
                target met, as 281 municipalities implemented at least two of the three modules, exceeding the
                target of 280. IEG considered this indicator as partially achieved because the Territorial
                Management Model is a structured framework designed to achieve specific outcomes. When
                this model is fragmented or divided, it is not a Model anymore, as it fails to deliver the
                intended results for which it was originally conceived. In addition, Module 2 on Financial and
                Revenue Management was central to the project’s PDO. The task team (interview) considered
                that the implementation of Modules 1 and 3 was sufficient to qualify as TMM adoption, as the
                indicator definition did not specify that all three modules needed to be completed, and while

                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



               Module 2 contained important components, assigning it greater weight would have introduced
               subjectivity to the evaluation process. In addition, private sector providers developed
               alternative Financial and Revenue Management modules and offered them to municipalities at
               reduced cost or free of charge. While Module 2 was implemented in only 40 municipalities
               under the project, many municipalities are nevertheless using similar financial management
               tools from private providers.
    4. IRI 3.3: Provision of TA to SNGs on the functionalities of the TMM. Baseline: No TA had been
       provided (February 2024). Target: 300 municipalities have received TA as part of the TMM. Actual:
       365 municipalities received TA as part of the TMM (March 2024). (IRI 3.3: Exceeded)

Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1, p. 21, and table 3, p. 9)

The achievement of the PDO was assessed using the indicators listed below.

PDO Indicator 1. Beneficiary municipalities with an improved score in the management component of the
Municipal Performance Measure (MDM) Index by at least 10 points (Percentage). Baseline: 6
percent (December 2019). Target: 50 percent. Actual: 53 percent, or 160 out of 300 municipalities, improved
their score by at least 10 points (March 2024). The MDM management score is measured as the average in
the scores of budget execution and open government (PDO Indicator 1: Exceeded)

PDO Indicator 2. Beneficiary municipalities with updated long-term planning instruments (Percentage).
Baseline: 5.10 percent (December 2019). Target: 100 percent. Actual: 69 percent, or 27 out of 39 planned
POTs, were formulated with the project’s support (8 in zone 4 and 19 in zone 2) (March 2024). The end-target
was not achieved. No additional POTs will be financed and formulated by the project. (PDO Indicator 2:
Partially achieved)

The project helped enhance management performance, transparency and accountability, and information
reporting to the central government by SNGs through the implementation of the TMM, Cadaster pilots, and
POTs. However, many planned activities were cancelled, and there were significant shortcomings in the
implementation of module 2 of the TMM on Financial and Revenue Management (IRI 3.2). Only 40 out of 281
municipal governments implemented module 2, along with modules 1 and 3, despite module 2 being a
fundamental component of the model and a core area of public management in SNGs. Additionally, one
outcome indicator (PDO Indicator 2) and its related IRI (IRI 1.1) which measured the implementation of POTs,
were only partially achieved. POTs are critical for reducing disaster risk and directing investments based on
land conditions and socioeconomic use. Therefore, the achievement of this objective is rated as Substantial



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Strengthen the capacity of the Borrower’s central government to manage the decentralization and territorial
management framework

Rationale

                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



Theory of Change. The original PAD did not include an explicit theory of change, but one was added in the
ICR (Annex 7) for the project at appraisal and at closure. The project aimed to strengthen the capacity of the
Borrower’s central government to manage the decentralization and territorial management framework. This
objective was to be measured by PDO indicator 3) Beneficiary subnational entities using instruments
developed by the project to strengthen the decentralization framework and public management (Percentage)
and PDO indicator 4) Level of automation of administrative and financial processes (Percentage).

These outcomes were to result from implementing a series of activities that included the development of a
platform to formulate POTs; the development of a Territorial Planning Kit (KPT), later upgraded to the
Territorial Planning System (SisPT) to help subnational entities formulate and monitor their PDTs; and
equipping SNGs with technical manuals on the planning process and formulation of their POTs. After its
update to SisPT, the platform was further enhanced with the incorporation of the Public Investment Platform
(PIIP-T), integrating information systems across all stages of the project cycle and unifying processes related
to territorial public investment in a dynamic, user-friendly virtual space. Additionally, the project introduced a
new budget catalogue aligned with Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
recommendations, consolidating financial data from local budgets, and enabling standardized fiscal reporting.
Activities also included developing a toolkit for citizen participation in public management, and formulating
Regional Land Use Plans (MOTR) and Regional Strategic Plans (PER) expected to guide regional
governments in maximizing their functional potential and provide tailored TA from the government to support
a cohesive national framework. Activities also included supporting the government’s new Decentralization
Mission informing and preparing decentralization reform proposals following extensive stakeholder
engagement sessions.

The causal links between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were well-defined. The adoption of these
critical tools, funded by the project, was expected to significantly enhance the central government's capacity
to manage the decentralization process and the territorial management framework.

Outputs (ICR, pp. 10-11, p. 26)

The project delivered the following outputs:

      1,129 subnational entities developed and published Indicative Plans using the KPT.
      In 2020, 1,044 subnational entities, in 2021, 1,080, in 2022, 1,082, and in 2023, 973 subnational
         entities used the KPT to monitor their Development Plans.
        782 subnational entities adopted the SisPT within the first month of being launched to formulate their
         PDTs. These results were measured under PDO Indicator 3, which exceeded its target by 20 percent.
        POT toolkit developed and embedded in the DNP territorial portal and used by 384 SNGs for
         formulating their POTs.
        565 SNGs used the citizens participation toolkit.
        The PIIP-T was incorporated to the SisPT, integrating information systems across all stages of the
         project cycle and unifying processes related to territorial public investment.
        A new budget catalogue was introduced and aligned with OECD recommendations.
        Five PERs were formulated and approved by the DNP (Pacifico, Eje Cafetero, Central, Amazonia, and
         del Agua y la Montaña regions).
        68 participatory sessions were held for stakeholder engagement with over 2,200 participants,
         including public officials, ethnic communities, academia, and civil society.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




      A communication strategy was developed to strengthen territorial development and the production of
         technical documents that were debated and discussed in virtual forums of the Decentralization
         Mission.
        Analytical inputs and technical documents were delivered for the Decentralization Mission.
        TMM designed, with a citizen participation module.
        Technical assistance on the TMM was delivered to 365 SNGs.
        A Special Comprehensive Development Plan for Buenaventura was developed through extensive
         community engagement aimed at addressing the district's historical needs through ten-year
         investments in social, economic, institutional, and environmental areas.

There were Intermediate Results Indicators that informed the achievement of PDO 2.

      IRI 1.3: Development and implementation of a support platform to formulate Territorial Land Use Plans
         (POTs). Baseline: Beta version of the platform has been completed but has not yet been officially
         launched (December 2019). Target: At least 60 SNGs have used the platform to formulate POTs.
         Actual: The platform to formulate POTs is used by 384 SNGs (March 2014). (IRI 1.3: Exceeded)
        IRI 1.4 Formulation of Regional Land Use Plans (MOTR) and Regional Strategic Plans (PER).
         Baseline: No MOTR and PER have yet been formulated (December 2019). Target: MOTR and PER
         have been formulated for at least 4 regions (September 2023). Actual: PER have been formulated and
         approved by the DNP for 5 regions, but no MOTRs were produced because the government scaled
         back the use of MOTRs (March 2024) (ICR, footnote 15, p. 11). According to the task team
         (interview), through a 2019 law (Ley 1962), the MOTR was effectively replaced by the PER as the
         designated planning instrument. Territorial entities were instructed to develop PERs instead of
         MOTRs, meaning that the PERs formulated and approved by the DNP are equivalent to the MOTRs
         under the revised legal framework (IRI 1.4: Exceeded)
        IRI 3.1: Design of the Territorial Management Model (TMM). Baseline: TMM had not been designed
         (February 2014). Target: Design of the TMM completed. Actual: TMM designed, including the
         definition of technical specifications and implementation strategy (March 2024). (IRI 3.1: Achieved)
        IRI 3.4: Technical assistance to strengthen citizen participation along the public management cycle.
         Baseline: No tools or methodologies exist to support citizen participation (February 2014). Target: A
         citizen participation toolkit has been designed and implemented by at least 50 municipalities. Actual:
         The territorial platform (KPT) provides a toolkit for citizen participation in the planning process of public
         investment projects. The tool kit has been used by 565 subnational governments for the planning of
         public investment projects financed through General Royalties System transfers (March 2024). (IRI
         3.4: Achieved)
        IRI 4.2: Design of instruments for territorial management control. Baseline: No instruments exist
         (February 2014). Target: Control model integrated in TMM. Actual: Control model integrated in TMM
         (March 2024). (IRI 4.2: Achieved)



Outcomes (ICR, Annex 1 and Table 4, p. 11)

The achievement of the PDO was assessed using the indicators listed below.




                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



                            PDO Indicator 3. Beneficiary subnational entities using instruments developed by the project to strengthen
                            the decentralization framework and public management (Percentage). Baseline: 0 percent (December 2019).
                            Target: At least 80 percent. Actual: 100 percent (March 2024). (PDO Indicator 3: Exceeded)

                            PDO Indicator 4. Level of automation of administrative and financial processes. Baseline: 0 (Feb 2014).
                            Target: At least 210 beneficiary SNGs increased their automation level by 10 points based on the Digital
                            Government Index – MIPG Indicator I20. Actual: 263 SNGs (March 2024). (PDO Indicator 4: Exceeded)

                            The project helped strengthen the capacity of the Borrower’s central government to manage the
                            Decentralization and Territorial Management Framework by successfully supporting subnational entities using
                            instruments developed by the project to strengthen the decentralization framework and increasing their
                            automation level based on the MIPG. Missing the target on the formulation of Regional Land Use Plans
                            (MOTR) was due to a government decision to scale back the use of these instruments.



                            Rating
                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project substantially met its objectives of improving SNG performance in core public management areas
                            and strengthening government capacity to manage the decentralization and territorial framework. It missed
                            one of its four PDO indicators (PDO Indicator 2) but achieved 69 percent of its targeted change on that
                            indicator and exceeded targets for the other three PDO Indicators. The operation achieved seven IRIs,
                            missing only two, and exceeded the target on several of them, with partial progress on others. Despite
                            Colombia being affected by armed conflict, the project succeeded in implementing the pilot Multipurpose
                            Cadaster in seven out of 10 target municipalities.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: A comprehensive ex-ante cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was unavailable, but an initial
   appraisal suggested benefits exceeding costs, including savings on expenditures (current and capital) and
   increased tax revenues from improved PFM in SNGs. The project aimed to enhance revenue administration,
   financial management, information systems, budget planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and citizen
   participation.



                                                                                                                          Page 14 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



A standard CBA at project completion evaluated the efficiency of the investments. The ex-post CBA indicated an
estimated net present value (NPV) of approximately US$52.8 million and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 34
percent. Expected benefits included cost reductions for 27 SNGs from improved investment and procurement
management, and savings for 40 SNGs from digitized public financial administrative processes. Additionally,
seven municipalities involved in the land cadaster pilot were expected to see increased tax revenue through
improved property tax administration and enhanced taxpayer compliance.

A sensitivity analysis showed the project's economic viability was primarily driven by savings from improved
SNGs’ investment and procurement management. The project remained economically viable even when
expenditure savings and tax revenue increase assumptions were reduced, with an estimated low-case NPV of
US$0.2 million and an IRR of 10 percent.

Operational Efficiency: The armed conflict in Colombia, the COVID-19 pandemic, and the change in the
political landscape due to three elections during the project’s lifetime affected the project's operational efficiency.
Ongoing violence and conflict did not allow project teams to reach municipalities in some areas. The onset of the
pandemic and mobility restrictions also halted some project activities. Finally, changes in government authorities
delayed implementation, as new counterparts had to familiarize themselves with the project and its objectives
(ICR, p. 16).

In addition, other factors internal to the project affected implementation and operational efficiency. The decision
to use a third-party fiduciary agent ultimately proved to be counterproductive. It added excessive bureaucracy,
duplication of efforts, and delays, leading to reprocessing and redundant reviews that exacerbated inefficiencies
and ultimately complicated the management of project funds. Frequent changes in DNP leadership and staff
also led to disruptions and delays in project execution. New leadership teams usually meant a change in
priorities and a revisit and reassessment of the project's approach (ICR, p. 16). Moreover, weaknesses in the
design of the results framework reduced operational efficiency. Methodologies for tracking progress were often
unclear. Frequent restructuring also complicated consistent reporting because of changes to the results
framework (ICR, p. 18).

Furthermore, project management costs, which constituted 17 percent of the total project cost, may not have
been reasonable when compared to country and regional averages. The ICR does not comment on these costs,
but the task team (interview) explained that the project’s management costs were driven by its client-facing and
field-based focus, which was central to achieving the objectives. Unlike typical operations that rely primarily on
centralized management, this project involved intensive on-site engagement, capacity-building activities, and the
implementation of a new Territorial Management Model and PFM digital solutions across multiple SNGs.
Additionally, the project required hiring experts across diverse topics to support the design and implementation
of innovative solutions, adding complexity to the operation. A sample of firm consulting and non-consulting
service contracts under component 5 (project management) showed that 62.9 percent of the expenditures were
for administrative support services, while 37.1 percent were allocated to expert technical advisory for the local
counterpart (DNP).

With operational/implementation efficiency below expectations for the sector, project efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                        Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
Appraisal                                                    0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
ICR Estimate                                                34.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s PDO was of high relevance, but there were shortcomings in the project’s achievement of its
objectives, as one of the two objectives was only partially achieved (low Substantial). In addition, there were
shortcomings in the project’s operational efficiency, which led to a Modest rating for project efficiency. The
overall outcome rating of the project is therefore Moderately Satisfactory, in alignment with the ICR’s rating,
reflecting moderate shortcomings in the project's preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The risk to development outcome is low. Territorial development continues to be high on the government’s
agenda, and the project's results helped shape the strategy forward. The project objectives continue to be
highly pertinent to the Bank's country strategy, and key project activities, such as the Multipurpose Cadaster
pilot, have been expanded through other initiatives such as the Multipurpose Cadaster Project (P162594)
and the Program for Results to Scale up the Multipurpose Cadaster in Colombia (P181163). In addition, the
cadaster pilot's outcomes influenced the creation of a new multipurpose cadaster policy, paving the way for
broader applications of this instrument and enhancing decentralization processes and government capacity
at both central and local levels in Colombia. The institutional strengthening that was at the core of the project
is likely to be sustained (ICR, p. 14) and also helped minimize risks to the achieved outcomes as it focused
on key public management areas, including planning and budgeting, to prepare for the roll-out of the TMM.
The ICR (p. 19) does not evaluate the risk to development outcomes arising from conflict, violence, and
political instability.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The original project design benefitted from a long-standing WB engagement in Colombia on delivering
  knowledge products and financial services to address key challenges in decentralization and subnational
  governance. It also benefitted from the government's commitment to decentralization reform, but with
  shortcomings emerging in that area, as the electoral cycle led to delays in implementation due to lack of
  engagement from new authorities or shifts in policy orientation.

  The original project design had several shortcomings in the results framework. It did not identify
  appropriate PDO-level indicators to measure the project’s contributions to intended outcomes, and
  original links to some of the IRIs were weak, which did not provide the guidance needed for effective
  monitoring and evaluation.

  PDO Indicator 1 (dropped): Pilot subnational governments have increased local tax collection by at least
  10 percent, could not be attributed to project activities; PDO Indicator 2 (dropped): Fulfillment of
  municipal development plan outputs/goals, could not be measured, and PDO Indicator 3 (dropped):
  Budget execution (total budget execution as percentage of revised budget), was influenced by many
  factors beyond the project’s control.

  The ICR noted that project design lacked criteria to select beneficiary municipalities, which compromised
  implementation (ICR, p. 19) as conflict dynamics were overlooked and regional operators were unable to
  access conflict-affected areas to deliver TA and implement project activities.

  Some implementation challenges could have been foreseen and better accounted for in the design, such
  as the requirement for extensive coordination between the DNP and SNGs, the absence of early criteria
  to prioritize and select beneficiary municipalities, and the limited capacity of some municipal governments
  to review and approve technical products. These factors, along with geographic and security challenges
  in some regions, negatively impacted the project's readiness for implementation and compromised
  project efficiency.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Supervision was weak during the early stages of project implementation due to shortcomings in design,
 monitoring, and measurement as well as inefficiencies by the first fiduciary agent. Initial project
 restructurings would have benefitted from better analysis and early flagging of needed changes in the
 results framework. It took six years, until the third restructuring, to revise three out of four PDO indicators
 and to add additional IRIs following a downgrade in implementation progress to Moderately Unsatisfactory.
 In addition, proper supervision at the start of the project could have flagged the inefficiencies with the first
 fiduciary agent, FINDETER. Shortcomings in the implementation arrangement with FINDETER hindered
 progress towards the achievement of the project development objectives before the first restructuring (RES
 18787, p. 5). This ultimately led to FINDETER requesting an end of its contract with DNP. According to the



                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



 ICR, the decision to use a fiduciary agent proved to be counterproductive and complicated project
 management (ICR, p. 16).

 On the positive side, following the third restructuring, the project began to thrive thanks to a consistent
 Bank supervision team with minimal turnover, ensuring ongoing support and continuity. The technical and
 new fiduciary teams on the ground were vital for managing complex contracts. Urban and land
 management specialists addressed technical challenges like POTs and the Multipurpose Cadaster.
 Regular support visits, including virtual missions during COVID-19, ensured consistent progress tracking.
 The team also adapted well to changing government priorities among three different national
 administrations and shifts in local level governments.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 M&E design had substantial shortcomings, mainly due to weaknesses in the results framework. A theory of
 change was not formulated at appraisal because it was not required. Nevertheless, while most of the links
 between project activities, outputs, and outcomes were clear in their contribution to achievement of the
 PDO, the PDO indicators had shortcomings. They had limited attribution to the project, and the
 methodologies for tracking their progress were often unclear. Consequently, as mentioned above, nearly all
 indicators were modified during implementation, except for PDO indicator 4 and IRI 3.1: Territorial
 Management Model (TMM) design, for which the definition was kept the same, but targets were adjusted.

 Attributing project outcomes to the original PDO indicators proved challenging. While these indicators
 largely derived from existing composite indexes developed by the DNP, they were not well suited to the
 project. These indexes encompassed multiple factors beyond the project’s direct influence. Similarly, some
 IRIs extended beyond the project's scope and were dropped during the first restructuring. Examples
 include IRI 1.1 (Creation of a territorial observatory), IRI 1.2 (Strategic projects for high-impact regional
 investment structured), and IRI 4.1 (Definition of the integrated SNGs financial control model).

 In addition, there were delays in selecting the beneficiary municipalities, and criteria for their selection were
 not appropriate. Data collection methodologies were also not clearly identified, which further complicated
 M&E implementation.



b. M&E Implementation
  M&E implementation was affected by poor indicator design, unclear data collection methodologies, and
  frequent changes in the results framework that made consistent reporting difficult, despite having a strong

                                                                                                      Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



  M&E team in the DNP. Moreover, the project’s operations manual was not updated to reflect changes,
  resulting in a lack of formal methodologies for the revised indicators, which complicated accurate
  assessment of progress. One example was the lack of definition for IRI 3.2 (Implementation of the TMM)
  on whether or not implementation included all three modules, which led to challenges in rating efficacy for
  that indicator’s achievement.

  Although the PIU consistently provided the Bank with timely and informative progress reports and data for
  semi-annual ISRs; reporting lacked candor and was not accurate. The ICR (p. 17) indicates that the
  project’s many restructurings created challenges for maintaining consistent and accurate data on project
  process and achievement, resulting in shortcomings of both accuracy and candor in ISRs.

  Overall, in spite of team continuity and team members being field-based, the Bank lacked proactivity in
  addressing the project’s sub-optimal M&E design and took over six years to replace inappropriate PDO
  indicators. The ICR (p. 16) argues that this lack of proactivity was due to excess flexibility in
  accommodating shifts in government priorities, as well as changes in DNP management.



c. M&E Utilization
  Project M&E data informed project restructurings, but misalignment between the results framework and
  project activities, along with vague methodologies for reporting on indicators in ISRs, limited effective
  utilization of data. The project’s MTR mission in February 2018 and subsequent follow-up discussions
  with the DNP concluded that the results indicators did not capture the project’s outputs or their
  contribution to achievement of the PDO (RES3321, p.5), but noted that there were delays in addressing
  known issues and that ISRs did not always present candid assessments of challenges. M&E was rated
  satisfactory for most of the project’s duration, but the ICR noted that this rating may have masked these
  underlying issues (ICR, p. 17).

  Overall, M&E quality is rated as Modest, in view of the significant shortcomings in the M&E system’s
  design, implementation, and utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as Category C at appraisal, as it did not include any activities that involved
   environmental or social risks. The indigenous people’s safeguard was activated, but no direct contact,
   meetings, or consultations with Indigenous communities were planned or required, rendering the
   supervision of social safeguards unnecessary. Project implementation proceeded without the need for
   additional oversight related to environmental or social safeguard policies.




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   A financial management assessment was conducted at appraisal. This assessment determined that the
   executing agency (DNP) had adequate capacity to manage the financial management aspects of the
   project (PAD, p. 41). FINDETER, via a subsidiary agreement with DNP, was to carry out all major fiduciary
   functions. However, the project's overall financial management risk was assessed as Substantial due to
   the complexity of dealing with multiple levels of government. Lack of experience of FINDETER in
   implementing Bank procurement procedures was listed as a challenge (PAD, p. 45). Mitigation measures
   for this and other challenges were well specified.

   During the first restructuring, financial management and fiduciary functions were transferred from
   FINDETER to FONADE. FONADE’s financial management and procurement capacities were assessed
   and considered sufficient by the bank’s fiduciary team (RES 18787, p. 9).

   The ICR does not state whether financial reports and statements were submitted in a timely manner and
   were of acceptable quality. It also does not note whether procurement issues delayed planned external
   audits and whether audits were completed as scheduled, but these issues were clarified by the task team
   (interview). Financial reports were submitted on time and were of acceptable quality. However, the
   justification of expenses was frequently delayed. Regarding external audits, the last audit report remains
   overdue and was expected to be submitted by December 2024. Previous audits were issued with a clean
   opinion, indicating no major concerns. Procurement issues did not directly contribute to delays in planned
   external audits.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   N/A



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                        Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)



12. Lessons

Strategic prioritization and early assessment of local capacities are important for effective
project implementation. Integrating foundational elements, such as updated cartography, into the
project design from the outset is essential to prevent delays in project implementation and cost
overruns. Establishing clear selection criteria for beneficiary municipalities is vital to shield the
process from political interference and ensure that interventions are tailored to local needs. To
accommodate the diverse capacities and challenges of municipalities across the country, particularly
those affected by armed conflict and natural hazards, it is crucial to simplify planning instruments
and adopt flexible, fit-for-purpose schemes. Building local capacity should remain a priority, with
ongoing support from the central government through training, virtual tools, and targeted assistance.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR presents a clear, coherent, and well-organized overview of the project. The analysis discussed in the
text provides sufficient evidence for assessing project performance. The ICR is concise, follows most of the
guidelines, and is focused on results. The evidence provided is aligned with the messages outlined in the ICR,
although there were minor shortcomings in the completeness of information that for the most part were resolved
during the interview with the task team. The ICR's lessons are useful and logically flow from the data and
analysis provided in the ICR.

However, the ICR could have more effectively captured and described the direct impact of government
transitions and changes in policy priorities on which the restructurings were based. The discussion of design
shortcomings should also have included an assessment of the original PDO indicators, highlighting their
unrealistic ambition as well as lack of measurability and attributability. The ICR could have assessed the risk to
development outcomes arising from conflict, violence, and political instability.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CO Subnational Institut. Strengthening (P123879)




                                                                                Page 22 of 22
