     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0023926

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P161590                                    Support to MSME Competitiveness Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                         Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88710                                 30-May-2023                                        21,351,251.42

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 30-May-2018                                30-May-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            25,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        21,351,251.42                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz            Vibecke Dixon                Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) Loan Agreement (p.4) dated
   June 21, 2018, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 17), the Project Development Objective (PDO)
   was “to foster MSMEs’ competitiveness in the targeted sectors and targeted geographic areas of the Republic
   of Congo’s territory”.




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Support to Enterprise Development and Competitiveness Project (PADEC) was to be implemented by the
   Ministry of Plan, Statistics and Regional Integration (MPSRI) through its project implementation unit (PIU)
   and consisted of three components.

   1. Regulatory and institutional support to strengthen the enabling environment for private sector
   development (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$7.64 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$3.41 million): This
   component was to promote investments in priority sectors (agriculture, agribusiness, tourism, transport, and
   information and communication technology-ICT) and to strengthen the enabling environment for private
   sector development by accelerating the adoption of reforms launched under the IDA Support to Economic
   Diversification Project (PADE). This component was divided into three sub-components: 1.1 Investment
   climate reform and public private dialogue: The sub-component was to accelerate the pace of
   implementing business climate reforms (existing and pending). Based on the lessons learned from the
   PADE, the project was to focus on both sector specific and cross-cutting reforms. In addition, the project
   was to support reforms in six selected Doing Business (DB) indicators (business startup, dealing with
   construction permits, access to electricity, property transfer, paying taxes, and trading across borders) by
   assisting relevant authorities in drafting or improving reform texts and also reviewing the implementation
   and operationalization of the Organization for the Harmonization of Corporate Law in Africa (OHADA) legal
   framework. Lastly, technical assistance (TA) was to be provided to High Council for Public Private Dialogue
   to improve its functions and practices. 1.2 Targeted promotion of domestic and foreign trade
   investments: This sub-component was to build capacity of institutions involved in facilitating investments
   and enterprise development including Investment Promotion Agency (API), Small and Medium Enterprises
   Development Agency (ADPME) and other sectoral agencies such as the Ministry of Tourism. This was to be
   achieved through providing support for the development and implementation of an investment promotion
   strategy focusing on the priority sectors and development of specific sector and project profiles to catalyze
   market testing and targeted promotion with anchor investors and developers. In addition, support to ADPME
   for operationalization of its strategic plan and creation of a database of MSMEs were to be provided. 1.3
   Transport sector and industrial infrastructure management and development: This sub-component
   was to enhance the management and development of transport and industrial infrastructure sectors,
   through (i) provision of support to revise and update the legal framework for industrial infrastructure
   development; (ii) carrying out and institutional and operational diagnostic of One Stop Shop for cross-border
   trade (GUOT); (iii) carrying out a feasibility study for the creation of a multimodal transport observatory; (iv)
   carrying out a policy and regulatory diagnostic of trade transit fluidity through the targeted geographic areas
   of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire and along the Pointe-Noire-Brazzaville-Ouesso growth corridor and
   provision of TA to implement recommendations from the diagnostic, (v) carrying out studies to determine
   support services required for the targeted geographic areas; (vi) provision of capacity building for design
   and development of the institutional framework for special economic zones (SEZ), development of an
   integrated investment planning and asset management strategy, and preparation of prefeasibility analyses
   for industrial infrastructure and tourism development.

   2. Direct support to MSMEs to enhance the development and competitiveness of selected value
   chains (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$12.08 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$10.04 million): This

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



  component was to promote entrepreneurship and enhance the beneficiaries’ development and
  competitiveness of selected value chains in the targeted sectors through provision of direct technical
  support and financial grants to MSMEs. This component was divided into two sub-components: 2.1
  Entrepreneurship promotion and development: This sub-component was to finance the roll out of a
  nationwide Business Plan Competition (BPC) which was expected to aspire new and existing entrepreneurs
  achieve their potential to build linkages with large investors. The assistance was to start at the conceptual
  stage and continue until the firm has become operational and has begun to reach maturity. The BPC
  activities were to include: (i) an awareness and outreach campaign; (ii) support for the design of bankable
  business plans and delivery of services such as training /mentoring; (iii) attribution of seed financing to
  eligible beneficiaries and (iv) aftercare and technical assistance to help turn new firms and projects into
  sustained operations. It was expected that a final selected 100 entrepreneurs were to be supported and the
  average seed financing grant was to be around US$50,000. 2.2 Support and development grants: The
  grants were to be provided approximately to 200 MSMEs and up to 10 associations/cooperatives of firms
  with the goal of enhancing their operational and technical capacities. This was to be implemented under
  three windows: Window A: BDS to MSMEs including training for management and personnel; Window B:
  Tangible assets such as equipment used in the production process as well as in the construction, lease of
  infrastructure; Window C: Technical assistance to help organize and structure identified value chains and
  associations (GIE), and commercial relations. The grants were to be channeled through Support Fund for
  the Development of Small and Medium Enterprises (FADPME). The eligibility criteria for the grants were
  identified at appraisal separately for micro, small, medium/large firms and associations.

  3. Project implementation and coordination (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$1.70 million; Actual Cost
  at Closing: US$5.22 million): This component was to support operating costs of the project’s institutional
  and governance arrangements including facilitating the activities of the Project Steering Committee, setting
  up and managing a dedicated Project Management Unit with key staff, facilitating stakeholder outreach and
  communication, and undertaking project evaluation and monitoring.

  Revised Components: In response to and address challenges imposed by COVID-19, a new window
  (Guichet Express COVID-19) was introduced under Component 2. This window aimed to support working
  capital needs of businesses affected by COVID-19 following the slowdown of activities in targeted sectors.
  The ICR reports that the COVID-19 window was implemented as an additional activity under Component 2,
  without significantly altering the Theory of Change or impeding the attainment of the PDO, slightly
  broadening the project’s scope, with an anticipated positive impact on the PDO (ICR, p. 13). The
  introduction of this new window was not part of an official restructuring.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The project cost estimated at appraisal was US$25 million (EUR20.3 million equivalent). The
  actual cost at project closing was US$20.52 million (EUR19.12 million), lower than the estimate at appraisal.
  The difference was mainly due to exchange rate changes and the underutilization of the originally allocated
  funds for technical assistance under Component 1 due to COVID-19 pandemic (Meeting with the project
  team on February 28, 2024, and written response of the project team to IEG’s questions March 4, 2024).

  Financing: The IBRD loan amount estimated at appraisal was US$25 million (EUR20.30 million
  equivalent). This amount included an advance from the World Bank’s Project Preparation Facility (PPF) of




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



   US$3.82 million. By project closing, the project had disbursed US$20.52 million, US$1.84 million of which
   was from PPF.

   Borrower Contribution: At appraisal, no borrower contribution was foreseen, and none had materialized at
   closing.

   Dates: The project was approved on May 30, 2018, and became effective on May 20, 2019. Project
   effectiveness experienced a one- year delay due to late parliamentary ratification of the project. The loan
   closed on May 30, 2023, on its original closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank Strategy: The project objective was highly aligned with the World Bank strategy defined
in the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY20-24 (Focus Area 1: Strengthen Economic Management
to Create and Improved Climate for Private Sector-Led Growth, Objective 1.4: Improved Business
Environment and MSME Development) and with the World Bank Group’s 2018 Systemic Country
Diagnostic for the Republic of Congo (RoC). The performance of the private sector in RoC was reflected by
low levels of non-oil private investments which remained about 19.4 percent of total investments for 2011-
2016 (PAD, p. 11). The economy-wide challenges of adverse business environment, limited capacity of
MSMEs, trade-related industrial infrastructure insufficiencies, limited access to finance, and high sector
concentration in oil restrained economic diversification and negatively impacted private sector development.
Within this framework, the PDO focused on improving the competitiveness of the MSMEs by strengthening
the investment climate (Component 1) and providing direct support to firms in non-oil value chains
(Component 2) to foster SME growth and increase investments in diversified sectors and targeted regions.
In this regard, the PDO contributes to the objectives of the CPF and is well aligned. In addition, the
Systemic Country Diagnostic for RoC highlighted the importance of economic diversification outside of oil-
intensive sectors. In line with the government’s National Development Plan, the PDO targeted increasing
competitiveness in identified target sectors and geographic areas. Furthermore, the PDO was also well
aligned with the second Focus Area of the CPF: Reduce Fragility and Build Human Capital for Improved
Social Inclusion.

Country Context: In the RoC, strong government presence strained private sector development and
maintained industrial sector concentration on extractives. Economic diversification was constrained across
several economy-wide dimensions including i) adverse business environment and weak MSME ecosystem;
ii) inadequate financial sector; iii) Insufficient trade-related and industrial infrastructure; iv) Inadequate
supply of human capital. In addition to addressing these economy-wide challenges noted above, an
effective diversification strategy was needed to support the emergence of an MSME ecosystem clustered
around non-oil sectors showing potential for growth. The PDO focused on strengthening the MSME
ecosystem while supporting diversification. In this regard, the PDO was in line with the RoC’s National
Development Plans (2012-2016 and 2018-2022) which prioritized diversification, transformation of the
economy, and growth exploiting the country’s natural endowments, and on developing sectors (agriculture
and agribusiness, transport, ICT, and tourism) with an identified comparative advantage.



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



               Previous Sector Experience: The PADEC project was built on the achievements and experience of IDA
               PADE project. The PADE was the first project of its kind aiming to foster diversified private sector-led
               growth in the RoC. With the assistance provided by PADE, the government has laid the foundation that
               would enable a deeper diversification drive moving forward. The project supported efforts to strengthen the
               investment climate the public-private dialogue and provided direct support to the development of non-oil
               value chains – after decades of state control of the economy and dominance of the oil sector (PAD, p. 27).
               The PADEC was structured in line with the programmatic approach initiated under PADE but was to go
               beyond cross-cutting interventions to tackle specific bottlenecks related to the competitiveness of RoC’s
               transit economy (e.g., trade, logistics, transport) and high potential sectors and value-chains.

               Overall, the PDO was highly relevant to the context, well aligned with both Bank and country strategies and
               priorities, and built on the Bank's previous operations. Relevance is thus rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To foster MSME competitiveness in the targeted sectors and targeted geographic areas of the Republic of
                             Congo’s territory.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change:

                             The project inputs were to be used to finance the project activities consisting of the following: identification of
                             critical constraints to improvement of enabling environment for private sector, defining corrective measures
                             with respect to sectoral laws and policies, provision of support to reform in six DB indicators, review of
                             OHADA framework, capacity building and training to API, ADPME and the Ministry of Tourism, capacity
                             building for industrial infrastructure investment planning, feasibility study for creation of multimodal transport
                             observatory, policy and regulatory diagnostics for transit trade fluidity in the targeted region, organization of
                             BPC, technical support to MSMEs for design of a bankable business plan, attribution of seed financing for
                             eligible firms, BDS and TA support in the form of grants to MSMEs and selected associations. The activities
                             were expected to lead to the project outputs of improved conditions for private sector development and trade
                             as well as increased capacities in the institutions in charge promoting investments and trade. In addition,
                             support provided to the MSMEs through the grant schemes in selected sectors was expected to enable them
                             to increase their capacities to invest and develop. These outputs would have been expected to result in
                             MSMEs entering into new markets, attracting investments, and thus contribute to increasing their
                             competitiveness. In the longer perspective, these would lead to more investments and generating more
                             private sector employment, contributing to inclusive growth and reducing poverty.


                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



The ICR (p. 6) defines competitiveness as the ability of the firm to enter new markets, outperform
competitors, attract investments, and foster growth.

There were three critical assumptions: Continued economic stability, political commitment, and support for the
implementation of reforms, and availability of eligible qualified MSMEs for the direct support programs. The
theory of Change was clear and direct. There were logical links between the inputs and outputs as well as
between the outputs and expected outcomes.

Overall, the causal pathways from financing and services provided for the MSMEs and support to relevant
institutions to expected results (improved enabling environment for private sector and increase
competitiveness of the MSMEs) were valid and direct.

Outputs:

Regulatory and institutional support to strengthen the enabling environment for private sector
development:

      12 procedures under 6 investment climate (DB) indicators streamlined, not achieving the target of
         streamlining 30 procedures. According to the project team (correspondence to IEG on March 4, 2024),
         a lack of political will as well restrictive conditions imposed by COVID-19 pandemic, led to the
         underachievement.
        175 measures to strengthening public-private policy dialogue (PPD) mechanism were developed, 12
         of which led to reforms, exceeding the target of eighteen.
        The API Board approved the Investment Promotion Strategy and business plan development. The
         target was achieved.
        Number of days required for setting up a new business decreased from a baseline of 10 days to one
         day, exceeding the target of seven days. The total time for completion of all procedures decreased to
         four days, exceeding the target of 17 days (baseline was 49 days).
        The GUOT was strengthened operationally. The diagnostic study of the GUOT and its repositioning in
         relation to the port ecosystem was completed as targeted. The project supported the development of
         the GUOT strategic plan with a road map of actions, as targeted. However, implementation of the
         actions in the road map, which required procurement of equipment and software, could not be
         completed due to limited remaining time before project closure (ICR, p. 19), and the target was not
         achieved. The process of setting up the corridor regulation and management body was completed, as
         targeted.
        Based on the progress made in relation to business startup and construction permit indicators, direct
         compliance cost savings of US$ 2,772 was achieved, exceeding the target of US$ 1,915 savings.
        Starting a business cost as a percent of income per capita, declined from the baseline of 77.7% to
         20%, exceeding the target of 57%.

Direct support to MSMEs to enhance the development and competitiveness of selected value chains:

      464 MSMEs received technical support, exceeding the target of 200 MSMES. Among these, the
       number of MSMEs with a female owner was 109, exceeding the target of 80 MSMEs with a female
       owner.
      632 firms benefited from private sector initiatives offered through the project, exceeding the target of
       500. This figure included 143 firms involved in new business links with the 464 beneficiaries having

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



      received technical support by the project plus an additional 25 firms having received FADPME TA
      without grants. More specifically, 15 training sessions covering all themes concerning enterprise
      management were organized. In addition, the project team identified and trained 83 MSME service
      providers (coaching, accounting, marketing, inventory management). In addition, 143 suppliers of
      goods and services were linked with MSME project recipients (ICR, p.21).
     Of the 632 firms benefiting from private sector initiatives as reported above, 264 of them had female
      owners, exceeding the target of 200 firms.
     11 private sector co-operatives were established, exceeding the target of 10 co-operatives. Two of
      these cooperatives secured a market access with a buyer against the target of five. Target was not
      achieved.
     Overall, the satisfaction rating by project beneficiaries administered through a survey questionnaire
      was 89.70% (average of youth, female, and MSME beneficiaries), exceeding the target of 75%.

Additional output achievements reported in the ICR not included in the RF and hence without target
values:

     Within the scope of the FADPME grant scheme, of the portfolio of 123 companies, 115 fulfilled the
      condition required for disbursement (including depositing their matched funds into the subaccount and
      agreeing to all safeguards for planned activities) and benefitted from grants. A total of CFAF (Central
      Africa CFA franc) 2,809,445,303 was awarded to 115 recipients for FADPME. This results in an
      average grant of CFAF 24,429,959 per recipient, which is equivalent to US$ 39,983 per recipient
      (written response of the project team, March 4, 2024).
     By project closing, 80% of the projects supported under the BCP scheme were in the agriculture
      sector, 7% in transport and logistics, and 5% in the tourism sector. The ICT sector had 3% share and
      COVID related projects’ share was 2%. Distribution of projects among the targeted regions was 27%
      in Brazzaville, 13% in Pointe-Noire, 12% Cuvette, 11%in Niari, 6% in Bouenza, and less than 5% in
      each of the regions of Cuvette Ouest, Kouilou, Lekoumou, Plateaux, Sangha. Within the scope of the
      FEDPME grants, by project closing, 69% of the supported projects were in the agriculture sector. The
      tourism sector followed agriculture with a share of 19%. The transport and logistics sectors each had a
      6% share and ICT had 3%. The ICR (p.21) reports that no data was available on the regional
      distribution of this grant scheme.
     The PADEC supported a total of 264 businesses owned by women. Of the 230 MSMEs supported in
      the first phase of BPC, 34% were owned by women. Out of the 123 FADPME projects, 24% were
      women owned. According to the information provided by the PIU, the salaries between the genders
      were equal.

Outcomes: The PDO indicators were achieved and exceeded.

     36.6% of beneficiary firms demonstrated sustained increase in annual turnover, exceeding the target
      of 20%.
     12 reform measures across 6 dimensions of the business regulatory environment were implemented,
      achieving the target of 12. These included two reforms on logistics and construction permits, three
      reforms on property transfer and the payment of taxes, two reforms on cross-border trade, business
      creation, and payment of taxes, three reforms on leasing and factoring, one reform on real estate
      registration, one reform on business formalities. Although the PDO targeted specific regions, the
      project’s achievements in this objective have nationwide benefits.


                                                                                                Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)




      At the project closure, 57.4% of new MSMEs supported through the BPC were still in operation,
       exceeding the target of 50%. Under the BPC, 179 companies took part in the final stages of
       implementing business plans, achieving an overall subsidy consumption rate of 85%. Among these,
       55 percent were companies that already existed before the BPC , and 45% were new companies.
       However, the ICR (p.9) notes that considering the evaluation timeframe, the indicator was proxied by
       “share of new firms supported under the BPC that are still operating at the Project closing” because
       although the firms were selected in two batches across two different time periods, project assistance
       was delivered throughout the project. The reported percentage (57.4%) refers to the proxy indicator
       (share of new firms supported under the BPC that are still operating at the Project closing).
      179 business plans were launched successfully, exceeding the target of 100.
            o 34% of the 179 BPC awardee firms secured additional funding on top of the business plan
               grant, exceeding the target of 20%. This indicates that 34% of the BPC awardees became
               'bankable projects' in relation to microfinance institutions and/or commercial (correspondence
               to IEG from the project team March 4, 2024).
      The ICR (p.19) reports that due to a lack of recent data, it was not possible to observe the
       macroeconomic indicators related to the business environment. For example, most of the World
       Bank’s ease of doing business and regulatory environment measures were not available for the years
       following the project’s launch since, in September 2021, the World Bank decided to discontinue the
       Doing Business Report. According to the UNCTAD, World Investment Report 2022, foreign direct
       investment inflows to Congo fell by 13 percent between 2018 and 2022 despite the increase between
       2019 and 2020. The ICR highlights that the slowdown was not unique to the Republic of Congo and
       could be attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine that raised food and energy
       prices, financial turmoil, and debt pressures.

Additional outcome achievements reported in the ICR:

      Interviews and surveys with the beneficiary firms of BCP and FADPME as well as 26 Case Study
       videos developed under PADEC indicate that the beneficiary firms experienced an increase in
       productivity and/or, revenues, expanded their clientele, broadened their service spectrum, increased
       their market shares and improved their marketing efficiency: all contributing to their competitiveness.
      Although there were no activities directly targeting financial institutions, project activities involved the
       enrollment of six microfinance institutions and eight banks which served as intermediaries to handle
       the disbursements of grants to recipient firms. As the project completed, these financial intermediaries
       reported that the PADEC constituted a learning opportunity for them, as they had not dealt with
       MSMEs beforehand. Since then, several of these banks and microfinance institutions have started to
       lend money to the MSMEs (ICR p.23).
      The project facilitated financing for MSMEs, enabling them to leverage their own capital to implement
       projects. The project noted a high formalization rate of 95 percent among the BPC beneficiaries. The
       ICR (p.28) reports that this was the result of awareness-raising actions concerning good management
       practices for MSMEs and the eligibility criteria of the BPC, which required firms to formalize and open
       bank accounts to qualify for receiving grants.

Overall, the project achieved and exceeded most outcome- and output level indicators with a few exceptions.
The project activities contributed to improvement of business climate for private sector development and
competitiveness of the beneficiary firms (increase annual turnover, attracting new investments). With respect
to increased competitiveness in the targeted sectors and regions, although most of the results were


                                                                                                     Page 8 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



                            concentrated in the agriculture sector, overall, the increase in private investments under this project were all
                            within non-oil sectors in the targeted regions.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project achieved and exceeded most output and outcome targets with a few exceptions. The project
                            activities contributed to improvement of business climate for private sector development and competitiveness
                            of the beneficiary firms in targeted sectors and regions. The overall efficacy is rated as Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis: At appraisal an economic rate of return (ERR) analysis was calculated for
   each of the components 1.1, 2.1 and 2.2. and was estimated to be 56%, 36%, and 62% respectively. The ERR
   for the whole project was calculated at 55%. For the remaining components of 1.2 and 1.3, expected benefits
   were to come from increased capacities of the institutions, improved policies, and increased public-private
   dialogue and the direct benefits linked to these interventions were challenging and complex to quantify (PAD, p.
   36). At closing, the ERR for the whole project was recalculated at 45% (35% for BCP and 48% for matching
   grant components). Given the country's challenging business environment, the ERR suggests that the project
   provided substantial value for money. The ICR also includes a calculation of the efficiency of Component 2 in
   terms of cost per job created. By the end of the project, a total of 1,557 jobs (BPC: 881 jobs, FADPME: 676
   jobs) were created. The ICR (p.25) reports that the cost for one job created was US$6,789 and that it was
   efficient compared to international good practices for SME projects (i.e., Youth Enterprise with Innovation in
   Nigeria BPC’s cost per job created was estimated at US$8,538).

   Administrative and operational efficiency: There were some shortcomings in the project’s administrative and
   operational efficiency. The date for project effectiveness was delayed by one year due to the delayed
   parliamentary ratification of the project. Later, the conditions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic further
   contributed to additional delays especially in a country characterized by institutional and social fragility, where
   direct missions and interaction with the client counterpart are pivotal for project success (ICR, p.30). This
   particularly negatively impacted Component 1 activities. During the implementation, the project experienced
   high turnover within the project implementation agencies, line ministries and public agencies which slowed down



                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



the progress of regulatory and institutional support activities. Despite these delays, the project closing was on
the originally planned date.

At appraisal, financial management risk was assessed as moderate but was downgraded to substantial as the
project experienced significant financial management issues during the implementation. Incidences of line
ministry operating expenses that were not included in the Financing Agreement being financed on the project
funds were a direct result of an inadequate internal control environment and the concurrent management of the
PADEC (ICR, p.35). Also, the World Bank in-depth review of the fiduciary management of the project identified
questionable expenditure amounting to CFAF 159,497,316 (approximately US$ 261,000). Furthermore, the
project incurred an additional questionable expenditure of CFAF 217,606,662 (approximately US$356,000) - see
Section on other issues. As a result of these two cases, the total sum blocked amounted to approximately CFAF
217,606,662 (approximately US$356,000). Despite these misuses, the ICR (p.26) reports that the project
exhibits efficiency in grant funding in terms of operational costs of administering grants and TA to firms. The
administration ratio for the total number of grants (302 grants) was 38 percent (the grant administration to grant
ratio for the BPC grants was 67%, whereas the same ratio for the FADPME was 9%). In addition, costs foreseen
under the Component 3 were underestimated. The costs for the actual implementation of the safeguards were
not included in the costs calculated at appraisal. Also, overhead expenses related to the administration of grants
and business plan competition recipients exceeded initial projections. Additionally, the implementation of the
Grievance Redress Mechanism in various business locations further contributed to increased costs (written
response of the project team, March 4, 2024). As a result, the actual cost for Component 3 was almost three
times higher than the cost at appraisal.

Overall, although there were some administrative inefficiencies due to financial irregularities and
underestimation of component 3's costs at appraisal, the project's efficiency is rated Substantial given that the
economic analysis revealed positive results at closing, timely completion of the project, and efficiency of
Component 2 in terms of cost per job created based on international benchmarks.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  55.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               45.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



                                                                                                      Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)




The relevance of objectives is rated Substantial. The efficacy rating is Substantial. Efficiency is rated Substantial
with some administrative shortcomings. As a result, the outcome rating is Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional support risk: Sustainability of the results achieved particularly the ones related to the SME
development relies on the support to be provided by the ADPME in the future. Although the project involved
significant number of institutional capacity building activities which included support addressed to ADPME as
well, according to the ICR (p.30), the institution has yet to access the planned government-allocated funds
for its operation. If this could not be implemented and support to ADPME is discontinued, it constitutes a risk
to realization of future support to SMEs in the country. Through the project, MSMEs achieved good progress
building their capacities and investing. In order for this improvement to be pursued, continuous support and
guidance by the relevant authorities will be needed.

Government ownership/commitment risk: The ICR (p.30) reports that the Republic of Congo is
characterized by intricate challenges in institutional coordination and attaining consensus on reforms. The
PADEC supported development of new as well as corrective measures and reform steps to improve
business environment in the country. However effective implementation of these reform steps remains to be
performed. There is a risk (although low, taking the concrete steps taken in the reform process into
consideration) of maintaining commitment and attaining consensus by the relevant authorities.

Economic risk: Economic instability constitutes a risk for the implementation of support programs for the
SMEs. Particularly in the absence of donor funds, and in the scarcity of government funds, there is a risk for
mobilizing state funds for providing support to MSEs.

Other stakeholder ownership: The project involved MSEs and also financial institutions as stakeholders.
The MSEs showed appetite for the programs offered and six financial institutions took part as
intermediaries. However, one of the intermediaries failed to fulfill its commitment to disburse the allocated
funds to the intended beneficiaries due to misuse of funds by the relevant manager of the financial institution.
This failure to fulfill financial commitments undermined the trust of project partners and posed a risk for the
continuation of the implementation of similar programs in the future.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had high strategic relevance as it supported RoC’s and the World Bank’s relevant priorities
  and strategies which focused on diversification, transformation of the economy, and growth exploiting the
  country’s natural endowments, and on developing sectors with an identified comparative advantage. At

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



  appraisal the project team followed a consultative approach with government and private sector while
  preparing the project. The political and economic risks were identified and sufficiently assessed. To
  mitigate these risks and to enhance the project’s achievements, the Bank team adopted a sectoral,
  regional, and programmatic approach matching with the World Bank’s experience in the country.
  However, the risk associated with financial institutions was underestimated. Although the project covered
  a significant number of capacity-building activities for involved institutions, it did not include a sub-
  component for capacity building addressed to local financial institutions (six microfinance institutions and
  eight banks), which were critical for the implementation of grant schemes offered through the PADEC.
  The incident with CECC outlined in the Efficiency and Fiduciary Sections demonstrates the need for such
  an element in the project design as well as the necessity for rigorous and repeated due diligence
  processes when selecting financial institutions for project involvement (ICR, p.31). The implementation
  arrangements were built on experience and the capacity developed by the previous PADE project. The
  M&E design had some weaknesses in capturing the effect of the intervention on competitiveness and the
  beneficiary firms as well as supported institutions (see Efficacy and M&E Design sections). The costs in
  relation to the implementation of safeguards and the Grievance Redress Mechanism were not adequately
  assessed.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The ICR reports (p.36) that the project team was strongly committed to supporting the Government in
 project execution. Lack of political will, high staff turnover in implementing agencies and COVID-19, slowed
 down the implementation. The project team conducted 10 supervision missions and virtual conferences
 between 2019 and 2023. Project progress was documented in Aide Memoires and Implementation Status
 and Results Reports during these missions. These reports served as guiding tools and kept the World
 Bank team well informed about the project’s progress. Toward the project’s conclusion, World Bank team
 and the PADEC PIU conducted regular meetings, and this contributed to increasing effective
 implementation and closure, highlighting the role of interaction in complex contexts. The continuous
 dialogue also enabled the project team to acknowledge changing needs of the borrower in the context of
 COVID-19. In this regard, the team in agreement with the borrower introduced a new window (Guichet
 Express COVID-19) under Component 2 to support working capital needs of businesses affected by
 COVID-19. On the other hand, the weaknesses in M&E were not addressed during the implementation.
 The ICR (para 107) also notes that the PIU’s final report highlighted that the recurrent alterations in
 component activities, changes in the World Bank’s team members, and the complex procedures involved in
 executing project activities collectively had an overall adverse impact, slowing down the project’s
 pace. The project team supervised fiduciary aspects of the project satisfactorily. When the incidences of
 line ministry operating expenses that were not included in the Financing Agreement being financed on
 Investment Project Financing (IPF) were identified, the World Bank conducted an in-dept review of fiduciary
 management of the project. The review covered a 90 percent sample of recorded expenses incurred by the
 project from May 2018 to December 31, 2021. The review identified questionable expenditure amounting to
 CFAF 159,497,316 (approximately US$261,000) arising from inadequate budget monitoring. The ICR
 notes that some expenses which took place early on during the project were reviewed later as ineligible.
 These expenses were flagged early on by the team and official processes were followed accordingly.


                                                                                                   Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The monitoring of program outputs was to be carried out by the PIU established under the MPSRI in
 coordination with the implementing institutions. The PIU was responsible for data consolidation, quality
 control, and analysis and reporting, which was to be tracked through a Management and Information
 System. The results framework was the main monitoring tool. Although the outcome level indicators were
 relevant, they did not fully capture the potential outcomes of competitiveness e.g., job creation. The ICR
 partly addresses this weakness by including calculations on job creation in the efficiency analysis. Also, the
 case studies developed, and the finding from PIU interviews conducted with some of the beneficiary firms
 indicate positive outcomes of increased economic contribution and poverty reduction. The M&E framework
 as designed, lacked relevant indicators to measure relevant outcomes of the project activities related to the
 capacity of the beneficiary institutions.



b. M&E Implementation
  During the implementation, the project’s achievements were recorded and documented in the
  Implementation Status and Results Reports and Aide Memoires. Recommendations and input from these
  reports supported the PADEC management team to effectively tackle bottlenecks and refine the project’s
  operational strategy and approach. The data required under the results framework were collected and
  analyzed. However, the ICR reports that there were some inconsistencies regarding data collection.
  These were a result of i) a lack of qualified M&E personnel at the service providers engaged by the BCP
  and FADPME for data collection; ii) a lack of operational logistical resources at the service providers; and
  iii) problems with data collection basis and data accumulation periods. These circumstances led to
  computing errors and required regular course corrections. Lastly, monitoring the PDO indicator “share of
  new firms supported under the BPC that are still operating 24 months after receiving assistance” was not
  feasible mostly because of the lack of ownership and resources of a public entity that would undertake
  this monitoring. Although the original results framework did not include an indicator to assess impact of
  the project on “institutional resilience and capacity” of the supported institutions, the ICR includes
  additional relevant information outside the results framework reflecting this impact was delivered to the
  MSMEs continued until its closure at the end of May 2023.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly reviewed by the project team and the implementing agency to make
  appropriate adjustments to the implementation plan, depending on the status of physical progress. For

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



  example, M&E findings helped identification of delays in disbursing funds to beneficiaries and later
  resulted in the termination of the partnership agreement with CCEC and identification of incidents of
  misuse of funds. In addition, monitoring of project implementation facilitated the introduction of Guichet
  Express COVID-19 window under Component 2.

  Overall, the M&E design had some shortcomings since the results framework did not include relevant
  indicators which could fully capture the impact of the PADEC implementation on the enhanced
  competitiveness of the MSMEs as well as impact on the institutions benefitted from capacity building
  activities. However, the M&E system, as both designed and implemented, was generally sufficient for
  assessing the full achievement of project objectives. AThis effort from the PIU to improve the M&E
  system and data collection over time was significant, especially given the FCV context, combined with
  the COVID-19 context. The overall M&E quality is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   At appraisal the project was classified as a Category B operation due to the moderate level of
   environmental risks and impacts of its foreseen activities. Three environmental safeguard policies were
   triggered: OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); OP 4.09 (Pest Management), and OP 4.11 (Physical
   Cultural Resources). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which was developed
   to comply OP 4.01 and OP 4.09 and was particularly used by the operational tools of Environmental and
   Social Impact Assessment (ESIA/ESMP), a Pest Management Plan, or Integrated Pest Management Plan
   (IPMP or PGP). By project closing, 160 MSMEs, appointed an environmental focal point for environmental
   and social monitoring. The PIU provided further capacity building for the remaining 30 MSMEs. The ICR
   reports that the PIU had difficulties in collecting necessary environmental data due to the lack of capacity of
   the relevant personnel as well as the material/equipment necessary for monitoring. In addition, the project
   supported 168 MSMEs through grants for meeting their necessary operational safety requirements. The
   grants provided were used in various fields, including for the acquisition of personal protective equipment,
   installation of facilities such as latrines and garbage cans, alignment with hygiene standards, the
   establishment of living quarters, and the formulation of staff contracts, coupled with the initiation of
   insurance policies. The ICR (p.34) reports that, despite this support among the 168 MSMEs involved, only
   88 (approximately 52 percent) successfully implemented the prescribed operational security measures.
   Regarding OP 4.11, “at the onset of the project, because it was believed that some activities under
   Component 2 may involve excavations, resources was triggered. Eventually, the project activities did not
   involve any such excavations, and OP 4.11 ended up being monitored and assessed as Satisfactory, as
   indicated in the Environmental Assessment dated January 31, 2018.” (Written response of the project team,
   March 4, 2024).

   Regarding the social safeguards, at appraisal, the project activities were expected to trigger only one social
   safeguard policy: OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared
   during the implementation, and a social safeguards specialist was hired for the project team. To assess the
   implementation of safeguard measures, ten supervision missions and field visits were conducted, and

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



  weaknesses were identified. Although the project did not encounter challenges related to displacement or
  ensuring secure and documented land tenure status at beneficiary sites, the ICR (p.34) reports that
  environmental and social safeguards were inadequately considered and monitored overall. During the
  implementation, the relevant reports were not consistently shared with the World Bank, and at project
  closing, a comprehensive report on the project’s environmental and social performance was not available.

  The grievance redress mechanism was set up and functional, and 10 complaints were registered,
  addressed, and closed. The issues that were subject to complaints included disagreements related to
  business plan selection, conflicts among associated beneficiaries, delays in funding due to site changes
  conflicting with project safeguarding requirements, and disputes over the amount of financing for the
  business plan.

  The costs for safeguard advisors were foreseen under Component 3 but not the costs for implementation of
  the safeguard policies themselves. These were quite costly since all the business beneficiaries were
  required to be vetted against these safeguards. Moreover, the implementation of the Grievance Redress
  Mechanism in various business locations further contributed to increased costs. As a result of these cost
  increases, by project closing, the actual cost for Component 3 was three times higher than the cost at
  appraisal.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement: The PIU, under the supervision of the MPSRI, was responsible for carrying out the
  procurement functions. All procurement activities were completed with the exception of the mission to write
  the project completion report and the development of the FADPME website. During the implementation,
  due to the nature of activities, which were small and specific, the World Bank’s procurement procedures
  needed adaptation for implementation among a subset of beneficiaries. Accordingly, a suitable
  Procurement Plan for the procurement of goods, equipment, and services for beneficiary SMEs was
  therefore developed by the PMU Trust with the assistance of the Bank. However, the ICR (p.36) reports
  that despite these measures, some expenses which took place early on during the project were reviewed
  later as ineligible. These expenses were flagged early on by the team and official processes were followed
  accordingly. Procurement was rated as Satisfactory at project closing.

  Financial Management: The PIU was responsible for managing the project's fiduciary aspects (including
  financial and accounting management). The PADE PIU was to act as a fiduciary agency given its
  experience in World Bank-financed projects. The fiduciary risk at appraisal was modest (was downgraded
  to substantial during the implementation) and was to be mitigated by setting up the PIU with qualified and
  experienced staff dedicated to the procurement and financial management of the project. Accordingly, the
  PIU was staffed with a financial management specialist and an accountant familiar with World Bank
  procedures. In November 2021, incidences of line ministry operating expenses that were not included in
  the Financing Agreement being financed on Investment Project Financing (IPF) were identified. In May
  2022, the World Bank conducted an in-depth review of fiduciary management of the project covering a 90
  percent sample of recorded expenses incurred by the project from May 2018 to December 31, 2021. The
  review identified questionable expenditures amounting to CFAF 159,497,316 (approximately US$261,000)
  arising primarily because of inadequate budget monitoring. In addition, the CECC (one of the six
  microfinance institutions for BCP and FADPME schemes) seemed to be using the project funds for which
  they were not intended, and they were not returned. As a result, the project incurred additional

                                                                                                Page 15 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



   questionable expenditure of CFAF 217,606,662 (approximately US$356,000). In conclusion, the project
   incurred a total questionable expenditure of CFA 377,103,978 (approximately US$617,000). The ICR notes
   that this not being an eligible use of project resources, these funds automatically became ineligible and will
   be notified to the Government for reimbursement. The notification package has been notified by the TTL to
   the Country Director for notification to the client, based on the advice of FM, procurement, and legal teams.
   The external audit was submitted to the Bank and was approved on February 17, 2024 (correspondence to
   IEG from the project team February 28, 2024). Financial Management was rated as Moderately
   Unsatisfactory at project closing. Upon these incidents, the ICR (p.31) highlights the necessity for careful
   and repeated due diligence processes when selecting financial institutions for project involvement. It also
   brings up the necessity of involvement of a dedicated subcomponent focused on capacity building in local
   financial institutions, to be considered at appraisal stage.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Satisfactory         Satisfactory
                                  Moderately
Bank Performance                                       Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                    Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following are lessons taken from the ICR with some paraphrasing:

•     Relevant incentives and training may help increase business activity and may be
catalytic to the formalization of private sector companies. By project closing 95% of BCP
beneficiaries were formalized. This was achieved through provision of adequate support and
incentives. The firms which formalized served as examples for other informal firms, as many of the
formalized firms could access financing in parallel to the grants they received. In fact, about half of
the BPC recipients borrowed money from the financial institutions in which they opened a bank
account to help come up with their matching share of the grant. In order to disseminate this

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)



achievement and demonstrate positive results, the project team pushed the PIU to engage in
effective communication and to obtain many videos of the winners, for others to see the benefits of
formalization.

•     MSME development and entrepreneurship promotion can support a paradigm shift
toward a market economy. In the case of RoC, where entrepreneurship is still in its early stages,
direct support mechanisms provided through BCP and FADPME schemes created a profound
impact on start-ups and MSMEs. The technical support, training, and coaching proved crucial for
these companies, so much so that many continued to use these services at their own expense after
the closure of the PADEC. These developments indirectly affected the SME financing ecosystem,
notably the financial institutions, which, for the first time, have considered the possibility of financing
SME-related projects, whereas they had not granted credit to this sector in the past. However, for
these positive outcomes to be sustained, technical and coaching services for firms must be provided
on a sustained basis by the relevant actors of the entrepreneurship and MSME support ecosystem.
This can be maintained either by the Government through increasing its funding for such activities or
new projects from development partners building on the previous projects and scaling up the MSME
support.

•        Public-private dialogue can encourage improved collaboration between the public and
private sectors. In the case of PADEC, the project demonstrated the transformative role of PPD in
shifting advocacy from lobbying a few large firms to a structured and transparent dialogue process
for the benefit of many, with beneficial returns for the business environment and competitiveness of
firms of all sizes. Consistent political commitment, sustained capacity building, and funding are
essential to support continuous PPD and catalyze the needed reforms.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. It is candid in explaining the issues encountered at
design and implementation phases and concise. It is internally consistent, The ICR is result oriented and it
provides evidence based on the measurement of the indicators in the results framework. In addition, the ICR
also makes a genuine effort to provide evidence outside of the M&E system (i.e., calculations on jobs created
and formalization of beneficiary firms) to demonstrate the impact of the project. The discussion in the Lessons
and Recommendations section are clear, useful, and based on the evidence outlined in the ICR. Overall, the
quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial



                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Support to MSME Competitiveness Project (P161590)




                                                                                 Page 18 of 18
