     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024224

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P153115                                    Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 China                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87770                                 31-Dec-2023                                           97,307,378.19

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Aug-2017                                31-Dec-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           100,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                             97,307,378.19                                                0.00

 Actual                                         97,307,378.19                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          J. W. van Holst              Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli                   Pellekaan




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective stated identically in the Loan agreement (page 6) and the PAD (para 11) is “to demonstrate a
   risk-based integrated approach to managing heavy metal pollution in agricultural land for safety of agricultural
   production areas in selected counties in Hunan.”



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
                                                                                                    Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components.

   Component 1: Demonstration of Risk-based Agricultural Land Pollution Management (Appraised:
   US$71.11 million, of which IBRD US$67.28 million; Actual: US$80.22 million, of which IBRD
   US$78.59 million)

   Carrying out and monitoring of site-specific demonstration plans for a risk-based agricultural land pollution
   management in selected farmlands in the Project Counties, comprising a selection of technical measures
   including: (a) heavy metal pollution source control measures; (b) agronomic management measures to

   immobilize heavy metals in soil; (c) planting structure adjustment; (d) soil remediation to reduce heavy
   metals in soil; (e) integrated pest management; (f) rice quality control; and (g) protection of no-risk/clean
   farmlands.

   Component 2: Strengthening Agricultural Environmental Monitoring and Management (Appraised:
   US$3.07 million, of which IBRD US$1.63 million; Actual: US$2.69 million, of which IBRD US$2.58
   million)

   Provision of technical and analytical support to: (a) develop and establish an agricultural environmental
   monitoring database for early warning, and the upgrade of the monitoring center(s) at selected Project
   Counties; (b) develop and use a risk-based land management tool and carry out crop- and soil-risk
   mapping; (c) develop and issue regulations, technical standards, and guidelines for risk-based integrated

   agricultural land pollution management, as well as carrying out associated studies; (d) carry out studies on,
   inter alia, sustainable financing models and eco-compensation mechanisms for agricultural land
   management; and (e) develop action plans on risk-based agricultural land pollution management at the
   provincial and county level.

   Component 3: Capacity Development and Knowledge Distribution (Appraised: US$16.23 million, of
   which IBRD US$14.01 million; Actual: US$8.53 million, of which IBRD US$8.17 million)

   3.1 Provision of training to selected Project-related officials at the provincial, prefecture and county level on,
   inter alia: (a) risk-based land management, agricultural environmental monitoring; (b) pollution prevention
   (source control); (c) environmental management system; and (d) policy enforcement and compliance.

   3.2 Provision of training to Project-related environmental monitoring officials at the provincial, prefecture and
   county level on environmental monitoring.

   3.3 Provision of training to, and carrying out of awareness raising activities for, farmers, agriculture technical
   service providers and farmer field schools, and other stakeholders, on, inter alia: (a) environmental impacts
   of poor farming practices; (b) international good practices on soil management; (c) risk-based land pollution



                                                                                                        Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



  management tools; (d) technical operation principles/guidelines for reducing heavy metals in crops and soil;
  and (e) regulations and standards related to heavy metals inputs to farmlands.

  3.4 Provision of technical assistance and training to selected heavy metal discharging enterprises.

  3.5 Carrying out knowledge sharing and learning activities

  Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Appraised: US$5.92 million, of
  which IBRD US$1.48 million; Actual: US$11.70 million, of which IBRD US$8.17 million)

  Provision of Project management support and technical assistance activities at the provincial, prefecture
  and county level on, inter alia, day-to-day implementation, procurement, financial management, social and
  environmental safeguards, coordination, monitoring and evaluation (including a monitoring
  information system), and reporting.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost

  The project was appraised at US$111.94 million and the actual cost was US$103.36 million.

  Financing

  The project was financed with an IBRD loan of US$100 million.

  Borrower Contribution

  At appraisal, the borrower was expected to contribute US$11.94 million; the borrower contributed US$6.05
  million

  Dates

  The project was approved in August 2017 and became effective in March 2018. The Mid-Term Review
  (MTR) was conducted in 2022 and the project closed as planned in December 2023.

  Restructuring

  The project underwent one level two restructuring in July 2022 to: i) reallocate a small amount of IBRD loan
  proceeds among components, ii) clarify the definitions of some indicators and introduce targets for them, iii)
  reallocate some IBRD proceeds among project counties and iv) update economic and financial analysis of
  the project (Restructuring paper, para 13).

  Changes to Results Framework

  The changes included the following:




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



         One PDO indicator was turned into an intermediate indicator with target added (Number of
          regulations and technical guidelines/standards developed for agricultural environment protection at
          local levels)
         One intermediate indicator was turned into a PDO indicator (Agricultural lands managed under the
          project (ha))
         Three indicators, one PDO and two intermediate, that were previously text indicators – with binary
          outcomes of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ – were given targets (percentage of safety risks of agricultural production
          area in participating counties classified, number of participating counties which established and
          operated Agricultural Environment Monitoring (AEM) databases for early warning, and number of
          action plans for risk-based agricultural land management developed in participating counties and in
          Hunan province)
         Two intermediate indicators were deleted (risk-based land management tools developed, and
          sustainable financing models for risk-based agricultural land management identified)



   Split Rating

   The PDO did not change. The project remained equally ambitious following the changes listed above.
   Attaching targets to some of the indicators made no change in the project’s ambition but enabled the
   measurement of less-than-complete accomplishment of the targets. This review therefore concludes that a
   split rating of outcomes is not warranted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country/province Context

Achieving food security and safety have been at the forefront of China’s agricultural policy but it was
undermined by widespread air, water, and soil pollution with heavy metals due to rapid industrialization
without strict environmental enforcement, which had left vast areas of the countryside polluted – an
estimated 19.4 percent of agricultural land and affecting 13.9 percent of grain production. Hunan province,
well known for nonferrous metal, nonferrous metallurgy, chemical and mining industries that make up for 80
percent of its industry (ICC, para 1) is also the largest producer in China of rice, a crop particularly
susceptible to accumulation of Cadmium (Cd). The discovery of significant levels of Cd in Hunan-produced
rice in 2013 led to a food safety scandal, which also revealed the potential losses to farmers and millers
from price discounting of contaminated rice.

In 2011, the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) announced an integrated prevention and control of
heavy metal pollution in the 12th five-year plan to address heavy metal pollution, the guiding principles of
which were to prevent new pollution, control pollution sources, and remediate contaminated water and land
aiming to make safe 90 percent of contaminated farmland by 2020. Since 2014, Hunan province piloted soil
and crop heavy metal remediation across heavy metal polluted farmlands. It obtained promising results with
the cadmium content in rice decreasing by about 30 percent in the pilot area. However, “the initial results

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



could not be replicated on a wider scale” (ICR, para 3). A key lesson learned in the national programs for
heavy metal pollution prevention was that the application of various treatments required careful planning,
strict and effective implementation, and supervision requiring professional services to demonstrate,
implement, and supervise the evaluation of demonstration trial results (PAD, para 6).

Country/province Strategy

The PDO was relevant to the province’s strategy to mitigate and manage heavy metal pollution in cultivated
land to safely produce food crops on about 93 percent of the contaminated land by 2025. The objectives of
the Action Plan on Prevention and Control of Soil Pollution (named Ten Measures for Soil Pollution) issued
by the State Council declared that by 2030, the soil environmental quality of the whole country would be
stable and good, the soil environmental safety of agricultural land and construction land would be effectively
guaranteed, and the soil environmental risk would be comprehensively controlled. This project was an
important part of the prevention and control of soil pollution in Hunan Province, which laid a solid foundation
for the comprehensive management and control of soil environmental risks in the project counties and
provided a demonstration experience for the whole province (ICR, para 24). The PDO remained relevant to
the greener development and food security and safety agenda of China’s current 14th Five Year Plan
(2021-2025) (ICR, para 5).

Bank Strategy

The PDO aligned with The World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for China 2013-2016,
particularly with respect to several outcomes sought under the CPS’ strategic theme 1: demonstrating
pollution management measures, promoting sustainable agricultural practices and enhancing urban
environment services (ICR, para 5). The PDO aligns with the current WBG’s Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for China (2020–2025), particularly Engagement Area 2 (EA2) - Promoting Greener
Growth. Under EA2, the WBG aims to support the Government’s efforts to (a) reduce air, soil, water, and
marine plastics pollution; (b) demonstrate sustainable agricultural practices and improve agrifood product
quality and safety; and (c) strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable natural resource management,
especially the efficient use of scarce arable land and water (ICR, para 23).

The level at which the objective is pitched

The PDO was pitched at an output level, to demonstrate the feasibility of an integrated approach to
addressing metal poisoning of soils. Scaled up, the approach would help in achieving the objectives of
reducing heavy metal pollution of soils and producing crops that meet food safety standards.

Summary: China’s aim to achieve food security and safety was jeopardized by widespread air, water, and
soil pollution. The effects it would have on food safety became apparent in heavily industrialized provinces,
such as Hunan, that were also major agricultural producers. Committing resources to make contaminated
areas suitable for production again, Hunan province had reduced pollution in its pilots but it could not
replicate the results on a wider scale. The PDO to demonstrate an integrated approach in this project that
could be more effective was relevant to China’s food security and safety agenda and the World Bank’s
objective of helping China achieve greener growth.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating

                                                                                                          Page 5 of 17
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                OBJECTIVE 1
                Objective
                To demonstrate a risk-based integrated approach to managing heavy metal pollution in agricultural land for
                safety of agricultural production areas in selected counties in Hunan.

                Rationale
                Theory of Change (ToC)

                The retrospectively developed ToC, articulated in ICR (para 7 and Figure 1), stated that activities/inputs, such
                as i) implementing a risk-based approach to reducing heavy metal levels (by characterizing sites on the basis
                of an integrated concept of farmland pollution risks and applying site-specific technical measures from a
                menu that included soil, crop and water management strategies and strategies that aimed to change land use
                and remediate soil where required), accompanied by ii) strengthening of Agricultural Environmental
                Monitoring (AEM) and management and iii) developing management and technical capacity of government
                officials, monitoring staff, farmers and heavy metal discharging enterprises, producing project outputs such as
                regulations and technical standards and number of AEM data bases, which would lead to the outcome of
                demonstrating risk-based integrated approach to managing heavy metal pollution, in terms of the feasibility of
                implementing (and scaling up) the approach and producing crops that meet the food safety standards.

                The critical assumption was that a risk-based approach in which interventions are targeted to address the risk
                characterization of sites would be more effective than blanket application of certain interventions as Hunan
                province had done previously to turn heavy metal polluted lands into lands safe to produce foods.

                The ToC was plausible. The key assumption is that targeted measures to address site-specific risks could
                more effectively make polluted lands suitable for safe production than, presumably, blanket measures were
                reasonable. However, the pilot/demonstration would need a counterfactual to prove its greater effectiveness
                and efficiency.

                Outputs

                        8 regulations and technical guidelines/standards were developed for agricultural environment
                          protection at local levels, exceeding the target of 5
                        14 participating counties established and operated AEM database for early warning, meeting the
                         target of 14
                        15 action plans for risk based agricultural land management were developed in participating countries
                         and in Hunan province, meeting the target of 15
                        100 percent of beneficiaries of project villages were consulted for farmland pollution management,
                         meeting the target of 100 percent



                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)




      7,636 management personnel and monitoring staff were trained, exceeding the target of 3,000

      142,339 farmers were trained, compensated, and involved in the project, exceeding the target of
       70,000

Outcomes

      9,623.08 ha of agricultural lands were managed under the project, exceeding the target of 8,000 ha
      94.35 percent of agriculture production areas in participating countries were classified exceeding the
       target of 85 percent
      94.16 percent of crop samples from demonstration areas met food standards, exceeding the target of
       80 percent

 The outcome of the project was measured by i) the area of lands managed by the project following the
protocol of risk-based approach, ii) proportion of the production area in participating counties that was
classified for safety risk, and iii) percentage of samples from demonstration areas that indicated that the lands
were suitable for production that met food safety standards.

 The project implemented the protocols or managed an area larger than targeted in the 12 counties (ICR,
para 27). Nearly all of the production areas in the selected counties were classified for safety risk. The crop
samples taken from demonstration sites showed that the lands became increasingly suitable for production,
reaching around 94 percent of the demonstration area. The pattern of change differed for early, middle, and
late season rice, and their shares in the total rice is not clear (ICR, para 34). The compliance rates, or the
proportion of crop samples that showed that they are safe for consumption, for early and late rice were higher
than the target 80 percent even at the beginning of the project – hence the change in compliance rate was
marginal. For middle rice, however, the improvement was larger, from 77.04% to 94.16%, a 17.12 percentage
point improvement; but even in this case, the compliance rate at the beginning was just below the target of
80%.

The measures implemented included the construction of irrigation projects, agricultural input control,
demonstration and promotion of low-accumulation rice varieties, optimized field water management, soil
acidification conditioning, application of heavy metal passivators to the soil, application of organic fertilizers,
straw removal and other agronomic measures, adjustment of planting structure, removal of substandard rice
and soil remediation via lime and manure applications (ICR, para 27). Other measures taken included crop
restructuring or cultivation of other crops, curbing of sources of pollution, and integrated management of pests
to reduce the use of chemicals.

The project demonstrated over an area larger than planned that a risk-based approach is effective in making
the polluted Demonstration sites safe enough to produce food. A greater than targeted proportion of the
demonstration land had become suitable for safe production. The approach is suitable for scaling up. The
World Bank team indicated to IEG in an exchange on August 1, 2024, that the demonstration sites mentioned
in the ICR were representative of the larger polluted area. The absence of a counterfactual, however,
deprived the demonstration of evidence for attributing the outcome to project activities, given that compliance
rates close to or above the target were observed at the beginning of the project. With this minor shortcoming,
the efficacy in achieving the objective is rated Substantial as the project almost fully achieved the objective.




                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The theory of change postulated that targeted interventions – to reduce the source of pollution, its uptake by
                            crops, treatment of contaminated soils, and removal of contaminated grains from the food chain – based on
                            risk assessment, combined with building early warning and monitoring systems and training of stakeholders
                            would demonstrate the benefits from using the risk-based approach to convert heavy metal polluted lands
                            safe for production. The project implemented the protocol over more than the targeted area of land and
                            successfully built warning and monitoring systems and trained stakeholders. The results from sampling of
                            demonstration sites also showed that a greater than targeted share of them had become safe for food
                            production. However, the absence of a counterfactual and compliance rates at the beginning of the project for
                            some of the targeted areas that were close to the target make it difficult to attribute all the outcome to project
                            activities and demonstrate the superiority of the risk-based approach over simpler cost-effective approaches.
                            With these minor shortcomings, the efficacy in the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, the economic analysis “with” and “without project” considered the values of the safe agricultural
   produce from the project as the incremental quantifiable benefits from the project. The economic prices of the
   polluted agricultural produce were valued at zero. EIRRs were calculated by county, and the aggregated
   economic cash flow of the project by county showed an EIRR of 17-20 percent (PAD, para 34).

   The appraisal analysis (replicated at closure in the ICR) considered the values of safe agricultural produce from
   the project, accrued from crop productivity gains and price premiums attributable to improved quality as the
   incremental quantifiable benefits. The costs covered those incurred in the project area and the outlays on
   institutional capacity building, project management and evaluation. Based on the aggregated economic cash
   flow of the project areas of the whole province, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) estimated in the ICR
   was 20 percent, compared with 18 percent at appraisal, reflecting the slightly reduced project cost and
   increased demonstration areas. Thus, the project was economically viable and robust compared with the
   opportunity cost of capital of 6 percent (the standard applied in China) (ICR, para 37).

   The project enjoyed a high level of support from government leadership (ICR, para 67). To ensure coordination
   among line agencies, the project maintained a provincial steering committee and project-leading groups at
   municipal and county levels. Overall, implementation efficiency was substantial.


                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 18.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              20.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Industrialization-caused heavy metal pollution of agricultural lands had jeopardized China’s achievement of food
security and food safety in heavily industrialized provinces that were also major food producers. The PDO
demonstrating a risk-based integrated approach to make polluted lands safe for food production in Hunan
province was highly relevant to China’s/Hunan province’s pollution reduction strategies and the World Bank’s
strategy to support green growth in China. The project substantially achieved its objective with minor
shortcomings. It implemented the protocol on more than the targeted demonstration area and crop samples
from the demonstration areas showed that a larger than targeted portion of the land had become safe for food
production. However, for some of the demonstration areas, there was no evidence to suggest that the approach
is more effective than a simpler heuristic-based one. Despite this shortcoming, the efficacy with which the
objective was achieved is rated Substantial. Implemented without any delay and with estimated economic
returns in the range projected at appraisal, the efficiency of implementation was rated substantial. This project's
outcome was rated satisfactory based on minor shortcomings in efficacy.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Pollution source risk

The government made efforts, through the project, to stop and remove historical and existing sources of
pollution. The project also increased awareness among farmers, agrotechnicians, and government officials,
which has made them aware of the dynamics of pollution and the need for action to prevent and remediate
pollution. The AEM system, which makes use of the information from various agencies, will provide future

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



early warning of new pollution sources. The public has access to the information by law. Nevertheless, the
uncertainty over continued functioning of the early warning system and the ability of stakeholders to use it to
demand action to curtail pollution sources poses a risk (ICR, para 91).

Technology adoption risk

The project has trained farmers on measures they can take to reduce pollution and has given them access to
inputs. The project identified and disseminated new rice varieties with low potential for accumulation of heavy
metals suitable for local soil and climatic conditions. The project has also prepared technical guidelines (ICR,
para 91). Provincial governments have agreed to provide oversight and continue to build capacity of farming
communities. The uncertainty over their living up to their commitment also poses a risk.

Infrastructure maintenance risk

The project built irrigation water-source control works, such as flood drainage ditches, stream embankments,
and mountain ponds (ICR, para 92). Farmer cooperatives and water user groups have assumed
responsibility for the daily operation and maintenance of the infrastructure built, motivated by the benefits
from increased productivity, outputs, and price premiums. Whether the benefits are sustained poses a risk to
the continued commitment to maintenance.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The objective to find an approach that could control and mitigate land pollution and make the lands
  suitable to produce food that meets safety standards was relevant to increasing incomes and thus
  reducing poverty. The project included components – implementation of an integrated approach, building
  up of monitoring systems, and the training of stakeholders – that could be expected to achieve the
  objective and provide the foundation for scaling up the approach.

  The technical design incorporated lessons from similar operations in China (ICR, para 88). The approach
  was, however, new. The design therefore began with piloting in three counties the lessons from which
  would guide the plans for other counties.

  The RF at entry had a few limitations. One of the PDO indicators was a project output. Several indicators,
  including a PDO indicator, did not permit the measurement of less than full accomplishment of activities
  or outcomes they were related to.

  The implementation was assigned to organizations that had previously implemented poverty alleviation
  projects financed by the World Bank and other donors with demonstrated capabilities for complying with
  operational policies and requirements (ICR, para 88).

  A design appropriate to achieving the objectives, built on experience and incorporating stepwise
  implementation, a reasonable implementation plan, and minor shortcomings in an RF that could have
  been more robust earn this project a rating of satisfactory for quality-at-entry.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team fielded 12 support missions with relevant expertise during the project’s
 implementation. A stable team leadership provided continuity. Implementation also benefited from constant
 interactions between the World Bank office staff in Beijing and the government counterparts (ICR, para
 89).

 The Bank team proactively addressed critical issues including the restructuring.

 For fielding adequate support missions, frequent interactions between local office staff and the
 government, and proactive actions, quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Overall: A design that responded to needs includes appropriate activities, a reasonably good RF at entry,
 adequate supervision, and proactively addressing issues that emerged during implementation. Given the
 satisfactory quality at entry and supervision ratings, overall Bank performance is also rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The design, intended to track project outputs, intermediate outcomes, and the final outcomes of the project,
 reflected the theory of change, which hypothesized that risk-based application of measures supported by
 discrete enabling actions performed by the participating counties would help in making heavy metal
 polluted lands safe for production.

 Two of the three PDO indicators were appropriate and measurable. The other PDO indicator measured an
 intermediate outcome: “regulations for agricultural environment protection developed and relevant technical
 standards issued at local levels.”

 The original design had eight intermediate indicators. Five of them indicated intermediate outcomes, such
 as AEM databases established and operational in the counties. Three related to outputs, such as the
 numbers trained and the percentage of beneficiaries consulted.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



 The RF could have benefited from intermediate level indicators on the measures taken by the project. In
 their absence, how polluted lands were treated is a black box; the measures taken are known but in what
 proportion is not made clear in the ICR.

 The design required annual studies to examine the outcomes. However, in some of the counties, the
 design lacked a counterfactual, particularly given that the initial conditions in these counties were close to
 the targets the project wanted to achieve to demonstrate the effectiveness of the approach.



b. M&E Implementation
  At restructuring, the RF was revised to overcome some of the limitations of the initial design. The PDO
  indicator that only captured project output was downgraded to intermediate status; and an intermediate
  indicator that measured outcome was upgraded to be a PDO indicator. And several indicators that were
  framed to capture binary outcomes were changed and targets were attached to them.

  Modifications to indicators left one of them awkwardly crafted: “Percentage of safety risks of agricultural
  production areas in participating counties classified.”

  The ICR notes that the suggested annual evaluations were carried out. M&E was carried out by an
  independent research organization with the necessary expertise, as recommended (para 70). The project
  team comprehensively evaluated the implementation of various organizations, the implementation impact
  and compiled the effectiveness evaluation reports. Three other independent research organizations
  carried out i) environmental tracking and monitoring (semi-annually), ii) social tracking that included
  farmers’ income and employment dynamics, and iii) assessment of plant diseases and insect pests.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR the M&E provided the necessary information for effectively implementing the
  project (para 76).

  Summary: The project’s design had appropriate and measurable indicators – although some of them
  needed to be modified – for effective implementation and to test the ToC. The design could have
  benefited from more intermediate indicators that offered insights on how the measures contributed to
  making lands safe for production. The M&E system was implemented effectively by the Project
  Management Office and independent research institutions. With minor shortcomings in design, M&E
  quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



Environmental

The project was classified as Category A (for full assessment), and it triggered An Environmental
Assessment (OP 4.01), and safeguards on Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Safety of Dams (OP 4.37)
(para 77). Throughout project implementation, the project’s environmental performance maintained a
Satisfactory rating.

Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an
Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and Social Management Plans
(ESMPs), a Pest Management Plan (PMP), and an Environmental Assessment Executive Summary were
prepared and disclosed.

The project ensured coordination on environmental protection-related issues among PPMOs, contractors,
and the external independent environmental monitoring agency, and environmental training was organized
for them from time to time. The requirements of the ESMP/Environment Code of Practice were included in
the bidding documents and the construction contracts of the project, and a grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) was established. The disposal of substandard rice contaminated with heavy metals by each
county was monitored to ensure that they adhered to the plans they had formulated to prevent the flow of
this grain into markets.

Pest Management (OP 4.09). The project supported sustainable soil management practices, including
chemical management, to restore and maintain soil quality. Through agricultural, biological, and physical
control measures, the use of chemical pesticides was reduced. Project funds were used to purchase solar
insecticidal lamps to demonstrate their use. The project also encouraged fish and duck farming in rice fields
to control pests and diseases. The external monitoring of Pest Management Plans (PMPs) concluded that
the application of integrated pest management (IPM) strategies in the project constantly improved.

Safety of Dams (OP 4.37). Forty reservoirs that provided irrigation water to project areas in 12 counties
triggered OP 4.37. The failure of these dams upstream could have caused extensive damage to project
investments. Detailed dam safety action plans were developed and included in the ESMP. During project
implementation, the PPMO hired a dam safety expert to supervise the dams’ safety status, regular
operation, and maintenance according to the dam safety action plan.

Social Safeguards

The project triggered Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) at
appraisal. As the project supported small civil works for agricultural irrigation facilities, it was possible that
ethnic minority people might be present at some of the project sites. a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan Framework (IPPF) were prepared at appraisal, implemented, and
monitored. As the project was implemented in three stages, identifying the location of project works at
different times, social assessments were conducted at the beginning of each phase. The social parts of the
safeguard instruments and mitigation measures were also integrated with the ESMF, ESIA, and ESMPs.
The ICR did not include any assessment of the project’s compliance with social safeguards.

Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). An RPF was prepared at the project preparation stage and
implemented and monitored throughout project implementation. The project civil works were constructed on
village public land along existing roads or irrigation localities without affecting any individual person. The
project supported over 11,306 mu (753.7 ha) for crop restructuring without changing the land ownership of
related farmers. Subsidies of around US$70.52 per mu and/or farming goods were provided to affected

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



  farmers for crop restructuring. Through crop restructuring, these farmers and related farmers’ cooperatives
  turned to growing tea, oranges, and other non-grain farm products. Under the World Bank’s information
  disclosure policy, social documents were disclosed in the project areas and on the websites of local
  government agencies and the World Bank.

  Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). According to the IPPF, social assessment was carried out for each batch of
  project sites in 2016, 2018, and 2020. The Social Impact Assessment reports concluded that the World
  Bank’s Indigenous Peoples Policy did not apply to the officially identified Chinese ethnic minorities, such as
  Miao and Tujia minorities, in the project areas because they were well-integrated with most Han people.
  They spoke Mandarin and enjoyed the same rights, opportunities, and interests as most Han people. They
  were not disadvantaged by the project. No indigenous peoples were defined by the World Bank at the
  project sites.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement.

  According to the ICR, procurement complied with World Bank requirements and was done by both
  provincial/county PMOs and cooperatives (para 86). Procurement documents, signed contracts, and
  acceptance certificates for contracts procured and implemented by the provincial PMO and county PMOs
  financed by the IBRD loan proceeds were uploaded into Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP). Community participation procedures (as described in Section 3.19 of the
  Procurement Guidelines) were applied for activities implemented by village committees and farmer
  cooperatives. Procurement performance was satisfactory.

  Financial Management.

  The project’s financial management arrangements were consistent with World Bank guidelines and,
  according to the ICR, implementation was satisfactory (para 87). Four project audit reports for the fiscal
  years 2019 to 2022 were furnished to the World Bank in a timely manner and were of acceptable quality
  and with unmodified (clean) audit opinions. Most of the interim financial reports were also submitted to the
  World Bank in a timely manner; some of them were received after short delays. The interim financial
  reports were of acceptable quality.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
  Private sector finance mobilization

  The project-led increase in quantity and quality of agricultural production spurred investments in production,
  processing, warehousing, and value chain development. For example, many cooperatives in the Yongshun
  area built new rice processing plants and warehouses (ICR, para 46). Nine counties implemented

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



   campaigns to remove Cd-polluted straw from agricultural fields. A bio energy technology development
   company invested US$16.92 million in one of the districts to utilize the straw as biomass fuel (ICR, para 48).

   Poverty Reduction

   Rice farming income increased by US$233-465.4 per ha (ICR, para 49). Production of certified green rice
   helped farmers increase income, which prompted them to venture into agro- and eco-tourism.

   Improved environmental practices

   Over the last five years of the project, improved agronomic practices used by farmers and their increased
   awareness of environmental tradeoffs and synergies were documented in project evaluations: (a) a 35.4
   percent decrease in farmers’ use of laundry detergents to protect their crops against insect pests, (b) a 42.6
   percent reduction in the use of pesticides and fertilizers, and (c) a 51.2 percent reduction in the pollution of
   water sources (ICR, para 58).



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                       IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                  Efficacy is rated Substantial due
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Satisfactory               to the absence of counterfactual
                                                                                  in the assessment.
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR extracted several lessons from implementing the project. Three that are likely to be widely
applicable are presented below with some edits:

A risk-based approach, in which the remediation measures are targeted to address the nature
of assessed risks, has the potential to be effective in controlling heavy metal pollution (ICR,
para 96). The approach entailed conducting spatial mapping of sources (for example, mining,
industries, and so on) and types of heavy metals (for example, cadmium, arsenic, lead, and
mercury); classifying the intensity of these heavy metals on farmland (for example, high, medium,
and low risk based on safety thresholds); and implementing targeted remediation measures (for
example, closing heavily polluting mines and industries, converting contaminated farmland into
estates/industrial parks, and applying farmland passivation measures—adding chemicals, especially
liming of polluted soils—to change heavy metals from active forms to stable forms). The project’s
risk-based approach successfully mitigated heavy metal pollution in the soils of Hunan Province.



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



Adopting a learning-based model of work that continually reworks the approach to reducing
environmental damage based on observed outcomes, can potentially lead to the
development of robust models for scaling up the approach (ICR, para 99). This unique
approach was a game changer in managing agriculture and the environment in this project. Through
five years of continuous implementation, exploration, summarizing, and synthesizing, the project
established a comprehensive management model for farmland heavy metal pollution mitigation.

The ‘science-enterprise-society’ technology model of expert decision-making, enterprise
support, and cooperative implementation with farming communities has the potential to
mobilize grassroots enthusiasm and improve farmers’ participation in projects (ICR, para
100). Demonstrations of improved practices empowered rural communities. Participating counties
were organized and guided by the project to conduct experiments on agronomic measures, rice
varieties, and remediation products. The outreach to farmers and policymakers via short
documentary films and easily accessible rural websites catalyzed society’s understanding of the
critical challenges and opportunities to participate and contribute to finding solutions. The project
built the capacity of local researchers, extension workers, and farmer cooperative representatives to
develop and maintain early warning systems. The experiences of project stakeholders are potentially
useful for developing robust and effective decision-support tools that can be used even in areas that
lack research and extension expertise.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR follows the OPCS guidelines and offers a sufficiently detailed overview of the project covering the
project implementation, the outcomes, and, to a limited extent, their impacts. The information it brings to the
analysis is credible, using data drawn primarily from the M&E system. For example, the approach the report
takes to link project outputs to outcomes is reasonable, given the M&E system did not collect information (or
have indicators to report) on the composition of measures that were implemented. The report is moderately
results-orientated as it offers some information from annual studies of the impact of the project on farm
incomes, for example. The lessons are appropriate and based on specific experiences and findings of the
project.

The report, however, has some shortcomings. For example, the PDO indicator (percentage of safety risks of
agricultural production areas in participating counties classified) is stated differently in Annex 1, para 26, and in
Table 1 of the ICR. Although a number was reported for the indicator, it wasn’t discussed in assessing the
outcome to clarify its meaning. More details would have been useful in some cases. Annex 1 offers no
information on how the indicators were measured, although such clarity was also absent in the PAD.
Information drawn from annual evaluation studies is not appropriately referenced. While the ICR assessed the
project’s response to environmental and social safeguards as satisfactory, it does not state whether the project
complied with environmental and social safeguards as required by the guidelines for the preparation of ICRs.



                                                                                                       Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Hunan Integr. Manag of Agri Land Project (P153115)



The quality of ICR is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 17 of 17
