     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024210

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P155229                                     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Lesotho                                     Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61510                                   31-Dec-2023                                         18,314,077.94

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Nov-2017                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             18,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              18,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          18,314,372.23                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Natalya Stankevich           Elisabeth Goller             Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) are to (a) improve access to social services and markets in
   targeted rural areas of Lesotho; (b) strengthen road safety management capacity; and (c) improve the
   Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.

   The PDOs were not revised.


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



   In this validation, the PDOs were assessed in the three parts as follows (in the same way as in the ICR):

   (i) to improve access to social services and markets in targeted rural areas of Lesotho;

   (ii) to strengthen road safety management capacity; and

   (iii) to improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   1. Improving Infrastructure Access. (Cost at appraisal: US$9.2 million; cost at the March 2022 and June
   2023 restructurings: US$5.2 million; actual cost US$5.2 million.) The component was designed to finance
   the construction of approximately 35 footbridges with climate resilient measures in areas that are cut off
   from road access. It was also expected to provide technical advisory services to: (a) prepare design for any
   required site‐specific safeguard instruments for the footbridges; (b) conduct an assessment study to
   introduce output and performance‐based contract (OPRC) methods in the road sector; and (c) monitor and
   supervise the work contracts and develop the project monitoring and management system to ensure
   transparency and accountability in managing works.

   During the first restructuring in March 2022, four footbridges in the lowlands were cancelled because, as per
   the new government policy, only vehicle bridges could be constructed in lowlands. 10 new footbridges in the
   highlands were added, bringing the total number of footbridges to 41. In addition, community-based road
   maintenance was added (though the Task Team clarified in their written responses to the IEG that the
   community-based maintenance was financed under Component 3).

   2. Improving Road Safety. (Cost at appraisal and at the March 2022 restructuring: US$4.4 million; cost at
   the June 2023 restructuring and actual cost: US$3.01 million). This component was expected to address
   road safety in a more integrated manner to help achieve the Government’s objective to meet the global
   decade of road safety aim of halving road deaths between 2010 and 2020. It consisted of two sub-
   components:

          Sub‐component 2.1: Strengthening Road Safety Management Capacity. This subcomponent
          was to finance: (i) capacity building and institutional strengthening of the Road Safety Department
          (RSD) and National Road Safety Council (NRSC) to effectively address road safety; (ii) acquisition
          of vehicles for the RSD and road safety equipment for the RSD and traffic police; and (iii)
          deployment of the road accident data management system (RADMS) to improve the systematic
          recording and reporting of road accidents through a companion GPS‐enabled smartphone
          application, to be used by trained citizens and traffic police to report accidents in real time.

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



        Sub‐component 2.2: Establishing Lesotho Integrated Transport Information System. This
         sub‐component was expected to finance (a) the implementation of an integrated vehicle registration
         and driver licensing system with a traffic management information system – entitled the Lesotho
         Integrated Transport Information System (LITIS) – and (b) a needs assessment and system
         specification for establishment of the proposed LITIS.

  During the June 2023 restructuring, the activities related to LITIS were cancelled because of procurement
  and contract award delays. The LITIS related activities were replaced with the provision of park homes
  (offices) for Traffic Police, which were connected to information systems and utilities.

  3. Institutional Strengthening Support to the Transport Sector. (Cost at appraisal and actual cost:
  US$4.7 million). This component was expected to provide institutional strengthening support to the transport
  sector and building the capacity of the Roads Directorate (RD) and Ministry of Public Works and Transport
  (MoPWT) through: (i) provision of technical advisory services to prepare the National Transport Master
  Plan, including institutionalization of cross‐sectoral coordination in transport planning and decision
  making; (ii) strengthening of the institutional capacity of the RD and MoPWT for project implementation; (iii)
  implementation of citizen engagement (CE) mechanisms and HIV/AIDS and gender‐targeted activities; (iv)
  capacity building of the staff of the RD, Road Fund (RF), and MoPWT and local industry contractors,
  provision of training to the staff on OPRC management and pricing methods, and engagement with local
  engineering schools to train a future cadre of specialists; and (v) provision of technical assistance to the RD
  and RF in designing and piloting community‐based maintenance schemes to address sustainability of road
  assets.

  4. Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). (Cost at appraisal: US$0.00 million; cost at
  the March 2022 restructuring after the activation of CERC: US$4.0 million; cost at the June 2023
  restructuring and actual cost: US$5.39 million). Component 4 was to provide a quick access to resources
  for eligible expenses during an eligible crisis or emergency.

  The component was activated on June 23, 2021, following the declaration of a state of emergency in the
  country because of the January 2021 flooding and the government’s request to activate the CERCs across
  all eligible Bank-financed projects on March 14, 2021. During the March 2022 restructuring, US$4 million
  was reallocated from Component 1 to this Component for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of damaged
  roads and drainage structures. During the June 2023 restructuring, US$1.39 million was reallocated from
  Component 2 to this Component to complement the needed funds for the emergency works.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Costs. The total project cost at appraisal and the actual project cost were US$18.3 million,
  as shown in Table 1 (p. 9) and Annex 3 (p.59).

  Financing. The Bank was expected to fully cover the project costs through an International Development
  Association (IDA) credit. As per the Implementation Completion Report (ICR) datasheet, the actual
  disbursement stands at US$18,314,372 while Annex 3 shows the actual costs of US$18.3 million at the
  closing.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



   Recipient contribution. The project did not envisage a Recipient contribution.

   Dates. The project was approved on November 20, 2017, became effective on December 27, 2017, carried
   out a mid-term review (MTR) on November 23, 2020, and closed on December 31, 2023 as per the original
   schedule for closing.

   Restructurings. The project underwent two Level 2 restructurings:

   First restructuring in March 2022 with disbursement at 61 percent (US$11.14 million). The first
   restructuring was done to: (i) reallocate uncommitted funds from Component 1 to the CERC, (ii) incorporate
   changes in the implementation arrangements following the institutional reform that split the MoPWT into two
   separate ministries – Ministry of Public Works and Ministry of Transport, (iii) revise the financing agreement
   covenant related to the Road Traffic Bill by removing the need for its approval because parliamentary
   processes are beyond the Government's and the project's control, (iv) include emergency activities in the
   project following the activation of the CERC (i.e., Component 4) on June 23, 2021, change activities in
   Components 1 and 3 and update the component costs, (v) change the results framework to reflect the
   project changes and recommendations from the MTR conducted in December 2020, and (vi) reallocate
   proceeds between disbursement categories.

   Second restructuring in June 2023 with disbursement at 87 percent (US$15.92 million). It was done to (i)
   reallocate proceeds between disbursement categories; (ii) reflect changes to the implementation
   arrangement following the reconsolidation of MoPWT and the name change of the Ministry of Finance to the
   Ministry of Finance and Development Planning; (iii) change project activities and cost as mentioned above,
   and (vi) adjust the results framework accordingly.

   Split Ratings. The PDOs were not revised, but the targets of the PDO indicators associated with the first
   two Objectives were revised, and the project was made less ambitious. Therefore, the IEG applied a split
   rating. The IEG considered applying a double split rating but ruled it out because the second split rating
   would not have changed the final outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context. At the time of appraisal in 2017, Lesotho was one of the poorest countries in Southern
Africa with a per capita gross national income of US$1,280 (2015) and a Gini co-efficient of 0.54. Almost 50
percent of population lived below US$1.90 per person per day as reported in the Lesotho Poverty Mapping
Report, 2018. Political instability and decreasing exports contributed to the decline of the economic growth
in the past few years prior to the project approval, with unemployment remaining high and the fiscal
situation deteriorating. High GBV, maternal mortality, adolescent pregnancy, child marriages, substantially
more HIV cases among younger women than younger men, and overall gender inequality required
significant attention and intervention in every economic sector of the country, including in the provision of
access to markets and social services.

Sector Context. Roads are the main means of transport connectivity in Lesotho. The road network is
mainly concentrated in the lowlands and foothills, which represent 25 percent of the country's area. The

                                                                                                    Page 4 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



uneven distribution of the road network affects the economic growth, especially in isolated highlands which
are poor but have a high agricultural potential and represent about 75 percent of the country's territory. At
the time of the project preparation, about 25 percent of Lesotho's population living in those remote
highlands had limited access to basic social services, economic opportunities and markets. In addition to
lack of roads, that access was impeded by the mountainous terrain, floods, landslides during the rainy
season and soil and road erosion due to the climate change. Most of Lesotho's unpaved roads remained in
poor condition due to inadequate maintenance and limited absorptive capacity of the local contractors. With
weak road safety management capacity and delayed reforms due to the lack of political will, Lesotho
continued facing challenges in road safety. High fatality rates were observed in densely populated areas,
while high accident rates were observed in the mountainous terrains. The country had high drowning rates
in the rivers, which people attempted crossing to access economic opportunities and social services.

Relevance to Government Strategies. The PDOs were and are still relevant to the Second National
Strategic Development Plan's priorities (NSDP-II, 2018/19 – 2022/23), which highlighted the importance of
the transport sector and outlined objectives and interventions for expanding and maintaining existing roads
and access routes, improving rural transportation systems (such as constructing climate-proof
footbridges) and road safety. NSDP-II was extended by the new government till 2027-28, which remained
committed to the above listed priorities.

Alignment with Bank Strategies. At appraisal in 2017, the PDOs were largely aligned with the Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2020 and contributed to the second focus area of promoting private
sector job creation through increasing transport connectivity. At completion in December 2023, the PDOs
were also aligned with the CPF for 2024-2028 by "providing access to climate-resilient infrastructure"
(Lesotho Overview, World Bank web site) and concentrating efforts on the poorest regions (i.e., rural
mountainous areas) that lacked sufficient services and access to essential infrastructure to advance
universal access and progress toward poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Specifically, the PDOs were
aligned with Objective 7 of the CPF "Strengthened household resilience shocks" by "providing access to
climate-resilient infrastructure services through technical assistance to improve road safety and capacity to
respond to crises or emergencies" (p. 37, CPF for 2023-2028) and with the CPF's commitment to follow a
territorial development approach for reducing poverty and improving service delivery in rural and
mountainous areas (p.4, CPF Brief for 2023-2028). In addition, the PDOs were also largely consistent with
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (2015) through their contribution to closing gaps in access to key basic
infrastructure in remote areas.

Previous Sector Experience. The PDOs built on needs identified in the Bank’s previous sector experience
in the country. The previous Integrated Transport Project supported the construction of three footbridges
and access tracks, which demonstrated that this kind of activities leads to improved access to government
services and job opportunities in areas separated by rivers (para 54, p. 52, CPF for 2016-2020 and ICR for
Integrated Transport Project). During the previous engagement, the Bank also launched several reforms,
including the establishment of the NRSC to build road safety management capacity. However, there was no
road safety capacity-related objective. In this operation, to elevate the road safety capacity agenda and
increase political support, the project included such an objective.

The relevance of the Objectives is rated as Substantial. At appraisal and project closing, the PDOs
were and are largely aligned with the country's and Bank’s previous and current strategies. The PDOs were
also designed building on the previous sector engagement. The PDOs were pitched at an outcome level
appropriate to address development problems of (i) constrained or limited access to social services and
economic opportunities in lowlands and highlands of Lesotho, (ii) weak road safety management capacity to

                                                                                                   Page 5 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



               reduce fatalities on roads and bridges, and (iii) weak government’s capacity to respond promptly and
               effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency. This was an appropriate level for the development context of
               Lesotho.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to social services and markets in targeted rural areas of Lesotho.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (TOC) for Objective 1 was that the activities to (i) construct footbridges with climate
                             resilient measures and safety features to guarantee all-weather safe pedestrian access, (ii) provide
                             institutional capacity building of the RD and MoPWT for project implementation, and (iii) provide technical
                             assistance to the RD and RF in designing and piloting community-based maintenance schemes to address
                             sustainability of road assets would lead to (i) completed all-weather footbridges, (ii) trained staff in planning
                             and management, and (iii) completed community-based routine maintenance on select roads as the outputs.
                             In terms of outcomes, this would improve access to social services and markets as measured through
                             reduced travel time for pedestrians and the number of people benefitting from the use of footbridges. It was
                             also expected to lead to full satisfaction of pedestrians with the quality of the completed footbridges. The main
                             assumptions were that the construction of the bridges would be in the right places and of good quality and
                             people in the influence area would use these footbridges during the rainy season.

                             The TOC has no major logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project activities.

                             Outputs

                             The project produced the following outputs:

                                        43 constructed footbridges, which exceeds the original target of 35.
                                        183 km of roads received community-based routine maintenance; the project had no indicator in
                                          the results framework to measure this output.
                                        48 staff members of RD, RF and MoPWT received trainings in planning, contract management,
                                          footbridges management, and other relevant areas (as per the Task Team's written answer #12 to
                                          IEG's questions). This exceeds the original target of 25 trained staff members.

                             Outcomes



                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



The delivery of above-mentioned outputs led to:

      46,843 people (ICR, p. 21, footnote 13) benefitting from the footbridges. The original target of
         27,155 people was exceeded. It is not clear if these beneficiaries are the people in the influence area
         of the project bridges or those who effectively use the bridges.
        62 percent of people benefitting from improved pedestrian accessibility to social services and markets
         are women. The original target of 50 percent was exceeded.
        75 percent reduction of pedestrian travel time to basic services and local agricultural markets during
         the rainy season, which exceeded the original target of 50 percent travel time reduction.
         However, the quality of the evidence is weak because the methodology is unclear how the 75 percent
         reduction was calculated.
        80 percent of the survey respondents expressed satisfaction with the quality of the bridges, some of
         them citing shortcomings in the location and quality of the bridges. The target of 100 percent was
         not achieved.
        85 percent of the survey respondents who expressed satisfaction with the quality of the bridges were
         women. The target of 100 percent was not achieved.
        86 local agriculture markets with improved connectivity, significantly exceeding the target of 5.
         However, considering that the number of footbridges built was not significantly different from what was
         planned, the target of 5 markets seems not sufficiently ambitious. The ICR did not report on this
         indicator. During the interview with the IEG and in their written responses to the IEG’s questions, the
         Task Team clarified that 86 bigger villages, all with local agricultural markets, were connected,
         together with numerous smaller villages surrounding those bigger villages.

The ICR states that the completed footbridges also offer a reduced risk of drowning or injury by providing safe
crossing points, especially during the rainy season when water levels rise significantly. The Task Team, in its
discussion with the IEG, pointed out that community-based maintenance on rural roads connecting to the
bridges contributed to improved access of rural population to social services and markets, but they did not
provide evidence.

The efficacy of this objective is rated as Substantial. At the output level, the project exceeded the targets
of completed footbridges and number of trained staff. At the outcome level, the achievements exceeded the
targets for the number of markets with improved connectivity, number of people benefiting from the
footbridges, percent of women benefiting from the improved pedestrian accessibility to social services and
markets, and travel time reduction. However, the original target for the number of markets was not ambitious.
The indicator related to the number of beneficiaries lacked clarity about the definition of beneficiaries (i.e.,
people residing in the project’s influence area versus actual users of those footbridges). The time travel
reduction is backed up by evidence obtained by using an unclear methodology. The project did not achieve
the expected level of satisfaction from all survey respondents because the original target to achieve 100
percent satisfaction was unrealistic.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)




Revised Objective
The Objective 1 “to improve access to social services and markets in targeted rural areas of Lesotho” was not
revised. However, the associated PDO indicator “local agricultural markets with improved transport
connectivity” was dropped and replaced with the indicator “number of people benefitting from improved
pedestrian accessibility to social services and markets”, which was similar to the already existing indicator
“number of additional beneficiaries from year-round footbridge access”.

Revised Rationale
The TOC outlined under the Original Objective 1 above, in substance, remained unchanged.

Outputs

The project produced the following outputs:

      43 constructed footbridges, which exceeds the revised target of 41.
      The other achievements reported under the Original Objective 1, for which targets were not
       revised during the first restructuring, are applicable here, too.

Outcomes

These outputs led to:

      46,843 people (ICR, p. 21, footnote 13) benefitting from the footbridges. The revised target of 32,282
       was exceeded. Similarly to the discussion under the Original Objective 1, it is unclear if these
       beneficiaries are the people in the influence area of the project bridges or those who effectively use
       the bridges.
      62 percent of people benefitting from improved pedestrian accessibility to social services and markets
       are women as opposed to the revised target of 60 percent. Similarly, it is unclear if these women are
       the ones residing in the project influence area or effective users of those bridges. The revised target
       was slighted exceeded.
      The targets for pedestrian travel time to basic services and local agricultural markets during the rainy
       season, survey respondents and female ones expressing satisfaction with the quality of the bridges
       were not revised during the first restructuring. Please refer to the discussion under the Original
       Objective 1, which reports that the targets for the travel time reduction was exceeded but the quality
       of evidence remained questionable, and the targets for the other two were not achieved.

Please also refer to the Original Objective 1 discussion about other achievements reported by the ICR
and the Task Team during the interview with the IEG, as those achievements are also applicable here in the
assessment of the efficacy of the Objective 1 under the revised targets.

The efficacy of this objective under the revised targets is rated as Substantial. At the output levels, the
project exceeded the revised target of completed footbridges. It also exceeded the target for the number of
trained staff, which was not revised during the restructuring. At the outcome level, the achievements
exceeded the revised targets for the number of people benefiting from the footbridges and percent of women
benefitting from improved pedestrian accessibility to social services and markets. The shortcomings related to
(i) the definition of the indicator of “the number of people benefiting from the footbridges”, (ii) the evidence on



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



travel time measurement, and (iii) the target for user satisfaction discussed under the Original Objective 1 are
applicable here, too.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen road safety management capacity.

Rationale
The TOC for Objective 2 was that the activities to (i) provide capacity building and institutional strengthening
of the RSD and NRSC; (ii) acquire vehicles for the RSD and road safety equipment for the RSD and traffic
police; (iii) deploy the RADMS, and (iv) support the implementation of LITIS would have as the outputs (a)
completed capacity building and institutional strengthening, (b) availability of vehicles and road safety
equipment, (b) functioning RADMS, and (c) functioning integrated LITIS with fuel efficient vehicle inspection
standards. In terms of outcomes, this would lead to (i) budget allocation provided to the NRSC at least three
years in a row, (ii) equipment and vehicle utilized on a routine basis by the RSD and traffic police, (iii)
improved systematic recording and reporting of road accidents and road safety monitoring, and (iv) improved
management and revenue collection procedures for vehicle inspection and driver licensing services to
enhance road safety management. All these were to strengthen the GoL’s road safety management capacity.
The main assumptions were that (i) the amended Road Traffic Bill submitted to the Parliament Counsel in
May 2017 would be approved no later than March 31, 2018 because it included the budget allocations to the
NRSC, (ii) capacity building and institutional strengthening activities would be effective in the professional
development and growth of the RSD staff and NRSC members, and (iii) the established RADMS and LITIS
would be immediately used for their respective intended purposes.

Most of the causal links between activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes
were monitorable. The budget allocation provided to the NRSC is not attributable to project activities. No
capacity building and institutional strengthening activities for the NRSC were included in the project.

Outputs

The project produced the following outputs:

      RADMS established after the procurement of software and hardware and web and mobile platforms of
       RADMS available. The target of “RADMS established” is achieved”.
      20 staff members from RSD and traffic police trained through sensitization workshops for the effective
       use of the RADMS, 6 RSD staff trained in road safety, and 5 MoT staff trained during the LITIS
       preparatory courses (ISR of June 2022). The target of 25 staff trained is exceeded.
      Road safety equipment (e.g., office equipment, communication devices, computers for RSD and
       tablets/smart phones, speed guns, breathalyzers) available for the RSD and traffic police (ISR of June
       2022). The target of “road safety equipment acquired” is achieved.



                                                                                                   Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



The following expected output was not delivered by the project:

      No integrated LITIS with fuel efficient vehicle inspection standards was established. The target of
       “integrated LITIS with fuel efficient inspection standards established” was not achieved. However,
       the project financed hardware for the existing eNATIS system, which is used for vehicle registration
       and the application of driving licenses.

The ICR provided no evidence on the completion of any capacity building or institutional strengthening
activities to the NRSC or trainings to the NRSC members. No separate target for capacity building of the
NRSC members was set in the Results Framework, but it was a clearly spelt-out expectation in the road
safety component description.

Outcomes

The above listed outputs led to the following outcomes:

      Streamlined road crash data collection using RADMS. According to the Task Team’s explanation to
       the IEG, streamlined crash data collection means that road crash data is now collected by using
       electronic devices (instead of doing it manually), directly inputted into RADMS in a new format that
       enables analyzing the causes and trends in road crashes, and the system enables releasing an
       annual road safety report for 2023. The target of “road accident reporting streamlined” is partially
       achieved. According to the PAD, this output was to measure “improved road safety management and
       monitoring with regard to systematic recording, reporting and documentation of road accidents and
       integration of reported information in the management of road safety in general (PAD, page 28)”. The
       ICR and the Task Team did not provide evidence if and how the collected road crash data is used for
       road safety management in general.
      Utilization of road safety equipment by the RSD and traffic police on a routine basis. The target of
       “road safety equipment utilized on a routine basis by the RSD and traffic police” is achieved. During
       the interview with the IEG, the Task Team also highlighted the improved capacity of the RSD and
       traffic police for enforcement of road safety, as they routinely use the provided equipment and
       systems after attending the relevant trainings. The police are now able to issue fines on the spot as
       they can use the smartphones and tables to enter the needed the information in the system right
       away, without going back to their office and hand-write fines on the paper.

The following expected outcome was not achieved:

      No budget was allocated to the NRSC. The target of “budget allocation provided to the NRSC at least
       three years in a row” was not achieved. This indicator on budget allocation was to measure “the
       strengthened institutional capacity for road safety management and completion of institutional reform
       process in road safety (PAD, page 28).” The ICR does not provide evidence on improved institutional
       capacity of the NRSC and the completion of institutional reforms. As mentioned under the TOC above,
       the project did not include capacity building and institutional strengthening activities for NRSC.
      No improved management and revenue collection procedures for vehicle inspection and driver
       licensing services to enhance road safety management. The results framework had no target to
       measure this outcome, but the PAD (page 30) mentions that integrated LITIS was to “measure of the
       improvement to the management and revenue collection procedures for vehicle inspection and driver
       licensing services to enhance road safety management.” Because of lack of evidence, it is not

                                                                                                Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



       possible to assess if the improvements to the eNATIS system helped enhance the road safety
       management capacity in any way.

The efficacy of Objective 2 under the original targets is rated as Modest. At the output level, the project
exceeded the number of trained staff and achieved the targets for the establishment of the RADMS and the
acquisition of road safety equipment but failed to establish the integrated LITIS with fuel efficient vehicle
inspection standards. At the outcome level, the project fully achieved only one of the outcomes, i.e., the use
of the equipment on a routine basis provided by the project, which facilitates road safety data collection and
enforcement and, hence, strengthens the GoL’s road safety management capacity. It is also plausible that the
trainings have at least somewhat strengthened the road safety capacity of the trained staff. Road crash data
collection was streamlined, but due to the lack of evidence it is not clear if and how the collected data is being
used for road safety decisions and management. No budget was allocated to the NRSC, which implies that
the NRSC’s road safety management capacity was not strengthened, and it is unable to carry out road safety
activities. The project also did not strengthen the road safety management capacity through improved
management and revenue collection procedures for vehicle inspection.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The Objective 2 to strengthen road safety management capacity was not revised. However, during the 2022
Restructuring the indicators were revised as follows: (i) “budget allocation to the NRSC provided at least three
years in a row” was dropped, (ii) “road accident reporting streamlined” was revised to “road crash data
collection is streamlined using RADMS and at least one annual report is produced”, and (iii) “integrated LITIS
with fuel efficient vehicle inspection standards established” was revised to “integrated LITIS with vehicle
inspection standards established”.

Revised Rationale
The TOC for Objective 2 under the revised targets is slightly different from the TOC for Objective 2 as
discussed above. The activities to: (i) provide capacity building and institutional strengthening of the RSD and
NRSC; (ii) acquire vehicles for the RSD and road safety equipment for the RSD and traffic police; (iii) deploy
the RADMS, (iv) support the implementation of LITIS would have as the outputs: (a) completed capacity
building and institutional strengthening, (b) availability of vehicles and road safety equipment, (c) functioning
RADMS, and (d) functioning integrated LITIS with vehicle inspection standards. In terms of outcomes, this
would lead to: (i) improved capacity of the RSD and NRSC; (ii) equipment and vehicles utilized on a routine
basis by the RSD and traffic police, (iii) improved systematic recording and reporting of road accidents, with at
least one annual report produced, and (iv) improved management and revenue collection procedures for
vehicle inspection and driver licensing services to enhance road safety management. The same two main
assumptions, except for the Traffic Bill approval, discussed under Original Objective 2 are applicable here.

Most of the causal links between activities, outputs, and outcomes were logical, and the intended outcomes
were monitorable. No capacity building and institutional strengthening activities for the NRSC were included
in the project during the restructurings.


                                                                                                   Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



Outputs

In addition to the delivered outputs which are discussed under Original Objective 2, the project produced the
following output:

      Eight mobile park home offices available for traffic controllers at eight locations in the districts with full
       furnishings, and equipment and connection to utilities (e.g., RADMS, eNATIS). A target for
       “Parkhomes (offices) to support Department of Traffic and Transportation's information system
       established (yes/no)” was introduced with the 2023 restructuring, and this target was achieved.

The following output was not delivered:

      No integrated LITIS with vehicle inspection standards established. The revised target of “integrated
       LITIS with vehicle inspection standards established” was not achieved. However, hardware was
       made available for eNATIS system, which is used for vehicle registration and the application of driving
       licenses. No target for the enhancement of the eNATIS was set in the Results Framework during
       the 2023 restructuring.

As discussed under Original Objective 2, the ICR provided no evidence on the completion of any capacity
building or institutional strengthening activities to the NRSC or trainings to the NRSC members. No separate
target for capacity building of the NRSC members was set in the results framework, but it was a clearly
spelt-out expectation in the road safety component description.

Outcomes

Please refer to the detailed discussion of outcomes under Original Objective 2.

The efficacy of Objective 2 under the revised targets is rated as Substantial. At the output level, the
project achieved the targets for (i) the establishment of the RADMS, (ii) the acquisition of road safety
equipment, (iii) the establishment of Parkhomes (offices) to support the Department of Traffic and
Transportation's information system, and (iv) exceeded the target of staff trained. At the outcome level, the
project achieved two of the three outcomes. The project fully achieved the targets of “road safety equipment
utilized on a routine basis by the RSD and traffic police” and of “streamlined road crash data collection using
RADMS and at least one annual report produced”. The project improved the eNATIS system for vehicle
registration and application of driving licenses, but due to the lack of evidence it is not clear if eNATIS helped
enhance the road safety management capacity, which the PAD (page 30) expected from the LITIS. It is also
plausible that the trainings have at least somewhat strengthened the road safety capacity of the trained staff.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.


                                                                                                      Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)




Rationale
Not applicable because this objective 3 became effective after the CERC activation on June 23, 2021.




Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The Objective 3 was to improve the Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible
Crisis or Emergency.

Revised Rationale
The evaluation of this Objective covers the time from the activation of the CERC on June 23, 2021 because
this Objective is directly linked to the CERC.

The TOC for Objective 3, as developed by the IEG for this validation, was that funds available with the
activation of the CERC would be quickly used to carry out activities to respond to an eligible crisis or disaster,
i.e., to reconstruct and rehabilitate roads and structures damaged by flooding (ICR, p. 15). This was expected
to lead to rapidly reconstructed and rehabilitated roads and structures as the main outputs, measured by the
kilometers of roads and number of bridges (Restructuring Paper of 2022, p. 6). In terms of outcomes, it was to
lead to a reduced period of inaccessible roads or road service disruption, indicating that the Recipient
improved its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency. This TOC is not
fully logical because the quick availability of funds is necessary but not sufficient for a prompt and effective
disaster response. The main assumptions were that (i) the activation of the CERC and reallocation of the
funds from other project components to the CERC would enable the GoL to act fast after the declaration of an
emergency in the country; (ii) procurement of works contracts would take place immediately after the
activation of CERC, and (iii) restoration and rehabilitation works would commence quickly and be completed
on time as per the contract schedules.

The PAD, restructuring paper, and the ICR did not include a TOC. While output indicators (number of
kilometers of roads and number of bridges rehabilitated) were introduced during the March 2022
restructuring, no targets were set, and the indicators were not monitored. Therefore, the IEG assesses the
achievement of Objective 3 Revision 1 based on the promptness and effectiveness of the response in
producing the desired results. Effective is defined here as successful in producing a desired or intended
result(s).

Outputs

The following outputs were delivered by the project:

      9 rehabilitated road sections and related structures (as per the Bank team’s response of November
       6th, while ICR, para 46 reports that 8 roads were completed), the completed design of the Ha Jimisi
       pedestrian and vehicle bridge, and the construction of this bridge. During the interview with the IEG,

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



       the Task Team mentioned that the Ha Jimisi bridge was constructed while the ICR indicated it was not
       completed by the closing date but confirmed the GoL’s commitment to complete this bridge with its
       own resources (ICR, p. 31, para 72). In the absence of monitoring data for these output indicators
       related to this objective, the ISR of June 2022 provided some guidance on what was expected to be
       achieved. It indicated that 11 activities were approved for the CERC: 10 road contracts and one bridge
       contract. This ISR also mentioned that (i) the bridge contract (not for the Ha Jimisi bridge but for the
       originally planned bridge) was eventually dropped upon the government request, and (ii) one of the
       road tenders never generated interest from bidders and funds were re-allocated to another bridge –
       Ha Jimisi. Hence, this would mean that 10 of the 11 planned activities were carried out. In the
       absence of monitoring data for the output indicators, the planned outputs are considered as
       partially achieved.

The Task Team clarified during the interview with the IEG that there were a number of other CERC-related
activities carried out since the January 2021 flooding until the activation of the CERC in June 2021, which
included an assessment of road infrastructure damages and the selection and prioritization exercise using the
vulnerability assessment tool. This tool was developed under the Trust Fund activity complementing this
project. These activities constitute a prerequisite to implement the emergency response.

Outcome

The readily available funds, the above listed outputs, and the way they were implemented contributed to the
Recipient's improved capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency as
follows:

      In terms of effectiveness, the availability of the CERC resources helped restore access for
       pedestrians and vehicles on the 9 roads and one pedestrian and vehicular bridge. However, the last
       ISR of August 2023 raised work quality issues in two road packages. Due to lack of monitoring data
       for the output indicators identified during the 2022 restructuring, the improved capacity to
       effectively respond to an emergency is considered as partially achieved.
      In terms of promptness, the CERC was activated 5 months after the eligible event in January 2021
       (ICR, para 47). Resources to finance the CERC activities were allocated to the CERC (Component 4)
       9 months later during the March 2022 restructuring. The open tendering for all CERC related
       packages, except the Ha Jimisi bridge, was launched in about 5 months after the flooding events, and
       all contracts were awarded within the following six months. According to the Bank team’s response of
       November 6, 2024, the emergency works commenced more than a year after the January 2021 floods
       – between February and October 2022. Subsequently, the road works were completed within 5-13
       months - between August 2022 and 2023. The ICR (para 47) explicitly referred to procurement and
       implementation delays. Hence, the improved capacity to respond promptly is considered as
       partially achieved.

The efficacy with which Objective 3 was achieved is rated as Modest mainly because of the difficulties to
measure it in the absence of adequate evidence. In terms of promptness of the response, a period of two and
half years to carry out mostly small road works seems realistic given the country’s capacity context. However,
it is not necessarily fast enough to carry out emergency road works to restore road connectivity after the
disaster.




                                                                                                Page 14 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)




                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy under the original targets is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings on
                            balance. This is because Objective 1 was mostly exceeded but had weaknesses in evidence and targets
                            and, hence, it was rated substantial, and Objective 2 was partially achieved and rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The overall efficacy under the revised targets is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings
                            because Objective 1 was exceeded but had weaknesses in evidence and targets and, hence, was rated
                            substantial, Objective 2 was almost achieved and rated substantial, and Objective 3 was partially achieved
                            and rated modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   At appraisal, the project carried out a cost benefit analysis for the construction of footbridges under Component
   1, amounting to 23 percent of the total project costs. The analysis showed an economic internal rate of return
   (EIRRs) of 31 percent and a net present value (NPV) of US$0.993 million, using a project life of 20 years with 5
   years of implementation and a 6 percent discount rate in the combined scenarios (20 percent increase in the
   capital costs and 20 percent decrease in the user benefits). The model adopted the 'consumer surplus' approach
   to estimate the project benefits that in this case included travel time savings and reduction in drowning
   accidents. The main assumptions included: (i) the cost of time to be US$0.2 per hour; (ii) the cost of an accident
   to be US$10,000, and (iii) an annual growth rate of the population to be 0.1 percent.




                                                                                                                           Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



During the March 2022 and June 2023 restructurings, the project neither carried out an economic or
alternative analysis for the activated CERC nor updated the economic analysis for Component 1.

At completion, the project carried out an economic analysis for the footbridges under Component 1, which
eventually represented 28 percent of the total project costs. The analysis adopted the same cost-benefit
methodology used at appraisal to estimate the NPV and EIRR. The main difference between the ex-ante and
ex-post analyses comes from a greater data availability at completion. The project delivered a slightly lower
EIRR than estimated at appraisal - 26 versus 31 percent, with the NPV of US$4.94 million vs US$0.993 million.
The lower EIRR at completion is explained by the actual lower number of beneficiaries compared to the more
ambitious assumption used in the ex-ante analysis.

The project did not carry out a cost benefit or alternative analysis to show that the project funds were used
efficiently for the CERC activities, accounting for 29.5 percent of the total project costs. An ex-ante cost benefit
analysis is generally not expected for the CERC. However, ex-post, the ICR could have made an attempt to
qualitatively show the costs and benefits of the emergency response or carried out a simple unit-rate analysis to
demonstrate that resources had been spent economically.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency

The project completed most of the activities with no cost increase and without an extension of the closing date
(the implementation period was six years). The Ha Jimisi Bridge in the CERC remained incomplete as of the
project's end date, and was eventually completed in August 2024 (Lesotho News Agency,
https://www.lena.gov.ls/jimisi-community-gets-bridge-promise/). The project experienced operational
inefficiencies, including inefficient contract management (e.g., delayed contract termination and retendering,
delayed payments to footbridge contractors (ICR, p. 31 para 71-72, and p. para 90), and delayed completion of
road works (e.g., delayed completion of at least four contracts under the CERC (ibid, para 72).

The COVID pandemic and the Ukraine war also contributed to delays in some of the project activities and price
increases in the construction materials because of disruptions in the construction materials supply. Due to the
complex implementation arrangements with the Planning Unit in the MoPWT being the main project
implementation unit, the RD, which was the de-facto implementing agency for most of the project activities but
not empowered with a decision-making authority, experienced delays in approval processes, which affected the
implementation of many activities.

Rating

The efficiency of project implementation is rated as Modest. While the project was completed within the
original implementation period of six years and the allocated budget despite the COVID Pandemic, the 2021
flooding and the Ukraine war, (i) it experienced operational inefficiencies and delays, (ii) the ex-post EIRR for
Component 1, despite being substantially above the economic viability threshold, is five points below the ex-
ante EIRR estimate, and (iii) the ICR and the Bank team did not provide any information to demonstrate that the
resources for the CERC were economically spent.


Efficiency Rating
Modest



                                                                                                      Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)




a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)         *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                  23.00
Appraisal                                                31.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable
                                                                                  28.00
ICR Estimate                                             26.00
                                                                                   Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project's overall outcome is rated as Moderately Satisfactory. The relevance of the PDOs to
government priorities and the World Bank strategies is rated as substantial. The overall efficacy of the
objectives under the original targets is rated as substantial (with disbursement at 61 percent at that time) and
the overall efficacy of the objectives under the revised targets is also rated as substantial. The project was
implemented partially efficiently mainly due to the lower than anticipated EIRR for component 1 and lack of
evidence for the efficient implementation of the CERC, which is accountable for 29.5 percent of the project
costs. Considering these ratings and weighting them by the share of disbursements before and after the revision
of the targets, the overall outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory, indicating minor shortcomings in the
project's achievements of its objectives and limited efficiency.

                                Original PDOs and targets                PDOs and targets revision 1
Relevance of objectives         Substantial
                                Substantial with moderate                Substantial with moderate
Efficacy
                                shortcomings                             shortcomings
Efficiency                      Modest
Numeric value of outcome rating 4                                        4
Disbursement (US$ Million)      11.14                                    7.17
Share of disbursement (%)       61                                       39
Weighted value                  2.4                                      1.6
Final overall outcome           4 - Moderately satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government ownership and commitment risk for the road safety agenda. The political ownership and
commitment to the road safety agenda remain risks at the conclusion of the project. The NRSC is
operationalized and meets annually, but it performs only a consultative/advisory role. The RSD, which is a
secretariate to the NRSC, does not feel empowered enough to implement the road safety agenda. The last
TTL said during the interview with IEG that a different institutional reform is needed to empower and

                                                                                                 Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



strengthen the RSD’s road safety management capacity rather than the NRSC institutional strengthening.
There is also a need for a political champion, who will help the GoL understand the adverse impacts of the
poor road safety on the country’s economy, not only on people’s life and health, and further implement the
needed institutional and systems reforms (e.g., LITIS, proper analysis of crash data and its use in decision-
making and planning) to improve road safety management capacity.

Government commitment risk for bridge maintenance. It is not clear if and how maintenance of the
project bridges will be arranged, which government agency is responsible for it, and if it has been agreed
with the RF that adequate financing will be provided for the bridge routine maintenance on an annual basis.
As these footbridges are constructed in the poor remote mountainous areas, there may be less of interest
from the contractors to engage in low-value maintenance contracts in remote areas. It is also not clear if the
community-based maintenance activities were implemented in those remote areas and if communities were
trained and prepared for executing routine maintenance of the project footbridges, especially in highlands.

Technical capacity risk for road maintenance. The RF seems to generate significant revenues, but it
spends only 50 percent of those annual revenues (ICR, para 6). The ICR indicates that the capacity of the
contractors is insufficient to utilize the entire maintenance budget allocated. Over the years this has led to
surplus of funds each year, which were carried over from year to year and increased the backlog of road
assets requiring rehabilitation due to premature deterioration, with poor areas having more poorly maintained
road assets and underfunded maintenance. Thus, there is a risk that the roads maintained and rehabilitated
under the project may not receive an adequate continued maintenance since their condition is better than
more than half of the road network in the country. It is encouraging to know that the project built the capacity
of several communities in providing routine maintenance on the roads. However, the MoPWT, RD and RF
are yet to be seen adopting an asset management approach through the implementation of the OPRC and
community-based maintenance on the country’s road network.

Exposure to natural disasters. The country is prone to severe weather events (e.g., flooding, landslide),
which could present a major threat to the infrastructure assets newly created in the mountainous areas under
Component 1 and the other assets, which were rehabilitated following the 2021 flooding under CERC. The
ICR did not discuss if adequate climate resilient features were built in these assets and if these assets were
assessed by independent engineers as adequate enough to withstand the impacts of the natural disasters.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank ensured that this project was prepared with consideration of lessons learnt from the previous
  transport engagements and other similar experiences in the world. It recognized the political commitment
  challenges to road safety improvement in the country. The Bank also recognized the need to support the
  technical capacity of the police, not only that of the RSD, to improve road safety management capacity.
  The Bank team emphasized the need for information systems (e.g., RADMS and LITIS) for accidents
  data collection to inform decision-making in road safety planning. It also saw the importance of vehicle
  registration and licensing system, which would enable revenue generation for road safety improvement.
  The Bank team also paid great attention to the gender, HIV/AIDS and GBV issues and integrated
  activities in the project design to address those issues in the project affected areas and increase safer
  mobility chances for women. The Bank team underscored the importance of incorporating a CERC in the

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



  project design given the country's climate vulnerability, which eventually allowed the activation of this
  component even before the formal first restructuring. The Bank paid adequate attention to the fiduciary
  and safeguards aspects during the preparation, and even triggered two safeguards policies on a
  precautionary basis.

  However, the Bank did not identify an adequate measure to mitigate the risk associated with road safety
  management capacity because the legal covenant related to the Traffic Bill approval was eventually
  cancelled during project implementation, and the NRSC capacity was not built and strengthened. In
  general, the Bank had an overambitious design of the road safety component for a context like Lesotho
  and in the absence of an obvious political champion for this agenda. While the inclusion of LITIS was
  necessary, it was also ambitious to carry out in the local context. In addition, the Bank did not provide
  adequate support to the Recipient to (i) ensure that the Borrower would have adequate safeguards
  capacity in place before the effectiveness of the project; (ii) ensure that all institutional strengthening
  activities were logically linked to the PDOs, (iii) convince the Recipient to set implementation
  arrangements, which would be more effective in coordinating between multiple stakeholder agencies and
  less undermining of the authority of the RD, the de-facto implementing agency, and (iv) ensure project
  readiness, besides the 19 footbridge packages, to start implementation immediately after the declaration
  of project effectiveness.

  At appraisal, the Bank also recognized the need for a long-term solution to ensure adequate
  maintenance arrangements for road projects (PAD, paras 9-10). However, it did not insist with the GoL
  on including an objective to strengthen the institutional capacity in asset management to ensure the long-
  term sustainability of the assets created and rehabilitated by the project.

  While most of the risks and mitigation measures were adequately identified, the Bank team should have
  rated the sector policies risks as high, especially the one related to the approval of the Traffic Bill and the
  operationalization of the NRSC because of the previous experience with lack of political commitment to
  road safety reforms.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team was pro-active in (i) triggering the CERC, (ii) helping the Recipient conduct assessment of
 damages and prioritize road sections for restoration following the January 2021 flooding, and (iii)
 conducting two restructurings when those were needed. The Bank also mobilized a trust fund (TF) grant to
 complement this project and build the client’s capacity in climate risk and vulnerability assessment for
 roads and develop a vulnerability assessment tool. This Bank-executed TA also helped raise awareness
 among GoL officials on their outdated road design standards and made the GoL commit to the review and
 update of their current design manual. The Bank also guided the client in the development and piloting of
 community-based road routine maintenance and output-based and performance-based contracting. The
 Bank team indicated to the IEG that the RD’s agreed to adopt the community-based routine maintenance
 approach, given the success observed during the piloting, and implement the three OPRC packages with
 its own funding.


                                                                                                       Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



 The Bank team provided adequate implementation support and guidance to the Recipient in building their
 safeguards management capacity of the RD, contractors, and communities that were engaged in works.
 The Bank team helped the Recipient ensure constant presence of environmental and social safeguards
 experts in the PIU and on the contractors' teams, and use of community liaison officers (CLOs) in
 safeguards monitoring on the ground on a daily basis under the supervision of the PIU’s environmental and
 social safeguards specialist. The model of CLOs involvement in safeguards monitoring proved to be so
 successful in effectively resolving safeguards issues that it was replicated by the Bank in the rest of the
 Bank-funded investment projects where applicable.

 During the restructurings the Bank team could have considered providing guidance to the Recipient on how
 to (i) better address some of the implementation issues (e.g., implementation arrangements for road safety
 and institutional strengthening activities, contract management) and (ii) improve the M&E implementation
 arrangements (e.g., recruitment of dedicated M&E expert, more effective monitoring of indicators, including
 CERC-related ones, and ensuring a better quality of evidence to demonstrate the project’s achievements).
 Too frequent changes of TTLs (i.e., four TTLs in 6 years; ICR, p. 31, para 73) "resulted in a lack of
 continuity, inconsistent guidance, and diminished institutional memory. These changes disrupted the
 cultivation of trust with stakeholders and beneficiaries, as each new TTL needed time to understand the
 context of the project and establish relationships". It was only during the second half of project
 implementation that the continuity in the Bank leadership helped the Recipient focus on issues and improve
 the project’s progress and performance. The last TTL's active presence and close follow-up with the
 implementing agencies enabled the Bank to be more efficient in helping the Recipient to respond to
 emerging needs and issues (e.g., termination of a non-performing contract, retendering of this contract,
 change of road safety activities during the second restructuring, reallocation of funds from not progressing
 road section to another bridge).

 The Quality of Supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory because of a number of moderate
 shortcomings as discussed above.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 According to the PAD (para 38), the RD, the Planning Unit, and other departments of the MoPWT would be
 responsible for the M&E of their respective components, as indicated in the results framework. The Project
 Coordinator in the Planning Unit of the MoPWT was assigned the responsibility for the preparation of
 project progress reports and their timely submission to the Bank in accordance with the agreed format.

 The results framework included 18 indicators. The indicators to assess the achievements of the efficacy of
 Objectives 1 and 2 were adequate. The PAD had clear definitions for descriptive indicators, which was

                                                                                                 Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



 useful for the assessment of achievements. The activities, outputs and outcomes were not always clearly
 linked in the TOC. Several indicators had weaknesses. Some indicators were not helpful to assess the
 achievement of the PDOs (e.g. National Transport Master Plan submitted to the Cabinet; number of direct
 local jobs created in construction of footbridges), while another indicator was not linked to any specific
 project activity (e.g., budget allocation to the NRSC). There were no indicators to assess Objective 3
 (CERC related objective). Some indicators had unrealistic targets (e.g., 100 percent of surveyed
 beneficiaries satisfied with the quality of footbridges; integrated LITIS with fuel efficient vehicle inspection
 standards established). The PAD lacked a clear description of methodologies to collect and evaluate the
 data and information.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 80) highlights lack of coordination among the implementing agencies as a major challenge
  for M&E implementation because of multiple players involved in M&E data collection and reporting. This
  resulted in the PIU coordinator’s role becoming redundant, which had a detrimental impact on both the
  quality and the timeliness of the reporting. After considerable delays in the compilation of data from all
  implementing agencies, the PIU finally submitted its first Results Framework indicator report in November
  2020. The project could have benefited either from a dedicated M&E specialist/firm in charge of (i) data
  collection, (ii) preparing of the M&E reports, and (iii) advising the PIU on the progress towards the
  achievement of all indicators and any obstacles in their progress. Despite the introduction of CERC-
  related intermediate indicators (but without targets) during the 2022 restructuring, those indicators were
  never reported in the Bank’s documents. It is also not clear if the PIU ever reported on those to the Bank.
  Both restructurings missed the opportunity to introduce adequate changes to the PDO indicators to better
  capture outcomes, especially the ones contributing to Objective 3.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR concludes that M&E system utilization was compromised by the poor coordination of data
  collection, inadequate reporting, and consistent delays in project implementation. It is not clear if and
  how the M&E data was ever utilized by the Bank or PIU to assess and improve the project performance
  or inform any changes in the project components/activities during the restructurings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Safeguards Policies and risks. The project was classified as Category B for the environmental
   assessment purpose. The following safeguards policies were triggered: Environmental Assessment OP/BP
   4.01, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, Involuntary Resettlement
   OP/BP 4.12. Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 and Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 were triggered out
   of precautionary reasons. The main safeguards risks related to the construction of footbridges within the

                                                                                                       Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



  existing alignments in Component 1, anticipated at appraisal, included vegetation clearing, dust and noise
  generation, soil erosion from borrow pits, construction-related injuries, and waste management issues.
  During the implementation, the scope of environmental safeguards activities was extended to include the
  CERC and community-based micro-enterprises for road maintenance.

  In terms of safeguards management, CLOs from the PIU under the direct supervision of the
  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist (ESSS) were in charge of environmental compliance
  monitoring and conducting daily inspections. The ESSS conducted weekly, monthly, and quarterly regular
  and ad hoc inspections to monitor contractors' compliance. The Bank team conducted biannual inspections
  to assess progress in safeguards performance.

  Environmental Safeguards. An environment and social framework (ESMF) was prepared by the Borrower,
  consulted upon, and approved by the World Bank, and disclosed in Lesotho on June 22, 2017, and on the
  Bank's external website on June 28, 2017, in line with OP/BP 4.01. An ESMP for the construction of the 19
  pedestrian footbridges was prepared by the Borrower, consulted upon and approved by the World Bank,
  and disclosed in Lesotho on July 27, 2017, and on the Bank's external website on July 31, 2017. The ESMF
  covered the remaining 16 footbridges, which were yet to be identified and selected for the project support.

  In terms of environmental safeguards implementation, the issues experienced during the initial stages
  of project implementation included delays in the provision of personal protective equipment and waste
  management practices, specifically disposal of waste generated at project sites. These issues were
  eventually rectified with close follow-up of the Bank safeguards team. The ICR also indicates that
  occupational health and safety incidents were reported by the PIU and RD in line with the requirements of
  the Bank Environmental and Social Incident Response Toolkit.

  Social Safeguards. Although no displacement or resettlement impacts were anticipated at the known
  footbridge construction sites at the preparation stage, it was recognized that civil works could necessitate
  minor land acquisitions at the locations of footbridges to be yet identified. Hence, a Resettlement Policy
  Framework was prepared, in addition to the ESMF, during project preparation as the locations for 19
  footbridges were not known during preparation. It was approved by the World Bank on May 11, 2017, and
  disclosed in Lesotho on June 22, 2017, and on the World Bank’s external website on June 28, 2017.

  In terms of social safeguards implementation, there was no resettlement recorded at any construction
  site during the implementation period. A fully functional Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was
  established at different levels, as anticipated at the preparation stage. The GRM was facilitated through
  multiple uptake channels including web-based at the ministry and local community levels, suggestion boxes
  installed at each construction site, and reporting directly to CLOs. The CLOs had been instrumental in
  receiving and resolving minor complaints and reporting grievances. Local authorities also played a critical
  role in receiving and resolving issues in collaboration with the CLOs and the project’s ESSS. The ICR
  reports that only three complaints related to irregular payments of workers were received and eventually
  resolved.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management. According to the ICR, the project complied with its financial management
  covenants throughout the project implementation. Interims financial reports and audit reports were

                                                                                                  Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



   submitted on time and found acceptable to the Bank. No outstanding financial management issues were
   highlighted in the ICR.

   Procurement and Contract Management. The project faced major procurement and contract
   management issues. Poor coordination between the PIU, which was in the Planning Unit of the MoPWT,
   and the implementing agencies (RD, RSD, Police) often affected the decision-making process, which in
   turn affected procurement or contract management in many instances. Procurement plans were often
   cancelled in STEP because of the inconsistent procurement strategy and inadequate procurement
   planning by the PIU in coordination with the other implementing agencies. Procurement-related complaints
   were not handled in line with best practices, which in turn affected the project implementation. The PIU
   was unable to adequately manage non-performing contractors. In one case, the contract was terminated
   only after the World Bank's intervention and more than one year of the contractor's non-performance.
   Delayed payment to contractors was a recurrent issue, which affected the contractors' performance and
   was underscored by the MTR. The Bank consistently advocated for the Borrower to expediate its
   procurement activities, strengthen the monitoring of contract implementation and arrange timely payments
   to contractors.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   No unintended impacts were noted.



d. Other
   The project conducted 69 GBV and HIV/AIDS awareness-raising campaigns as opposed to the 10 planned
   ones in the project affected areas. While the effectiveness of these awareness campaigns was not
   assessed by the project, it was important that the project gave significant attention to these important social
   issues because Lesotho has the second highest HIV/AIDS prevalence rate in the world and about 85
   percent of women experienced a form of GBV at least once in their lifetime.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                    Due to shortcomings in efficacy
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    and efficiency.
                                 Moderately
Bank Performance                                          Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                   Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Modest


12. Lessons


                                                                                                      Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)




The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR, with additions by the IEG
after discussions with the Bank team:

If a CERC is incorporated in the project design in a country with high risk of natural
disasters, it enables the Recipient to respond faster in the affected areas. The incorporation of
the CERC in this project allowed its activation in less than six months (in June 2021) after the
January 2021 flooding and before the approval of a formal restructuring which took place in March
2022. That enabled the government to promptly start the needed preparatory activities prior to the
CERC activation and launch the tenders right after the CERC activation. It eventually (and in this
case with implementation delays) helped the Recipient rehabilitate the damaged infrastructure and
restore the transport connectivity for the affected communities before the project closing date and
without requesting an additional financing.

When local communities, in addition to on-site experts, are actively engaged in overseeing
the safeguards implementation, it allows for proactive management of environmental and
social safeguards. The Recipient ensured consistent safeguards staffing on the contractors' and
the PIU’s sides. The RD provided regular safeguards trainings to raise awareness of contractors,
community-based micro-enterprises for road maintenance, and government staff members about
safeguards requirements and relevant mitigation measures. All contractors were mandated to have
CLOs to oversee compliance on the respective packages. However, it was active involvement of
local communities besides the presence of the safeguards experts on the site that helped timely
identify emerging safeguards implementation issues and promptly addressing them.

If new interventions are included in the project during a restructuring without adequately
reflecting this change in the M&E system, this M&E system may become inadequate to
assess the impact of the new interventions and their contribution to the achievement of the
relevant objective. The 2022 restructuring reallocated the funds from Component 1 to the CERC.
Despite the introduction of the two output indicators during that restructuring, no specific targets
were set, no outcome indicators were devised, and no monitoring of the output indicators took place
throughout the implementation. Hence, the impact of those activities to achieve the relevant
objective could not be objectively assessed.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is largely well-written. It provides a detailed overview of the project with a clear summary of changes
introduced during the first and second restructurings. The TOC is relatively well reconstructed, but it includes
an additional outcome of strengthened institutional capacity in the transport sector, which is not part of the
PDOs. The ICR is candid in explaining deficiencies of the results framework, factors affecting implementation



                                                                                                    Page 24 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LS-Transport Infrastructure & Connectivi (P155229)



and achievements of the outcomes, and accomplishments and weaknesses of the Bank's performance. It
shares clear and useful lessons, which were drawn on the evidence outlined in the ICR.

The ICR has a few major shortcomings. The quality of evidence used in the assessment of the efficacy of the
objectives was not always robust (e.g., time reduction due to the footbridges). The ICR did not attempt to fill in
gaps related to the lack of targets for the assessment of the efficacy of Objective 3. The ICR did not entirely
follow the ICR Guidelines, for instance, by not applying a split rating. The ICR did not include any analysis to
show the resources were spent economically (e.g., unit rate, cost effectiveness analysis, or qualitative analysis
of cost and benefits) for the CERC activities, which accounted for the largest share of the project costs (29.5
percent). Such an analysis would have boosted the efficiency assessment.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                     Page 25 of 25
