     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024304

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P144637                                    Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cameroon                                   Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-57180,IDA-62240,IDA-D2990              30-Nov-2019                                         99,018,032.54

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-Sep-2015                                30-Jun-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           108,601,700.72                                               0.00

 Actual                                        99,039,267.30                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Katharina Ferl             Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P164803_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P164803                                    CDPSP Response to Forced Displacement ( P164803 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 01-May-2018

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                              0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Appraisal Document (PAD) (p.viii) and the Financing Agreement of February 3, 2016, (p. 5)
   the objective of the project was “to strengthen local public finance management and participatory
   development processes in communes for the delivery of quality and sustainable social and economic
   infrastructure".

   The objective will be parsed as follows:

          i. to strengthen local public finance management in communes for the delivery of quality and sustainable
            social and economic infrastructure;
        ii. to strengthen local participatory development processes in communes for the delivery of quality and
             sustainable social and economic infrastructure;
        iii. the delivery of quality and sustainable social and economic infrastructure.

   This project was the third phase of the Programme National de Developpement Participatif (Community
   Development Program) (PNDP).

   In May 2018, the project received Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$ 8.0 million through the
   IDA18 Refugee Sub-Window (RSW) to support local development and participatory development processes
   in local councils hosting refugees to improve access to quality and sustainable socioeconomic infrastructure
   and services.

   Even though the project received AF, a split rating will not be conducted since the AF financed additional
   activities focusing on refugees. Those activities were not included in the original project.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



  Date of Board Approval
  29-Sep-2015

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project included three components (stating only IDA financing):

   Component A: Local development support (appraisal estimate US$46.77 million, AF US$34.42
   million, actual US$48.90 million): This component included two sub-components:

   Sub-component A.1: Local Development Investments for Communes: This sub-component was to finance
   implementation of a program of activities to support local development through:

        a. Provision of CDP-subproject grants to participating communes in six regions (Center, South, West,
           North-West, South-West, Littoral) to finance: i) social infrastructure subprojects in health, education,
           water and sanitation; and (ii) economic infrastructure subprojects including the construction or
           rehabilitation of rural markets, community storage facilities, rural roads, small bridges, culverts, and
           small irrigation schemes, all as identified in the respective CDP and Annual Investment Plan (AIP).
        b. Provision of CDP preparation grants for the preparation of CDPs and CDP-related activities by
           additional communes (31 additional communes of Cameroon). Multidisciplinary teams consisting of
           representatives of the decentralized units of technical ministries or LSPs were to assist communes
           to prepare/update CDPs through a participatory approach.

   Under the AF, the project was to continue to support performance-based financing (Performance Financing
   Window) to foster good governance and transparency. The 2017 competitive mechanism were to be
   repeated annually and reward the best-managed local councils in each region of Cameroon with an
   additional allocation of CFAF 50 million to finance subprojects. Moreover, a reward for the best annual
   progress of CFAF 25 million was to be allocated to one local council in each region.

   Sub-component A.2: Targeted Investments for the Poorest and Vulnerable Populations in the Adamaoua,
   North, Far North and Eastern regions: This sub-component was to finance Poor and Vulnerable Investment
   Support Grants to strengthen the level and quality of socio-economic infrastructure for poor and vulnerable
   populations in the Adamaoua, North, Far North and Eastern regions, which included areas with refugees
   from the Central African Republic and from Nigeria. These grants were to finance: i) social infrastructure
   including health, education, water and sanitation; and ii) economic or productive investments such as the
   construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, communities’ storage facilities, rural roads, small bridges,
   culverts, and small-scale irrigation schemes.

   The AF was to finance: i) social infrastructure, including health, education, water and sanitation; and ii)
   economic or productive investments, such as the construction/rehabilitation of rural markets, communities’
   storage facilities, rural roads, small bridges, culverts, small-scale irrigation schemes, and small
   electrification projects. Also, under the AF, the project was to create a special financing window—Refugee
   Financing Window—for the local councils hosting refugees. The project was to work in all local councils
   hosting refugees in the Far North, North, Adamawa, and East regions and the allocation will be made on a
   pro-rata basis.


                                                                                                      Page 3 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



Component B: Support to the decentralization process (appraisal estimate US$14.02 million, AF
US$5.73 million, actual US$12.08 million): This component included three sub-components:

Sub-component B.1: Institutional support to the decentralization process: This sub-component was to
finance institutional support to the GOC’s institutions responsible for the design and implementation of the
decentralization process through: a) provision of technical assistance and implementation of studies in
support of MINATD in connection with the drafting of implementing decrees under the Decentralization
Laws and the finalization of the Decentralization Charter; b) organization of workshops and dissemination of
the Decentralization Laws and corresponding implementing decrees; c) Provision of consultant services and
acquisition of small cartographic equipment required for the mapping of communes; (d) organization of
study tours on decentralization and local development for the technical secretariat of the Inter-Ministerial
Committee on Local Services, the National Council for Decentralization and the Mayors’ Association; and
development and deployment by MINATD and MINFI of a financial management and accounting software
for communes.

Sub-component B.2: Capacity Building: This subcomponent was to finance:

a. Strengthening the operational capacities of communes: Capacity building activities were to include: a)
promotion of nationwide competitions for local governments on best practices for enhancing good
governance and transparency; b) acquisition of computer equipment for communes that did not benefit in
the second phase; c) building capacity of the communal councils in monitoring environmental and social
impact of subprojects; d) enhancing social accountability of communes and civil society and citizens'
engagement, with regards to annual budget planning and execution; e) updating and disseminating
standard technical designs for constructing basic socioeconomic infrastructure; and f) defining and
supporting the communes in the implementation of a sustainable mechanism for operations and
maintenance (O&M) of infrastructure with clear responsibilities and clear financing sources for O&M
activities.

b. Capacity building for local stakeholders: This activity was to strengthen and enhance the capacity of local
stakeholders that support the decentralization process namely: local elected officials (parliament, municipal
councils), communal staff, and multidisciplinary teams of sectoral ministries, administrative authorities,
technical service providers and local services providers.

Sub-component B.3: Local Public Financial Management System: This subcomponent was to finance the
following activities:

    a. Scaling up of the implementation of local Integrated Financial Management Information System
       (IFMIS) (SIMBA) at communes (31) and remaining rural communes (276);
    b. Financing capacity building sessions for auditors at the “Chambre des comptes” to gain the required
       skills to understand SIMBA and to audit the communes’ accounts;
    c. Improving transparency by distributing the already developed ‘citizen budget’ template that simplifies
       budget information.

Component C: Coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation and communication
(appraisal estimate US$9.22 million, AF US$7.85 million, actual US$13.51 million): This component
was to finance project coordination, administrative, technical, and financial management of the project,
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and communication and dissemination activities.



                                                                                                 Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The project was estimated to cost US$133.0 million. According to the World Bank team
   (December 11, 2024), the actual cost was US$ 94.3million. The World Bank team also stated that they had
   multiple exchanges with the PIU to clarify the amounts actually disbursed by component. The team
   was never able to fully reconcile the amounts the PIU reported by component, with the total amounts
   recorded in the portal. The World Bank team stated that the discrepancy may be due to exchange rate
   fluctuations.

   Financing: The project was to be financed by an IDA credit in the amount of US$70.0 million (of which
   US$68.78 million disbursed). The project received Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$40.0
   million (of which US$27.0 million disbursed), and US$8.0 million (of which US$3.19 million disbursed).

   Borrower Contribution: The Borrower was to contribute US$56.0 million, and the beneficiaries were to
   contribute US$7.0 million. According to the World Bank team (December 11, 2024) actual contributions
   were US$17.16 million. The counterpart financing did not materialize as originally stated by the government.

   Dates:

   The project was restructured three times:

         September 29, 2015, the project was restructured to: i) receive Additional Financing in the amount of
          US$48.0 million; ii) revise the Results Framework to drop three PDO indicators and add two new
          intermediate outcome indicators: a) Village Development Committee of host villages with at least
          one refugee represented in the committee/bureau, and b) percentage of communes with at least 30
          percent [of] villages having implemented endogenous solutions. In addition, six intermediate
          outcome indicators were dropped, and the targets of nine intermediate outcome indicators were
          revised upward to reflect progress made at the time of the AF (which ended up being incorrect due
          to inaccurate reporting); and iii) extend the closing date by 31 months from November 30, 2019, to
          June 30, 2022.
         On June 24, 2022, the project was restructured to: i) reduce the financing by US$9.4 million due to a
          low disbursement rate (reducing the World Bank financing to US$108.6 million).
         On February 15, 2024, the project was restructured to: i) reallocate financing between funding
          categories due to pending invoices for payments to service providers, which were not processed due
          to a lack of financial resource; ii) to retroactively extend the closing date from June, 30 2022, to June
          30, 2024 to allow the PMU to make payments to service providers and other stakeholders who had
          fulfilled their commitments.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



Country and sector context. According to the PAD (para. 2) at the time of project appraisal, poverty level
in Cameroon had been around 40 percent and the country suffered from significant regional disparities. In
the Far North and East regions, the incidence of chronic poverty was 67 and 52.6 percent respectively,
while it was between 0 and 10 percent in urban areas. These areas had also been affected by an influx of
refugees from neighboring countries, putting a further strain on already limited resources. Despite some
progress, Cameroon was not likely to meet any of the Millennium Development Goals.

According to the PAD (para. 3) the government was addressing rural poverty and local development
primarily through decentralized provision of social services and infrastructure. Decentralization efforts
focused on improving local service delivery and accountability, generating more equitable distribution of
resources aiming to reduce regional tension, facilitating a more efficient use of natural resources, and
promoting more effective provision of services for the most vulnerable and marginalized groups.

In 2004, the government, in collaboration with the World Bank and other development partners, launched
the Community Development Program (Programme National de Développement Participatif, PNDP). The
objective was to reduce poverty and promote sustainable rural development by strengthening local
governance and empowering communities in rural areas, including marginalized groups. There had been
already two phases (phase 1 from 2004 to 2009 and phase 2 from 2009-2013). In August 2013, the
government requested the World Bank’s assistance in funding the third phase of the PNDP program to
develop management committees and maintenance funds that were to ensure greater sustainability and
operation of infrastructure. Furthermore, governance remained an important challenge for the promotion of
local development since the transfer of responsibilities and resources to municipality level had not yet been
achieved.

Alignment with the Government Strategy. The objective of the project supported Cameroon’s Vision
2035 which aims to decentralize its administration with good infrastructure and access to basic and quality
social services for all. Furthermore, the objective was in line with the country’s National Development
Strategy 2020-2035 which operationalizes Vision 2035 by various activities such as expanding access to
drinking water and sanitation, expanding access to primary education for all school-aged children as well as
deepening and completing the decentralization process and strengthening local governance.

Alignment with the World Bank Strategy. The objective of the project was in line with the 2022 World
Bank updated Systematic Country Diagnostic which identified the ongoing decentralization process as an
opportunity to address the widening regional disparities by settling frameworks or effective regions,
improving public expenditure management, building a more inclusive society through various areas such as
improved service delivery, health care, water and sanitation as well as basic education.

The objective of the project was pitched at the outcome level to address a critical development problem.
Overall, the relevance of the objective was High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To strengthen local public finance management for the delivery of quality and sustainable social and
               economic infrastructure.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as providing local
               governments and other stakeholders with IT and other equipment, training and human resources were to
               result in several outputs. These outputs were to include an integrated financial management system (SIM-ba)
               being installed, capacity for local governments in using Audit Bench on SIM_ba being built, simplified budget
               templates being developed, studies to support the implementation of the decentralization law being
               supported, as well as study tours, exchange visits on decentralization aspects for national and local level
               stakeholders being organized. These outputs were to result in the outcome of local public finance
               management being strengthened.

               The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.

               The project’s Results Framework did not include any output level indicator under this objective.

               Outputs reported in the ICR that were not included in the Results Framework and hence did not have
               target values:

                     31 urban communes and 276 rural communes installed financial management information system
                        SIM_ba.
                       25 communes were staffed with a Communal Financial Officer (CFO), financed by the project for a
                        two-year period on a sliding scale.
                       183 communes were provided with IT equipment.
                       286 communes were provided with power equipment.
                       Two studies were conducted (“Diagnostic of the Impacts of the Community Development Program
                        Among Local Stakeholders” and “Study on the Modalities of Institutionalization and Sustainability of
                        the Main Achievements of the Community Development Program”).

               Outcomes:

                     341 Communes improved their scores in the performance-based financing window, which had three
                        editions from 2017 to 2019. The average scores of communes increased from 33 percent in 2017 to
                        46 percent in 2019 exceeding the target of 35%. The performance-based window rewarded the best-
                        managed commune in each region with an additional CFA Franc 50 million (approx. US$79,300) and
                        rewarded the commune with the best annual progress in each region (compared to the previous year)
                        with an additional CFA Franc 25 million (approx. US$39,700). The evaluation criteria comprised
                        budgeting and financial management, good governance and transparency, and ownership of project-
                        financed activities. According to the ICR (para. 46) project records indicated that all 360 communes
                        uploaded their 2022 budgets to SIM_ba, indicating that they continued to use this system. The target
                        of 360 communes with a public information and citizen control mechanism on service delivery (citizen
                        scorecards) was achieved.

                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




      The share of communal projects included in the Public Investment Budget issued by the Ministry of
       Finance that were derived from Community Development Plans increased from 51% in 2016 to 85% in
       2021, exceeding the original target of 50% and the revised target of 70%.

Even though the project exceeded the outcome targets, there were no adequate indicators or targets for the
outputs. Moreover, according to the ICR (para. 47), only 187 communes (51.9%) submitted the 2020 financial
accounts to the Audit Bench. Also, CDPs mostly focused on socioeconomic needs and priority investments
and lacked an analysis of communes ‘potential for revenue generation'. Furthermore, only 149 communes
were trained and only 46 communes had updated their data in the latest version of the software program. The
ICR also notes that the methodology used for developing or updating CDPs was the same developed during
the first phase of the project; it was not updated to reflect the new government orientation of program-based
budgeting. The PIU and LSPs also had a greater role in the management than envisaged in project design,
thus limiting communes’ capacity building in this regard.

The project did not measure any outputs delivered under this objective in its Results Framework making an
assessment of project achievements at the output level not possible. The project achieved two of the three
outcome targets, and it is plausible that the improvements in Communes' performance based financing
window and the improved percentage of communal projects derived from Community Development Plans.
Therefore, the overall achievement of this objective is rated Substantial with shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen participatory development processes in communes for the delivery of quality and sustainable
social and economic infrastructure

Rationale
Theory of Change: The project’s theory of change stated that project activities/inputs such as providing
grants for preparing communal development plans (CDP) and associated activities were to result in several
outputs. These outputs were to include CDPs, and annual investment plans of local governments being
prepared and reflecting the citizen’s needs and priorities. These outputs were to result in the outcome of
strengthened participatory development processes in the communes.

The theory of change was sound and did not have any logical gaps.

Outputs:

      The project supported the preparation of CDPs in 20 of the targeted 31 urban communes that had not
       been covered in previous phases, and the updating of CDPs in 102 rural communes, 40 of which (i.e.,
       39 percent) were in the four vulnerable regions.
      96.47% of grievances registered related to delivery of project benefits that were addressed, exceeding
       the original target of 80% and the revised target of 90%.


                                                                                                Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



These additional outputs were reported in the ICR but was not included in the Results Framework and
hence lacked target values:

      24 communes were staffed with a Communal Development Agent for a two-year period on a sliding
       scale.
      36 communes were staffed with a Communal Community Engagement Officer for a two-year period
       on a sliding scale.
      38 communes were equipped with means of transportation (motorbikes) to more easily access
       communities.

Outcomes:

      7.16% of Village Development Committees (VDCs) comprised representatives of both host
       communities and refugees, who participated in the identification of the village’s problems and
       constraints, and its assets and development potential. This was negligible achievement compared to
       the target of 95% of village development committees of host villages including at least one refugees.

Given the significant shortcomings in achievement of the outputs and outcomes, and the lack of relevant
outcome indicators, the achievement of this objective is rated Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Delivery of quality and sustainable social and economic infrastructure.

Rationale
The project’s theory of change assumed that by achieving the first two objectives, communes would be able
to deliver quality and sustainable social and economic infrastructure.

Outputs:

      64.7% subprojects implemented the required environmental and social risk mitigation measures and
       were functional, not achieving the target of 100% of subprojects.
      Approximately 797 improved community water points were constructed or rehabilitated, not achieving
       the original target of 3,275 water points or the revised target of 4,519 water points.
      Approximately 117.58 kilometers of rural roads were rehabilitated, not achieving the original target of
       770 kilometers or the revised target of 1,063 kilometers.
      Approximately 1,1014 classrooms were built or rehabilitated, not achieving the original target of 1.830
       classrooms or the revised target of 2,515 classrooms.
      76 health facilities were constructed, renovated or equipped, achieving the original target of 76 health
       facilities but not the revised target of 211 health facilities.


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




      99 rural markers benefitted from project financing, exceeding the original target of 18 markets, and
         achieving the revised target of 97 markets.
        33 community storage facilities benefitted from project financing, not achieving the original target of 52
         community storage facilities nor the revised target of 97 community storage facilities.
        256 communities benefitted from subproject grants, not achieving the original target of 360
         communes.
        Communes did not put in place a citizen scorecard mechanism. The original target of 160 communes
         and the revised target of 360 communes with public information and citizen control mechanism on
         service delivery was not achieved.
        The project did not survey project beneficiaries as originally planned but project stakeholders.
         Therefore, the indicator to measure beneficiaries perception of project investments reflecting their
         needs was not appropriately measured. Furthermore, the survey did not disaggregate results by
         gender as stated in the Results Framework.

Outcomes:

The ICR (p. 35) estimated that the project benefitted 2,961,000 beneficiaries based on the size of the villages
where project investments were made.

While number of project beneficiaries is a corporate required outcome indicator, it is not sufficient on its own
to measure project outcomes as it does not provide any information as to what these beneficiaries have
benefited from.

Outputs that contributed to both objectives:

      Project records indicated that 25,273 individuals benefitted from trainings. However, this value was
       inflated as it did not discount individuals who benefitted from more than one training. Therefore, it is
       not clear to what extent the original targets of 3,520 beneficiaries and the revised target of 4,200
       beneficiaries being trained were achieved.
      Endogenous solutions were implemented in 34.56% of communes. Endogenous solutions included
       both physical works (e.g., cleaning of gutters; rehabilitation and/or maintenance of roads, bridges,
       farm tracks, or water supply points; construction of latrines; establishment of community pharmacies;
       creation of community composting facilities; allocation of farmland to youth or women’s groups;
       reforestation initiatives; etc.), and other types of activities (e.g., identification of community members
       who lacked identity cards or of school-age children who lacked birth certificates; awareness raising
       among women about the risks of home births and the importance of prenatal visits). The target of 50%
       of communes with at least 30% villages having implemented endogenous solutions was not achieved.

While the project managed to deliver on some of the expected outputs, it did not achieve most of the targets
for these outputs. It is also not clear to what extent these outputs would be sustainable since the project did
not conduct an impact assessment or beneficiary survey. The Results Framework lacked relevant indicators
at outcome level, so no project results at outcome level beyond number of beneficiaries were measured or
reported. The achievement of this objective is thus rated Modest.



Rating

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first Objective was rated Substantial with shortcomings as two of the three outcome
                            targets were achieved. The second and third Objectives were rated Modest given the lack of evidence at
                            outcome level as well as low achievement all objectives was Modest given the limited achievement as well as
                            lack of evidence on the outcome level. The overall efficacy rating is thus Modest for lack of evidence and low
                            achievement at outcome level.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                   Insufficient evidence


   5. Efficiency
   Economic efficiency:

   During project preparation no cost-benefit analysis was conducted due to the project’s demand driven nature of
   investment activities. Since the project did not collect any data on project benefits, the ICR did not conduct a
   cost-benefit analysis either. Instead, the ICR conducted a cost-efficiency analysis which compared the cost of
   the most common classroom type of infrastructure built by the project. The analysis only took into account the
   subprojects that built one bloc of two to three classrooms to allow for a better comparison. The average building
   cost was compared among the regions. The West and Littoral regions deviated most from the reference prices,
   with investments being on average 32-34 percent more expensive. In the remote North and North regions, costs
   were about six to nine percent lower. Also, the comparison showed that building three classrooms was the most
   cost-efficient.

   However, the analysis only compared construction prices and did not take quality of the construction into
   account.

   Operational efficiency:

   The project experienced several implementation delays due to Financial Management and Procurement related
   bottlenecks. Also, according to the ICR (para. 58) despite the project using standard technical designs for the
   most common types of infrastructure, detailed feasibility studies were conducted for 3,276 infrastructure
   subprojects for a total of about US$1.4 million. Also, a total of US$30.19 million of the total AF of US$43.19
   million remained undisbursed, all indicative of possible operational inefficiency.

   Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest due to weak evidence of economic efficiency, long
   implementation delays and a large amount of undisbursed funds, both the latter indicative of operational
   inefficiency.



                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the objective was High. Efficacy and Efficiency were both Modest. This gives an overall outcome
rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project’s risks to development outcomes can be classified into the following categories:

Technical capacity risk: According to the ICR (para. 99) there is a risk that the capacity in local public
finance management will not be sustained since 35 CFO positions were empty when the project closed.
Furthermore, CFOs were trained in the use of the FM system that was implemented under the project. The
sustainability of the use of this system will depend on whether the trained CFOs will stay in their positions.
Also, fewer communes had been submitting their accounts to the Audit Bench which might indicate that
improvements in local public management might not be sustainable in all communes.

Furthermore, according to the ICR (para. 100) there is a risk that the participatory development process for
preparing CDPs will not be continued in all communes to the same extent. Even though there are legal
requirements in place that communes need to prepare and control their budgets through a
participatory approach, this might not be operationalized due to communes’ varying capacities in being able
to lead the preparation of CDPs.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



Political risk: According to the ICR (para. 101) there is a risk that the infrastructure built under the project
might not be utilized as expected. Since there was no coordination among the projects financed by the
IDA18RSW, it is uncertain whether the schools built will be staffed by the next school year. Furthermore,
since the project did not conduct a technical audit on the quality of the infrastructure built, it is not clear how
technically sound and climate resilient the infrastructure is and how long it will last.

Financial risk: There is a risk that the communes will not be able to finance Operation & Maintenance of the
infrastructure built under the project, putting the sustainability of these assets at risk. The project did prepare
an exit strategy, to ensure that the communes would continue to receive technical and financial support to
continue managing local public finances as well as infrastructure after project closure, but the exit strategy
was not endorsed by the government due to lack of political commitment. . Furthermore, according to the
World Bank team (December 11, 2024) the lack of government funding for this project did not only hinder the
effective implementation of the project but also raised concerns about the government’s dedication to
fulfilling its obligations in support of vital development initiatives.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was the third in a row of similar projects in this sector in Cameroon. According to the PAD
  (para. 30) the project built on lessons learned from the first two phases of the program and other World
  Bank projects in this area. These lessons learned included: i) Using different tools such as mitigated by
  the GRM, the citizen scorecard mechanism, participatory monitoring, and periodic detailed technical and
  financial audits can improve local governance and transparency to prevent corruption; and ii) CDPs
  should serve as important tools in budget and prioritization processes, reinforcing the bottom-up
  approach from communities (villages or village clusters) to the communes to ensure the consistency with
  the decentralization law.

  The ICR (para. 93) stated that the World Bank team cooperated with a variety of stakeholders such as
  government agencies and other development partners as well as civil society and non-governmental
  organizations during project preparation to ensure everybody’s buy-in.

  According to the PAD (para.43) the World Bank team identified relevant risks to project implementation
  and rated the risk of institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability as High and the political
  and governance, the technical design of project or program, the fiduciary and the other (security) risks as
  Substantial. Mitigation measures included engaging in a transparent dialogue with stakeholders regarding
  the allocation of resources, developing an operation manual for communes that include the quality norms,
  such as region-specific unit costs for each type of investments, investing in service delivery and citizens’
  participation at the local level, as well as building capacity in critical areas such as Fiduciary and M&E.
  Mitigation measures were not adequate resulting in several issues including in procurement and financial
  management.

  The project design had several shortcomings such as not sufficiently focusing on building and assessing
  communities’ capacity even though the goal was to transfer the SOP local development responsibilities to
  the communes by the end of project implementation but continued with LSPs being responsible for the
  preparation of LDPs. Furthermore, the project’s Results Framework did not measure the economic

                                                                                                         Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



  benefits of project investments included a very limited amount of output and outcome indicators. making it
  challenging to measure and demonstrate relevant project results. Despite these shortcomings, Quality at
  Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (para. 95) the World Bank team conducted a total of 15 supervision missions (on a
 biannual basis). From 2017 onwards, the Task Team Leader (TTL) was based in Cameroon allowing for
 continuous technical support to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Throughout project implementation,
 the World Bank team provided capacity building trainings in key areas such as procurement, financial
 management, and safeguard compliance. During the last three years of project implementation the World
 Bank team conducted meetings with all PIUs in the country on an almost monthly basis to provide technical
 support. However, the World Bank team did not identify the overcounting of beneficiaries and infrastructure
 investments by the PIU despite its extensive experience in implementing the previous two operations of the
 program.

 Also, there was no verification process of the project’s detailed monitoring records in place. As a result,
 when the project received AF, the indicator targets were revised upwards. Furthermore, according to the
 ICR (para. 97), the integrated approach among the four IDA 18 RSW financed operations was not
 implemented as planned due to a complex and ineffective implementation arrangement, a missing common
 strategy, a logical framework defining how the four operations would complement each other, and a
 common Results Framework. Therefore, it is not clear whether the classrooms built under this project will
 be staffed by the next school year. The World Bank team failed to address the significant shortcomings in
 the Results Framework during the project restructurings, making it challenging for the project to measure
 and demonstrate relevant project achievements at both output and outcome levels. The targets for most
 indicators were increased when the project received AF, when, in fact, project was not able to achieve
 most of its original targets at project closure. There were significant shortcomings in M&E implementation,
 and Quality of Supervision is therefore rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                 Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



a. M&E Design
 The objective of the project was clearly stated and built on the Results Framework of the second phase
 operation. Also, the theory of change and how key activities and outputs were to result in the intended
 outcomes was sound. However, the theory of change was not fully reflected in the Results Framework. The
 Results Framework only included a very limited number of indicators, therefore, not allowing to assess if
 the objective pitched on the outcome level such as “for the delivery of quality and sustainable social and
 economic infrastructure” was achieved. Furthermore, the project did not have any plans to collect data on
 the benefits project investments would have on beneficiaries such as reduction in time spent on collecting
 water, increase in school enrollment rates etc. even though this project was the third phase in an SAP and
 the most common types of investments could be reasonably predicted based on the projects implemented
 in the two previous projects.

 According to the PAD (para. 38) Baseline data was established based on studies and surveys conducted
 during the second phase of the program. Two impact assessments were to be conducted during the
 implementation of the project (one at the mid-term review, and one at project completion). Impact studies
 were to assess the impacts of the project on poverty reduction in rural areas, with attention to the role of
 women. In addition, a survey of beneficiary satisfaction with services provided by the project were to be
 conducted every two years.

 According to the PAD (para. 37) the National Coordination Unit (NCU) was to be responsible for carrying
 out M&E activities and for meeting the agreed reporting requirements.



b. M&E Implementation
  According to the ICR (para. 72) the M&E team was appropriately staffed in the central PIU as well as in
  the regional coordination units. Furthermore, the PIU collected and reported detailed data on all project
  activities on a regular basis. Fieldworkers, on the regional level, supervised subproject implementation
  and updated monitoring data on a weekly basis. This data was shared with the central PIU by regional
  coordination teams on a monthly basis.

  However, M&E implementation had several shortcomings. First, the project did not conduct two impact
  studies (at mid-term and closing), to assess the impacts of the project on poverty reduction in rural areas,
  as originally planned. Second, the beneficiaries’ satisfaction surveys were not conducted among
  beneficiaries but project stakeholders and did not disaggregate results by gender even though this would
  data were to be measured. Third, incorrect monitoring of project output and outcome data resulted in an
  overcounting of beneficiaries (as the same beneficiary could be counted several times if (s)he
  participated in more than one activity), investments made, and outcomes achieved. As a result, targets
  for most indicators were increased when the project received AF, when, in fact, project was not able to
  achieve most of its original targets at project closure. The ICR (para. 73) stated that overcounting might
  have also been a result of possibly mixing data from investments financed by the Bank and AFD since
  both development partners financed similar types of project activities.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para. 75) the PIU met with the regional coordination units to assess
  implementation progress, the quality of data collected, and implementation bottlenecks on a regular

                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



  basis. However, given all the issues related to M&E implementation (e.g. overcounting of investments), it
  is not clear to what extend project implementation benefited from utilizing M&E data.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as category B and triggered the World Bank’s safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01
   (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous People), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement),
   OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resource), and OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on
   International Waterways).

   According to the ICR (para. 78) the Borrower updated the Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) which had been prepared under the previous phase. The ESMF was to define the
   screening process for subprojects and ensure that any negative environmental and social impacts were to
   be identified and mitigated appropriately. The ESMF also included procedures for the identification and
   protection of cultural property and treatment of artifacts if any were to be discovered. Also, the Indigenous
   People Plan (IPP) as well as the Resettlement Policy Framework that had been prepared under the
   previous phase of the program were updated. Furthermore, the Borrower adapted and customized the Pest
   Management Plan of the Agriculture Investment and Market Development Project (P143417) to ensure safe
   pest management in the subprojects.

   According to the ICR (para. 82) during project preparation the MINEPAT notified riparian states to support
   rehabilitation of irrigation schemes in the North and Far North of Cameroon. The Niger River Authority and
   the Lake Chad Basin Commission granted no objections to the project. This safeguard policy was not
   triggered when the project received AF.

   The project did not encounter any safeguard related issues and when the project closed, compliance with
   all safeguard policies was rated Satisfactory.

   The project also established a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) identifying procedures and
   responsibilities for addressing grievances. In 2017, the project launched a telephone hotline, the first in
   Cameroon. The GRM encountered several challenges including long response times (in average 97 days),
   and lack of dissemination of the telephone number.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   According to the ICR (para. 88) Financial Management (FM) was rated Satisfactory during the first two
   years of project implementation. Since the FM risk was rated Substantial, the project implemented certain

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



  mitigation measures such as updating procedures for transferring funds to communes, accounting and
  reporting mechanisms, competitively recruiting a regional accountant, internal and external auditors. The
  World Bank team conducted FM supervision missions on a bi-annual basis and submitted adequate FM
  reports. However, according to the ICR (para. 89) even though the audit reports had unqualified opinions,
  they identified several shortcomings including the following: i) inadequate budget monitoring resulting in
  irregular expenditures in part from conducting activities without prior obtaining prior no objection by the
  World Bank as required; ii) undocumented advances resulting in changes in the disbursement method to
  the Das and disbursement bottlenecks; iii) delays in repayments of taxes and social security contributions,
  and iv) lack of implementing recommendations made by the internal and external auditors as well as by the
  World Bank supervision team. These shortcomings resulted in the downgrade of the project’s FM rating to
  Moderately Unsatisfactory in November 2019.

  Furthermore, on the project’s original closing date (June 30, 2022), the project reported about US$25.8
  million on overdue payments as a result of long delays between the implementation of investments and
  their expense accounting. In addition, after the project’s original closing date and after the request of
  cancelling World Bank financing in June 2022, the counterparts asked the World Bank team to partially
  reinstate these funds to pay for work completed by June 2022.

  When the project closed, the FM rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory.

  Procurement:

  During appraisal, the project’s procurement risk was rated High due to limited experience of MINMAP with
  the procurement of World Bank projects, and procurement issues at the communes’ level.

  According to the ICR (para, 91) the project followed the World Bank’s procurement guidelines. The World
  Bank team conducted procurement supervision missions on a bi-annual basis and post-review
  procurement of large contracts was conducted on an annual basis. The project’s procurement performance
  was rated Satisfactory throughout most of its implementation.

  However, throughout the project’s implementation procurement documents were not uploaded to the
  Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) platform. When the project closed, there were
  still about 603 contracts (16.5% of the total number of contracts) which had not been uploaded to STEP
  yet. Furthermore, there were large discrepancies between the budgeted and actual contract amounts
  entered in STEP due to weak procurement capacity in the regional implementation units and inaccurate
  planning in the first year of implementation. In addition, the project experienced inefficient contract
  management resulting in implementation delays. As a result of these issues, the project’ procurement
  performance was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in December 2020 and it remained at this rating
  until project closure.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  NA



d. Other

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)



   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                      Reason for
Ratings                            ICR                     IEG
                                                                                      Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                      Efficacy is Modest due to low
                                   Moderately             Moderately
Outcome                                                                               achievement and lack of
                                   Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory
                                                                                      evidence.
                                   Moderately             Moderately                  Shortcomings in RF were not
Bank Performance
                                   Satisfactory           Unsatisfactory              addressed during restructuring.
Quality of M&E                     Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                    Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 32-34) included several lessons learned which were adapted by IEG with some
modification of language:

        The absence of government endorsement for an exit strategy may negatively impact
         the sustainability of project outcomes. Under this project, even though the exit strategy
         was prepared to ensure that the communes would continue to receive technical and financial
         support for managing local public finances after the project closed, it was not endorsed by
         the government, possibly due to limited political prioritization. As a result, the sustainability of
         project outcomes are at risk.
        Building local capacity throughout the life of the project can positively impact project
         outcomes as well as their sustainability. While this project built some local capacity, it is
         not clear if the capacity built will be sustainable if e.g. CFOs, who were trained under the
         project, leave their positions.
        Developing a Results Framework for World Bank operations aiming to support
         refugees and/or internally displaced people (IDP) that monitors outcomes and
         satisfaction particularly for refugees and IDP can ensure that they benefit from the
         project. In this project, the standard indicator “number of beneficiaries” was measured while
         it would have been better to assess more specifically the impacts of investments on refugees
         and IDP as well as their satisfaction with project activities and their ability to participate within
         the communes.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                          Page 18 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Community Dev. Prog. Sup. Project (P144637)




The ICR provided an adequate overview of project preparation and implementation. The ICR was also candid
on the shortcomings of the project. It furthermore provided a large variety of useful and interesting lessons
learned. However, the ICR lacked a cost-benefit analysis for the infrastructure aspects and was not sufficiently
outcome driven or results focused. The ICR would have benefitted from providing data on the outcome level to
substantiate any achievements made. Also, the Results Framework section in the ICR did not include original
and revised target values, making an assessment of the project’s achievement challenging. Lastly, the ICR did
not fully comply with the OPCS guidelines as the main text at 30 pages was double the recommended length.
Due to these significant shortcomings, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
