     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024318

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P164453                                     Health Service Delivery Network Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Bolivia                                     Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88680,IDA-62480                        31-Jul-2023                                         126,636,299.56

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Jun-2018                                 31-Jan-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            300,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                             126,636,299.56                                                 0.00

 Actual                                         126,636,299.56                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz          Salim J. Habayeb             Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 13), the project
   objectives were as follows:

            To improve access to, and the quality of, health service delivery in selected health networks.

   At the time of the project restructuring in May 2020, the following project objective was added:


                                                                                                      Page 1 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



         To respond to the threat posed by COVID-19.




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   1. Strengthening Health Service Delivery Networks (Appraisal: US$ 243.0 million; Actual: US$ 0.76 million):
   This component was to support strengthening of ten health service delivery networks. Activities
   included: rehabilitation or expansion of existing lower-level facilities; medical equipment and
   furniture; management tools to better coordinate services provided in the selected health networks; and
   preparation of turn-key contracts for the design and construction of hospitals and provision of equipment.

   2. Improving Quality of Health Service Delivery and Human Resource Capacity Development (Appraisal:
   US$ 49.0 million; Actual: US$ 0.32 million): This component was to support human resources
   capacity development, as well as tools and standard operating procedures for the management of the new
   hospitals and their networks. Activities included: training and residency programs for medical
   specialists; information technology tools to support implementation of evidence-based clinical practice
   guidelines and recommendations; quality checklists; and development of an interface between the existing
   health information system and the new hospital information systems.

   3. Project Management (Appraisal: US$ 7.4 million; Actual: US$ 3.1 million): This component was to
   support operations of the two implementing entities within the Ministry of Health and Sports: the Agency for
   Infrastructure in Health and Medical Equipment (AISEM) and the MoH’s Program and Project Management
   Unit (UGESPRO).

   Revisions: The project added a fourth component in 2020:

   4. Strengthening Public Health Emergency Response to COVID-19 (Appraisal: US$ 20.0 million,
   subsequently revised to 170.0 million; Actual: US$ 112.8 million): This component was to
   support implementation of selected activities of the Intersectoral National Plan to respond to COVID-19.
   Activities included: provision of supplies including personal protective equipment for health personnel,
   laboratory equipment, testing supplies, and drugs for treatment; and provision of hospital isolation beds and
   ICU equipment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



   Project cost

         The project cost at appraisal was US$ 300.0 million. The actual project cost at closing was US$
          126.6 million.
         As a result of the project restructurings, the original costs for Components 1 and 2 were drastically
          reduced. Component 1 appraised costs were reduced from US$ 243.0 million to US$ 108.0 million.
          Component 2 appraised costs were reduced from US$ 29.0 million to US$ 14.0 million.
         US$8.9 million remained unused at project closing.

   Financing

         The project was financed by an IBRD Loan of US$ 252.0 million and an IDA Credit of US$ 42.0
          million. The actual amounts disbursed were US$ 124.0 million and US$ 2.6 million, respectively.
         There was a partial cancellation of funds under both the Loan and Credit, in the combined amount of
          US$ 173.4 million, due to project activities that could not be completed before the revised closing
          date of January 31, 2024.

   Borrower contribution

         There was no planned Borrower contribution.

   Dates

         June 14, 2018: Project approval.
         March 21, 2019: Project effectiveness.
         March 22, 2020: Project restructuring. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic led to a project
            restructuring that added a fourth project component to support the country's response. US$ 20.0
            million was reallocated from Component 2.
           April 4, 2020: Project restructuring. Additional financing was provided to further support the country's
            response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to add a third project objective and a related key
            project outcome indicator.
           April 20, 2022: Mid-term Review.
           June 30, 2023: Project restructuring. The closing date was extended from July 31, 2023, to June 30,
            2025, in order to allow for completion of activities. However, on July 27, 2023, the Borrower informed
            the Bank of its decision to not countersign the legal amendment of this restructuring.
           July 31, 2023: Project restructuring. The closing date was extended from July 31, 2023, to January
            31, 2024, in order to allow for complete ongoing activities and phase out cancelled activities.
           December 22, 2023: Project restructuring. There was a partial cancellation of funds due to activities
            that would not be completed by the project closing date.
           January 31, 2024: Project closing.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



               Rationale
               Bolivia is ranked 118th out of 188 countries on the Human Development Index (2016), with marked
               geographic and ethnic inequalities between the poorer highlands and the wealthier lowlands, and the
               numerous indigenous groups. These inequalities are also evident in health indicators in different areas of
               the country, with substantial variation in health care among the income quintiles, which are also among the
               lowest in the Latin America and Caribbean region. Access to prenatal care, births in health facilities, and
               skilled birth attendance have improved, but infant and maternal mortality rates remain among the highest in
               the region due to limited access to emergency obstetric care. The country's epidemiological profile is also
               shifting to an increase in non-communicable diseases. For these two reasons, primary care facilities are
               increasingly seen as playing a key role as the principal gateway to higher level care.

               The country's National Economic and Social Development Plan for 2016-20 included support for improved
               health service delivery networks, namely by improving hospital infrastructure and specialized human
               resource capacity. Bolivia’s National COVID-19 Response Strategy consisted of four strategic lines of
               action to be implemented by the Ministry of Health (MOH): (i) diagnosis; (ii) isolation of cases; (iii)
               hospitalization of cases; and (iv) contact tracing.

               The Bank's Country Partnership Framework for FY 2016-20 noted the coverage gaps in access to basic
               services for indigenous groups and in rural areas, including for health; therefore a key objective was
               identified as increasing access to selected quality basic services for the poorest rural and urban
               communities. The percentage of the population in the bottom quartile of municipalities benefiting from
               expanded access to basic services was a key indicator.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to health service delivery in selected health networks.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change was clear albeit with some shortcomings. The key activity to improve and expand
                             physical infrastructure, particularly in areas without a functioning health network referral center (covering
                             approximately 3.8 million people) was likely to lead to the intended outcome to improve access to health
                             services. However, key assumptions underlying the theory of change were not sufficiently addressed,
                             including whether there were other potential barriers to access and whether there was sufficient
                             implementation capacity to build the complex infrastructure.



                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



Outputs

      Construction of the contingency building for the Emergency Unit of the Hospital de Clinicas, the most
       important third-level health emergency care facility in the La Paz Department.
      Provision of sterilization autoclaves for two primary health centers.
      Preparation of technical and administrative documentation for the bidding of four level-two hospitals,
       including social and environmental safeguards.

The primary activities of construction and equipping of ten hospitals to serve as network referral centers, and
the rehabilitation, expansion and equipping of primary health centers, were not completed.

Outcomes

As the primary activities were not implemented, there were no data available on actual improvements in
access to health services. The key indicator of network referral centers operational with at least 60% of the
required medical staff and providing health services was not achieved.

Achievement of this objective is rated Negligible due to major shortcomings in implementation and outcomes
not achieved.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the quality of health service delivery in selected health networks.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear albeit with some shortcomings. The key activities to increase human
resources training, update clinical guidelines, and upgrade information systems were likely to lead to the
intended outcome to improve the quality of health services. However, as noted in the ICR (page 19), there
were some gaps in the results chain such as interventions to integrate service delivery in the newly
established health networks and addressing barriers to continuity of care.

Outputs

      Updating of six clinical guidelines (target: seven), including the mobile applications for use by doctors.
      Development of facility licensing standards.
      Training of 100 medical health professionals through a post-graduate course in "Prevention, Diagnosis
       and Management of NCDs at the primary and secondary levels of care", of which 79 completed the
       course satisfactorily. Training of 80 medical professionals through a post-graduate course in "Quality
       control and medical auditing" of which 72 completed the course satisfactorily.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 13
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)




      Updating of the Single Registry of Health Care Facilities (Registro Único de Establecimientos de
       Salud – RUES), a tool for monitoring the installed capacity (physical infrastructure, equipment, and
       human resources) of health care facilities and to identify gaps.

The primary activities to enroll medical specialists in residency programs, train health administrators in
management, and the integration of a new hospital information system with the existing health information
were not completed.

Outcomes

As the primary activities were not implemented, there were no data available on actual improvements in
quality of health services. The key indicators of percentage of health facilities applying updated clinical health
standards and doctors checking the Ministry of Health's clinical guidelines application at least once in the last
60 days were not achieved.

Achievement of this objective is rated Negligible due to major shortcomings in implementation and outcomes
not achieved.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To respond to the threat posed by COVID-19.

Rationale
The theory of change was clear. The key activities to provide medical equipment and supplies to protect from,
diagnose, and treat COVID-19 were likely to lead to the intended outcome to effectively respond to the
pandemic. The ICR noted that this component provided the main source of funding for Bolivia's response to
the COVID pandemic at that time.

Outputs

      Provision of equipment and supplies to 286 health care facilities (target: 33). These included
       ventilators, oxygen supply, COVID-19 drugs, protective kits and supplies, nutritional supplements for
       elderly patients, diagnostic tests, and communication materials on COVID-19 in Spanish and four
       native languages.
      Provision of equipment to three regional labs for testing and diagnosis (target: 3).
      Hiring of 20,527 health professionals temporarily to provide additional support during the pandemic, in
       the areas of emergency and intensive care services in hospitals and also laboratory services.

Outcomes




                                                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)




                                  55,349 diagnosed COVID cases were treated per approved COVID-19 protocols as of May 2021,
                                     surpassing the target of 15,000.

                            Achievement of this objective is rated Substantial due to evidence of effective response to the COVID-19
                            pandemic.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Achievement of the first objective to increase access to health service delivery and the second objective to
                            increase quality of health service delivery are both rated Negligible due to major shortcomings in
                            implementation and outcomes not achieved. Achievement of the third objective to respond to the threat posed
                            by COVID-19 is rated Substantial due to evidence of effective response.

                            Overall Efficacy is rated Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                 Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                  Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   The economic analysis at appraisal (Annex 2) presented a cost-benefit analysis of the component on health
   facility infrastructure. The estimated costs included the total project costs and the operating costs triggered by
   the new hospitals which, in the absence of detailed information, were calculated using the operating costs of
   existing
   second and third level hospitals. The estimated benefits were based on the potential impact of new hospitals
   and improved health networks on population health status measured in terms of Disability Adjusted Life
   Years (DALYs). It was estimated that the intervention will reduce the DALYs of the beneficiary population
   (3.8 million people) Although the project would likely improve all health services, the analysis focused on the
   three most important causes of DALYs, which account for one-third of total DALYs in Bolivia: NCDs, diarrhea,
   lower respiratory and other common infectious diseases, and neonatal disorders. In the base case scenario, the
   net present value (NPV) of the project was US$ 1.4 billion and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) was 78.0
   percent. According to the sensitivity analysis, the NPV stayed positive even when the impact on averted DALYs
   was reduced, except in the extreme scenario where the project reduced DALYs by only 5 percent.

   While significant changes were introduced at project restructurings, no updated economic analyses were
   provided in the project papers. At completion, the ICR (Annex 4) did not provide an updated estimate of the
   cost-benefit analysis given the major shortcomings in implementation and thereby benefits from the improved

                                                                                                                           Page 7 of 13
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



health status of the population served by new hospitals and strengthened health networks were not realized.
Although revised activities were implemented under the COVID-19 component, the economic impact could not
be quantified given the difficulties in estimating the number of COVID-19 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths
averted. However, the economic impact was likely positive, given the large-scale deployment of medical
equipment and personnel among health care facilities financed by the Project and that the actual number of
diagnosed cases treated surpassed by the target by several ten-fold (355,349 cases treated as of May 2021,
compared to a target of 15,000).

US$173.4 million was cancelled and US$8.9 million remained unused at project closing.




Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     81.00
 Appraisal                                                 78.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions (including the COVID-19 pandemic),
country strategy, and Bank strategy. Efficacy is rated Modest due to Negligible achievement of the first objective
to increase access to health service delivery and the second objective to increase quality of health service
delivery, due to major shortcomings in implementation, and Substantial achievement of the third objective to
respond to the threat posed by COVID-19 due to evidence of effective response. Efficiency is rated Modest due
to major shortcomings in implementation with limited achievements reported.


a. Outcome Rating
   Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome



                                                                                                     Page 8 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



The completed activities (human resource training, updating of clinical guidelines, emergency pandemic
preparedness, information technology tools) are likely to be continued and the impact of these activities
would be sustained. However, the majority of the planned activities, which were critical to achievement of the
intended development outcomes, were not implemented and therefore overall outcomes are not likely to be
sustained.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project objectives were relevant to the prevailing conditions in the health sector and targeted
  underserved areas to address inequalities in health access and outcomes. However, there were
  shortcomings in the project design, including gaps in the theory of change (addressing barriers to access
  and continuity of care issues), overly ambitious scope of works and unrealistic timeframe under
  Component 1 in relation to the existing implementation capacity, and shortcomings in the selection of key
  indicators. In addition, there were significant gaps in readiness, including lack of a clear definition of the
  civil works to be supported under Component 1 (therefore leading to uncertainty in terms of the
  anticipated costs and impact) and lack of adequate diagnosis of the human resource and equipment
  gaps. The risk assessment appropriately rated the Component 1 capacity as High risk, but insufficient
  mitigation measures were identified.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team provided timely support to the country in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic,
 particularly in the midst of a volatile political environment in the initial implementation period which featured
 contested general elections in October 2019, violent conflicts nationwide, and the installation of a
 transitional government in November 2019. A locally based Task Team Leader and fiduciary and
 safeguards specialists in the country office collaborated with local counterparts on a daily basis, particularly
 to provide implementation support in fiduciary management and project management, given the limited
 capacity of the two main implementing agencies. Project restructurings were utilized to redirect resources
 to respond to the emerging COVID-19 pandemic, but did not use these multiple opportunities to revise the
 project objectives, activities, nor M&E framework when it became clear that there were going to be major
 shortfalls in implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

                                                                                                       Page 9 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E arrangements were clear, with the responsibility divided between two implementing agencies
 (AISEM for Component 1 and UGESPRO for Component 2). However, the data collection arrangements
 did not draw upon data already being tracked by existing Ministry of Health systems. There were
 shortcomings in the M&E framework. The indicators for the first objective to increase access did not
 measure actual improvements in access, rather the operational status of the referral centers. The indicators
 for the second objective to increase quality did not adequately capture the service quality relevant to the
 health care networks that were created.



b. M&E Implementation
  Given the limited implementation of most planned activities, M&E was largely carried out for Component
  4 COVID activities only.

  A new monitoring tool (Co-Vi) was developed by AISEM to support the large-scale contracting of medical
  personnel and the procurement of medical and non-medical equipment, although confirmation of
  reception of equipment by final beneficiaries was missing for an initial period.



c. M&E Utilization
  The above noted Co-Vi tool provided useful information in supporting the implementation of Component
  4 COVID-19 activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project due to planned civil works. According
   to the PAD, safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources
   (OP/BP 4.11), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) were triggered
   (although not all are reported in the ICR). An Environmental and Social Management Plan was prepared,
   which included elements of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (cultural pertinence approach), as well as a



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



   Resettlement Policy Framework which included clear methodologies for mitigation measures. COVID
   materials were made available in four indigenous languages.

   The ICR (page 22-23) reported that the one civil works completed site (Contingency Area within the
   Emergency Block of the Hospital de ClÍnicas) was guided by the site-specific Environmental and Social
   Management Plan and that environmental and social safeguards performance was satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: Financial management arrangements were adequate, with each implementing
   agencies staffed with a financial management specialist who coordinated with their respective financial
   units to prepare budgets, record financial transactions in the SIGEP Integrated Financial
   Management System, reconcile accounts, and handle payments to consultants and suppliers. As reported
   in the ICR (page 23), due to limited implementation capacity, financial management risks were substantial
   and performance in the unsatisfactory range. This was due to several issues, including concerns about the
   internal inventory control system for medical equipment purchased with project funds and qualified audits
   that raised internal control issues regarding the whereabouts of medical equipment and supplies. There
   was one qualified audit opinion in 2022 concerning the unresolved contract of UGESPRO for the
   acquisition of 144 lung ventilators. The remaining closing activity for both financial management units
   involves refunding unutilized funds to the Bank.

   Procurement: Procurement performance by both AISEM and UGESPRO was negatively affected by high
   staff turnover, a complex political landscape, and limited procurement capacity. The Bank team provided
   support through prior and post- reviews, targeted training for staff, and the development of procurement
   strategies tailored to the project's needs within the existing market conditions. These measures
   helped implementation of Component 4 COVID-19 activities, although there remained challenges in
   the timely delivery and payment for procured goods and services. The ICR did not report on any
   procurement irregularities.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                     Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                     Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Unsatisfactory           Unsatisfactory



                                                                                                       Page 11 of 13
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)



Bank Performance                   Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                     Modest                  Modest

Quality of ICR                     ---                     High


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (page 26), adapted by IEG:

         Limited institutional capacity to implement a large-scale infrastructure investment project can
          lead to major implementation shortcomings. In the case of this project, the primary
          implementing agency had only recently been created and therefore had limited experience,
          technical studies had not been completed at the time of appraisal to ensure feasibility, and
          the timeframe for completing infrastructure was very unrealistic.

Also,

         Gaps in the theory of change can undermine the achievement of outcomes. In the case of
          this project, there were several shortcomings in the linkages between key activities and
          project objectives, such as barriers to access beyond available facilities, clear pathways in
          the continuity of care in a health delivery network, and the integration of health services.
         Poor selection of indicators can undermine the accurate measurement of outcomes. In the
          case of this project, the operational status of the newly constructed health centers did not
          measure improved access, nor was it was feasible for them to be operational by project
          closing; improved use of clinical guidelines did not directly measure improved quality
          resulting from the establishment of health networks.

The ICR Review by IEG also identified the following lesson:

         Significant external events and/or shifts in government priorities can negatively affect the
          likelihood of achieving stated project objectives; therefore, appropriate revisions to project
          objectives should be considered. In the case of this project, the COVID-19 pandemic and
          government transitions at the highest levels led to a significant shift of focus away from the
          originally agreed-upon priorities in the health sector and to major shortcomings in project
          implementation and outcomes.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                         Page 12 of 13
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health Service Delivery Network Project (P164453)




The ICR was concise and consistent with guidelines. The ICR was candid about the project's shortcomings at
quality-at-entry (design, readiness, M&E). In particular, the discussion of outcomes was thorough and highly
analytical. The ICR was strongly outcome-oriented including noting shortcomings in the availability of evidence,
and ratings and conclusions, as well as lessons, were clearly linked to the analysis. There were no
shortcomings in the ICR aside from not reporting on all safeguard policies triggered.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 13
