     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024209

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P162956                                      TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Chad                                         Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D3020,IDA-D8060                          31-Dec-2023                                          48,016,190.65

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Apr-2018                                  31-Dec-2023

                                              IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             41,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                              56,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                          48,016,190.65                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                    ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman           Vibecke Dixon                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective stated identically in the Financing agreement (p. 5) and the PAD (p. 5) is to “promote the
   adoption of improved technologies leading to increased productivity and to enhance the climate resilience of
   agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by the project,”

   For this review, the objective will be parsed into two:



                                                                                                     Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



   Objective one: to increase productivity by promoting the adoption of improved technologies in the areas
   targeted by the project.

   Objective two: to enhance the climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by
   the project.

   CERC (Component C) was activated. The efficacy in achieving its objective will be assessed under objective
   two.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component A: Institutional support for sustainable agriculture development and climate resilience
   (Appraised: US$12.6 million; Actual: US$8.25 million). This component included three subcomponents:

   1. Strengthening the agricultural research and development (AR&D) system

   (a) Support for adaptive research systems including, inter alia: (i) the rehabilitation of the infrastructure
   (laboratories and facilities) and equipment of selected facilities for the Chadian Institute for Agriculture
   Research and Development (ITRAD); (ii) specialized short and long term training of researchers; (iii)
   support to the setting-up of an innovative and sustainable Agricultural Research and Development (AR&D)
   funding system; (iv) the production of high-quality breeder and foundation seeds for targeted crops; and (v)
   competitive research and development (R&D) funding.

   (b) Support for strengthening research-extension-farmer linkages including, inter alia, for consultation and
   cooperation among the stakeholders in agricultural R&D.

   (c) Support for the Recipient's participation and integration in regional networks and cooperation in
   agriculture, including, inter alia, through: (i) extension to the Recipient of West and Central African Council
   for Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF's) technical networks on strengthening regional
   cooperation and sharing of experience, knowledge and training; (ii) development and implementation of
   annual communication action plans based on the regional communication strategy prepared by CORAF,
   including the networking of knowledge management, information, and communications systems to
   accelerate the sharing of agricultural technology, tools, and best practices; (iii) support to the Recipient in
   preparing and implementing an action plan to mainstream climate change considerations in R&D programs;
   (iv) support for developing and implementing an action plan to mainstream gender considerations in R&D
   programs based on the gender strategy prepared by CORAF; (v) expansion of CORAF's regional

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



competitive agricultural research grant scheme to the Recipient; and (vi) technical assistance for the
creation and implementation of a national competitive agriculture research grant mechanism.

2. Strengthening of national support services for sustainable agricultural development and climate resilience

(a) Support for revitalizing agricultural advisory support services and mainstreaming ICT including, inter alia,
support to the Recipient's National Agency for Rural Development (ANADER).

(b) Support for strengthening the capacity of producer organizations and the federation of producer
organizations, through inter alia: (i) training of trainers; (ii) short and specialized training courses; (iii)
workshops, showcase events and study tours; (iv) linkage with development partners and the private sector;
and (v) acquisition of equipment.

(c) Support for developing farmer-oriented agro-climatic services including, inter alia, support for the
operation of the agro-meteorological multidisciplinary working group (GTP) and the acquisition of weather
forecasting digital solutions.

3. Strengthening the framework for sectoral strategies and reforms preparation and Monitoring

Support for development and dissemination of sector policies and strategies, preparation of studies, gender
impact evaluation and training in policy analysis and evaluation for the staff of the Recipient's Ministry of
Agriculture.

Component B: Supporting adoption of demand driven technologies and climate-smart agriculture
Appraised: US$ 27.2 million [IDA: US$23.6 million; Beneficiaries: US$3.6 million]; Actual: US$19.34
million [IDA: US$17.31 million; Beneficiaries: US$2.03 million]) This component included four
subcomponents:

1. Improving the efficiency of agricultural support services in the targeted areas

(a) Support for fostering demand-driven agricultural advisory services, including, inter alia: (i) financing the
implementation of innovation platforms; (ii) capacity building of producer organizations; (iii) capacity building
of public and private local extension services; and (iv) supporting agro-climatic services delivery.

(b) Support for effective technical support services for sustainable agriculture through the provision of
Matching Grants to finance Sub-projects focusing on, inter alia: (i) planning and production of improved
seeds and seedlings for the targeted crops; (ii) multiplication and dissemination of improved livestock
breeds and fish fingerlings; and (iii) access to inputs and small mechanization services.

2. Accelerating adoption of improved technologies and innovations

(a) Support for improved technology adoption and innovation to promote sustainable intensification of
targeted local production systems including, inter alia, through provision of Matching Grants for Sub-
projects.

(b) Support for diversification and value addition through the provision of Matching Grants to selected
private sector entities, for the use of technologies and innovations.



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



  3. Support to the Implementation of Climate-Smart Agriculture Plans (CSA-Plans)

  Support for the preparation of local community investment plans and implementation of climate-smart
  agriculture activities, including through the provision of Matching Grants for Sub-projects.

  4. Resilience building of targeted refugees, returnees and selected host communities

  Building the resilience capacity of targeted refugees, returnees and vulnerable members of host
  communities through the provision of: (a) Cash for Work (CfW) Transfers; and (b) training, aimed at: (i)
  contributing to their purchasing power; (ii) increasing their financial management capacity; and (iii)
  contributing to productive asset building.

  Component C: Contingency emergency response (Appraised: US$0.0 million; Actual: US$13.08
  million).

  Provision of rapid response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as needed.

  Component D: Project management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge
  management (Appraised: US$4.8 million; Actual US$7.5 million)

  Support for Project implementation, including, inter alia: (i) coordination and management, including human
  resources, financial management and procurement; (ii) monitoring and evaluation and technical studies; (iii)
  knowledge management and communication; (iv) safeguards and citizen engagement, including piloting an
  iterative beneficiary monitoring (IBM) system for obtaining feedback and informing on Project
  implementation; (v) establishing a grievance redress mechanism; (vi) financing of Incremental Operating
  Costs; (vii) rehabilitation of office space required for Project management; and (viii) equipment required for
  Project management and supervision.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

  The project was appraised to cost US$59.6 million and the actual cost was US$50.05 million.

  Financing

  The project was financed by two IDA grants totaling US$48.02 million.

  Borrower Contribution

  At appraisal, local beneficiaries were expected to contribute US$3.6 million; they contributed US$2.03
  million.

  Dates

  The project was approved in April 2018 and became effective in November 2018. A Mid-Term Review was
  held in March 2022. The project closed as planned in December 2023.


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



Restructurings

The project underwent three restructurings:

May 2020: to integrate the residual activities of the Emergency Food and livestock Crisis Response project
(PURACE) into Climate Resilient Agriculture and Productivity Enhancement Project (PROPAD) to
consolidate the agriculture portfolio under the World Bank financing in Chad. It resulted in i) changes to
results framework (RF)(Three intermediate level Indicators were added), ii) changes in components and
costs, iii) reallocation between disbursement categories and iv) changes in institutional arrangements.

August 2022: to bring additional finance into the project to fill the financing gap created by CERC which
was activated in May 2020. It resulted in i) additional financing, ii) changes to RF (Two intermediate level
indicators were added), and iii) reallocation between disbursement categories.

June 2023: to implement the recommendations of the Mid-Term Review (MTR). It resulted in i) changes to
RF (Three intermediate indicators were added; the targets for three PDO level indicators were revised
upwards, while that of the sub-indicator of one of them was revised down; and targets for six output level
indicators were revised down, ii) reallocation between disbursement categories, and iii) changes in
institutional arrangements.

Changes to RF

       The first restructuring added three intermediate level indicators under activity B (total beneficiaries
        who participated in cash for work program (number), productive assets rehabilitated (number), and
        people trained (number)).
       The second restructuring introduced two intermediate level indicators under component C
        (Beneficiaries that received emergency food assistance (number) and Smallholder farmers provided
        with improved seeds and small agricultural equipment (number)).
       The third restructuring i) added three intermediate level indicators under component C for activities
        implemented by FAO (Quantity of cereals and oilseeds seeds distributed (Ton), Quantity of seeds of
        garden vegetables and fruits distributed (ton), Vegetable gardening tools distributed (Ton)), ii)
        revised upwards the PDO indicators, and iii) revised downwards some of the intermediate indicators
        on which the project was behind. The revisions to targets are summarized below.

Level     Indicator                                                Original target      Revised target
          Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services
PDO                                                                360,000              500,000
          (No.)
          - Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services –
PDO                                                                108,000              150,000
          female (no.)
PDO       Surface area under improved technology                   21,400               40,000
          - Surface area under Climate-smart Agriculture
PDO                                                                10,700               3,000
          technologies/practices
Output    Young researchers trained                                17                   16
Output    Young researchers trained – female                       50                   25
Output    Agriculture sector reforms supported                     5                    4
Output    Improved seeds produced by targeted beneficiaries        3,000                850
Output    Diversification subprojects supported                    360                  250

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



   Output    Pilot local community CSA subprojects financed          100                50

   Split Rating

   The PDO remained the same through the restructurings. The project became more ambitious. Several
   intermediate level indicators were introduced as the first and the second restructurings brought additional
   resources into the project. The targets for three PDO indicators were revised upwards, whereas the target
   for one sub-indicator was revised down. The last restructuring revised down the target for several
   intermediate level indicators. As a split rating would not have changed the ratings with equally ambitious
   PDO level indicators and downward-revised output indicators, this review will not apply a split rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

When the project was appraised in early 2018, Chad’s oil and agriculture-dependent economy was under
stress (ICR, para 1). Annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth had plummeted from 6.3 percent in
2014 to 0.2 percent in 2017 due to a sharp drop in oil prices in 2014. Agricultural growth also exhibited
excessive volatility, from 10.1 percent in 2015 to -6.0 percent in 2016 due to increasingly erratic weather
patterns. These unfavorable developments were exacerbated by the growing insecurity spilling over from
neighboring countries (Sudan, Nigeria, Central African Republic, and Libya). The confluence of these
factors was undermining food security and triggering the urgency for improving the performance of the
agriculture sector on which the country was highly dependent – the sector employed 80 percent of the
Chadian workforce. Of the country’s 14 million inhabitants at the time, 47 percent of them lived below the
poverty line.

Average yields of the country’s staple cereals were among the lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa. An
Agriculture Sector Review in 2017 showed that some of the factors behind the poor performance included
inadequate institutional capacity, particularly in agricultural research and extension services, widespread
use of low-yielding agricultural technologies (less than 5 percent of the farmers were using improved
seeds), climate shocks, and lack of coherent agricultural policies (ICR, para 2).

Country strategy

The Government of Chad developed the National Development Plan (PND 2017-2021) and the National
Rural Investment Plan (PNSIR 2016-2022) as frameworks to guide sector investments. The PDO remains
relevant to Chad’s Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), which includes the development of
adaptation actions in the agricultural sector to ensure food and nutrition security through enhanced crop
and livestock productivity. The PDO remains consistent with the government’s overall goals outlined in its
“Vision 2030: The Chad We Want”, and the National Development Plan (PND 2017-2021), which seek to
transform Chad through diversification, given the country’s over-reliance on the oil sector (ICR, para 17).

Bank strategy


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



               The PDO aligned with World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Chad for FY2016 – 2020,
               which emphasized support to the country to improve returns to agriculture and reduce vulnerability, and the
               World Bank Group (WBG) Africa Climate Business Plan, especially its focus on contributing to farmers’
               access to climate services and the adoption of climate-smart agricultural practices (ICR, para 3). The PDO
               remains consistent with i) WBG’s Country Engagement Note for the period FY23-FY24 especially with its
               objective of promoting “natural resource management and sustainable agriculture to prevent and manage
               conflicts based on natural resource scarcity and climate change”. (These themes have been continued in
               the new Bank-funded project, the Chad Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P179238).) ii)
               World Bank’s Western and Central Africa Regional Strategy, especially Goal 4 pertaining to promoting
               “climate resilience.” Iii) the Systematic Country Diagnostic approved in April 2022, which underscored the
               importance of supporting climate-smart agricultural practices and ensuring sustained agricultural
               productivity growth through innovation. Furthermore, the PDO is also aligned with key elements of the WBG
               Strategy for Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV), 2020-2025, and the Global Crisis Response Framework
               especially regarding “building the resilience and preparedness of communities, including the ability to
               manage climate change and environmental degradation.”

               The level at which PDO is pitched

               The PDO of increased crop yields and enhanced climate resilience of agricultural systems was pitched at
               the outcome level of the logical chain. Achieving the objective would contribute directly to the country
               strategy of achieving food and nutrition security, and it is pitched at an appropriate level to address the
               development problem of the country’s dramatic decline of agricultural growth and increasing vulnerability to
               climate change induced natural hazards.

               Summary: Chad’s oil and agriculture dependent economy slowed down considerably when oil prices fell
               sharply in 2014. The agriculture sector also performed erratically because of low adoption of technology
               and climate shocks. The PDO to increase productivity and make the agriculture systems climate resilient
               was highly relevant to Chad’s objective of achieving food and nutrition security and diversifying away from
               oil and the World Bank’s strategy to improve to returns to agriculture and reduce its vulnerability to climate
               shocks.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase productivity by promoting the adoption of improved technologies in the areas targeted by the
                             project.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                            Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



Theory of Change (ToC)

The retrospectively developed ToC articulated in ICR (para 4 and Figure 1) states that project
inputs/activities, such as strengthening of research and extension capacity, strengthening demand driven
value chain development through innovation platforms and supporting policy formulation, which produced
outputs, such as researchers trained, quantity of foundation seeds produced, and the number of innovation
platforms supported, would help farmers increase productivity of selected crops.

The critical assumptions in the ToC were that the project recommended technologies would be superior to
technologies farmers were already employing, they would adopt the technologies, and that the technologies
would increase yields on the farms of adopters.

The ToC was plausible if the technologies were adequately tested for suitability over the entire project area
and farmers were supplied with inputs including information to adopt the technologies.

Outputs

      15 young researchers were trained, falling short of the revised target of 16
      Of them, 25 percent were female researchers, meeting the target of 25
      122.40 MT of foundation seeds of cereals were produced, exceeding the target of 97 MT
      41.10 MT of foundation seeds of other crops, falling short of the target of 48.00 MT
      21 improved technologies were disseminated by the project, exceeding the target of 20
      4 agricultural sector reform/policies and strategies were supported, meeting the target of 4
      9 operational and regional innovation platforms were supported, meeting the target of 9
      95 benefited directly from using agricultural climate services, exceeding the target of 95
      1,117 MT on improved seeds were produced by the target beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 850
       MT
      20,000 smallholder farmers were provided with improved seeds and small agricultural equipment,
       meeting the target of 20,000

Outcomes

      685,286 farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services, exceeding the revised target of
         500,000
      189,844 farmers that were reached with agricultural assets or services were female, exceeding the
         revised target of 150,000
        68,483 ha came under improved technology disseminated by the Project, exceeding the revised target
         of 40,000 ha
        30.50 percent higher were the average yields obtained by direct beneficiaries compared to average
         yields of non-beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 25 percent.
        78 percent of the targeted beneficiaries rated the project interventions ‘Satisfied’ or above, falling short
         of the target of 80 percent
        79 percent of the targeted female beneficiaries rated project interventions ‘satisfied’ or above, falling
         short of the target of 90 percent.



                                                                                                       Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



The achievement of the objective was measured by one indicator: percentage increase in average agriculture
yield of direct beneficiaries compared to average yields in the project area. The wording of the indicator
suggests a 25 percent higher increase in yields among beneficiaries compared to average yields in the
project area, which presumably includes beneficiaries as well. The ICR reports average yields obtained by
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries in different years (Table 5, page 14). The yields obtained by beneficiaries
was 30.5 percent higher than that of non-beneficiaries during the last season of the project (2023-24). And
the yields were also 39 percent higher than the baseline yields (ICR, para 18). Comparable information on
any increase in yields among non-beneficiaries is not reported.

The information on yields came from annual surveys of 2,216 households that included 997 beneficiaries and
1,219 non-beneficiaries. There were a few limitations in meeting the target set by the indicator. One, the 30.5
percent higher yields is a mathematical average for the eight crops. For four crops, which were on nearly 46
percent of the area, the yield increase was lower than the target: sorghum: 17.2%; cowpea: 10.1%;
groundnuts: 19.5% and maize: 12.1%. Additional information provided by the team on August 19, 2023,
suggested that the weighted average yields too were higher by 36.8 percent – the average remains high
because of 64.9 percent higher yields of sesame grown on nearly 35 percent of the area. Two, the increase in
yields was not consistent across the three participating regions (ICR, Table 6). Three, the yields of
beneficiaries did not exceed that of the control group until the last year, 2023-24 (ICR, Table 5). The ICR
attributes the delayed increase in yields to the improved seeds reaching farmers only at the end of the project
and combined effect of adoption of complementary technologies over time (para 22).

The project increased the yields by i) reaching more than the targeted number of farmers with agricultural
assets or services and ii) bringing more area than planned under technologies disseminated by the
project. Crop yield growth was driven by access to inputs and knowledge (ICR, para 25). The project nearly
met or exceeded the target for producing foundation seeds – beneficiaries produced more seeds than
targeted. The Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations (FAO), which was contracted to
implement CERC activities, also supplied seeds. The project trained farmers in improved agricultural
practices.

Summary: The project aimed to enable beneficiaries to achieve yields that are 25 percent higher than the
average yields, which the ICR has interpreted to be yield among non-beneficiaries. The average of yield
differences of eight crops was higher than the target, but the yields of four of the eight crops, which were
nearly 47 percent of the area, were not sufficiently higher. The yields were also not higher among the three
regions. The yield increases can be attributed to project activities that included production and supply of
seeds, training, and support to subprojects. With the minor shortcoming in not raising the yields of all the
selected crops and across all regions, efficacy in the achievement of objective 1 is rated substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To enhance the climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the areas targeted by the project.

Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



ToC

The retrospectively articulated ToC in the ICR (para 4 and Figure 1) states that project inputs or activities,
such as i) promoting early maturing, drought tolerant, and disease resistance crop varieties, ii) addressing
predisposition to climate vulnerability, iii) diversifying sources of income to avoid reliance on vulnerable crops
and iv) piloting community wide natural resource management, would be expected to produce outputs such
as an increased area under climate smart agricultural technologies, number of subprojects supported to
improve resilience at community levels , and number of farmers supported with seeds and implements would
make agricultural production systems more climate resilient.

A critical assumption was that the climate smart technologies recommended to farmers were appropriate to
manage the climate risks they faced and that they could be assisted to diversify into countercyclical activities
that would make them more climate resilient. The evidence to prove that they have become more resilient,
given the project activities, included information on improved yields from the technologies and increased
diversity in income sources.

Outputs

       179 diversification subprojects were supported, falling short of the target of 250
       45 CSA sub-projects for resilience at the community levels were supported, falling short of the target
        of 50
       2,080 sub-projects to intensify sustainable production systems were supported, falling short of the
        target of 2,100

CERC

       194,952 people received emergency food assistance, meeting the target of 190,000
       20,000 smallholder farmers were provided with improved seeds and small agricultural equipment,
        meeting the target of 20,000
       16MT of seeds of garden vegetables and fruits distributed, meeting the target of 16 MT
       100,000 vegetable gardening tools distributed (FAO), meeting the target of 100,000

Activities transferred from the PURACE project

       12,367 participated in Cash for Work rotations (IOM), falling short of the target 13,600
       25 productive assets were rehabilitated, meeting the target for 25
       5,201 were trained (IOM), falling short of the target 5,183

Outcomes

       31,545.7 ha came under Climate-smart Agriculture technologies/practices, exceeding the original
        target of 10,700 ha and the revised target of 3,000 ha

No single indicator in the RF captured resilience (ICR, para 18). Given the activities, the proxies for improved
resilience were the performance of climate smart technologies, increased diversification into other activities,
and better preparedness for climate events. The only indicator in the RF that met the requirement was the


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



                            “area under climate-smart technologies/practices”. No information was collected on how the climate smart
                            technologies, a subset of the technologies promoted by the project, performed.

                            The 21 technologies promoted by the project were improved varieties of the selected crops. The seeds
                            distributed under CERC were also drought and disease resistant, in addition to possessing higher yield
                            potential, and were expected to contribute to building resilience (ICR, para 27). The project succeeded in
                            bringing the targeted area under climate smart technologies.

                            To help beneficiaries diversify their income sources, the project financed sub-projects, which enabled
                            households to acquire and rear small ruminants and CERC activities distributed vegetable seeds, built
                            irrigation systems, and distributed agricultural equipment. The project also rehabilitated vaccination parks to
                            enhance resilience to animal diseases (para 28) and supported community subprojects that were designed to
                            build resilience through landscape management involving agro-forestry activities (para 30).

                            The activities implemented to address predisposition to vulnerability included CERC-financed food
                            distribution, cash for work activities, which addressed the precarious food situation the beneficiaries faced by
                            helping them bridge the gap before the next harvest and discourage them from consuming seeds meant for
                            sowing or disposing off their productive assets (ICR, para 28).

                            Summary: The project expected to make the production systems more resilient by promoting the use of
                            climate resilient technologies, diversifying their sources of income, and making households less predisposed
                            to climate events. The project increased the area under climate smart technologies, and satisfactorily
                            implemented activities designed to help beneficiaries diversify their incomes sources and be better prepared
                            for climate events. A minor shortcoming was the absence of evidence on how the proxies for improved
                            resilience may have performed, the efficacy of achieving this objective is Substantial with moderate
                            shortcomings.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ToC hypothesized that supplying improved technologies, primarily improved seeds, along with building
                            capacity of research and extension systems and development of appropriate policies would bring larger areas
                            under improved technologies and increase the yields obtained by beneficiaries. Additionally, the theory
                            hypothesized that supplying farmers with climate smart/resilient technologies, helping them diversify their
                            income sources, and supplying them with food and other supplies, which would make them less predisposed
                            to climate events, could help make their production systems climate resilient. The average yields of
                            beneficiaries were higher than that of the non-beneficiaries, the difference exceeding the target. But the yields
                            of four of the eight crops were only marginally higher, and significant differences in yields were observed only
                            during the fifth year. The efficacy in achievement of objective one was rated Substantial. The project
                            satisfactorily implemented activities designed to contribute to improving resilience. With a minor shortcoming


                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



  in the absence of evidence on how the proxies for resilience may have performed, the efficacy in achieving
  objective two was rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The overall efficacy in the achievement of
  project objectives is rated Substantial with shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency

At appraisal, the economic analysis considered i) direct benefits to farmers, ii) community level benefits from
small rural enterprises, iii) and environmental benefits, which could be attributed to activities of Component B
(PAD, para 56). Eleven crop and activity models were prepared to compare ‘with’ and ‘without-project’
situations. Without the valuation of environmental benefits, the EIRR was estimated to be 14.2 percent (PAD,
para 60). With environmental evaluation at market prices, the estimated EIRR increased to 22.6 percent.
Including GHG mitigation valued at the low range (US$49/) and high range (US$98), the EIRR increased to 56.7
and 97.1 percent respectively.

The analysis repeated at closure developed 13 models, ten on crop production and 3 on income generating
activities. The EIRR was estimated at 13.9 percent. Including environmental benefits at low carbon prices, the
estimated EIRR increased to 61.6 percent.

Administrative efficiency

Several factors influenced the project’s implementation.

The startup was delayed because of slow onboarding of critical staff, high staff turnover, and their slow
replacement – resulting in several changes in counterparts. Lengthy procurement processes, with an average of
9 to 12 months for procurement valued more than US$52,000 (para 46) slowed down implementation. Floods in
2022 and 2023 disrupted production of seeds (para 49). Disbursements were also suspended for three months
following political developments in April 2021.

Many factors helped in more efficient implementation of the project, despite the initial delays: i) the project could
make use of technologies developed by a regional project (para 36), ii) coordinating with other projects in Chad
helped in providing weather forecasts to farmers, iii) and CERC interventions protected the agriculture sector
from COVID-19 related setbacks. Government made a timely request to reallocate resources to CERC to
mitigate the disruptions caused by the covid outbreak.

Summary: Estimated returns close to rates projected at appraisal and higher than opportunity cost of capital
combined with implementation without delays earns this project an efficiency rating of Substantial.


Efficiency Rating

                                                                                                       Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                              Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                   0
Appraisal                                                14.20
                                                                                    Not Applicable
                                                                                   0
ICR Estimate                                             13.90
                                                                                    Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Following an economic crisis precipitated by a decline in petroleum prices, oil and agricultural dependent Chad
wished to diversify the economy and intensify agriculture in its most productive regions. The objective to
increase productivity and make its production systems climate resilient was highly relevant to the country’s
objective and the World Bank’ strategy to support the country. The average yields of eight crops increased to
surpass the target, but the increase in yields of four out of eight crops fell short of the target. The project
increased the area under climate smart technologies, and satisfactorily implemented activities designed to help
beneficiaries diversify their incomes sources and be better prepared for climate events. The efficacy in
achieving the objectives was, therefore, rated substantial with shortcomings. The project, however, was
implemented without any delay and the estimated returns were close to the projections at appraisal. The
efficiency was, therefore, rated Substantial. The outcome rating emerges as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified a few risks to development outcomes, although the project was followed by other World
Bank funded projects that would continue to support related activities: the Food System Resilience Project
(P178132) and the Chad Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P179238).

Continued access to improved inputs

Farmers’ continued access to seeds and reasonably priced fertilizers poses a risk to sustaining outcomes.
Chad’s domestic system for improved seed multiplication and distribution is at a nascent stage. Farmers’
organizations took the lead in seed multiplication in collaboration with Chadian Institute of Agricultural
Research for Development (ITRAD). This collaboration is expected to continue. However, the government
needs to continue to support and monitor to maintain seed quality and supply, in addition encouraging


                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



private enterprises to invest in the sector. Similarly, given the current high prices of fertilizer, which had its
roots in the Ukraine war, access to remuneratively priced fertilizer is likely to remain limited, although the
government is working with the private sector and farmers’ organizations such as National Consultation
Council of rural producers (CNCPRT) on the issue (ICR, para 61).

Institutional risk

Continued access to advisory services also poses a risk. The project has put in place a framework to
improve the advisory services, which demonstrated that outreach can be expanded at low cost, but it is also
in a nascent state and needs support to mature.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
      a. Quality-at-Entry

   The project was designed to meet priorities of the government to increase productivity and make
   agriculture more resilient as embodied in PND and PSNIR. The activities, which broadly included
   strengthening of research and extension systems, the supply of improved technologies including climate-
   smart ones, and support to communities to make the necessary investments, could be expected to
   contribute to achieving the objectives the project.

   The design benefited from an agricultural sector review that had been just concluded, which gave the
   project a sound technical ground (ICR, para 44). The project also drew from the regional experience of
   the bank financed West Africa Agricultural Productivity program (WAAPP) and the regional research body
   West and Central African Council for Agricultural Research and Development (CORAF).

   The project made arrangements that ensured effective implementation. For example, the project struck
   partnership with the National Consultation of Council of Rural Producers of Chad (CNCPRT) to ensure
   the project’s relevance to the intended beneficiaries (ICR, para 44). The project also built into design
   coordination and synergy with other ongoing projects (ICR, para 58).

   A detailed M&E, which included annual surveys, was adequate to monitor implementation but less so for
   tracking the theory of change. Although no single indicator could capture resilience, the RF would have
   benefited from indicators to capture the performance of proxies for resilience, such as yields of climate
   smart technologies, level of diversification of income sources, and preparedness of climate events.

   Summary: The project was designed – with components that could be expected to achieve the objectives
   - to meet the strategies and objective of the country. The implementation plan entailed coordination and
   partnership with relevant organizations. Due to the minor shortcoming in an M&E that did not adequately
   capture the proxies for resilience, the Quality-at-Entry is rated Satisfactory.




                                                                                                         Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted the required biannual missions, 11 in all, with appropriate expertise. They
 offered candid aide memoirs and action plans (ICR, para 59).

 The local office provided consistent support with a TTL, who was based in the country, and a team whose
 composition remained stable.

 The team proactively addressed the concerns that arose, including by restructuring the project, but missed
 the opportunity to identify relevant outcome indicators to measure proxies for improvements in climate
 resilience, such as performance of climate resilient technologies and changes in diversification of income
 sources.

 Providing the expected support and for proactively addressing the concerns of the project, quality of
 supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Summary: The design, built on relevant experience, delivered a project that could be expected to achieve
 the objective, consistent with strategies of the country and the World Bank. Implementation arrangements
 that included collaborations with local organizations and coordination with related projects were sound. The
 design, however, had a minor shortcoming in the M&E system, which did not capture the outcomes of the
 proxies for resilience and this weakness was not addressed during implementation. The Bank team
 provided the support necessary for effective implementation and proactively addressed the issues as they
 emerged. The overall Bank Performance is also rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The extensive M&E design, with planned annual surveys, adequately met the requirements for monitoring
 implementation but fell short of generating adequate information to test the ToC.

 The PDO indicators were measurable but they were not enough to capture relevant outcomes, related
 particularly to improved resilience (ICR, para 20). Of the four PDO indicators, only two related to the
 outcomes associated with achievement of project objectives. PDO level indicators that measured changes




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



 in resilience, such as changes in diversification of income sources, could have been included, given that
 the annual surveys included generated the required information.

 The design made provisions for baseline surveys and continuous data collection.



b. M&E Implementation
  Changes were made to the RF during two restructurings, which brought additional activities and
  resources into the project. The sub-activities were expected to contribute to improving resilience –
  through diversification of incomes and addressing predisposition to climate vulnerability. The changes
  introduced tracked implementation of activities but did not measure the outcomes of those activities.

  The baseline study, midterm evaluation, and final evaluations were carried out as well as annual surveys.
  Daily information was also generated on the usage of e-extension and e-voucher activities (ICR, para
  52).



c. M&E Utilization
  The daily recording of the use of e-extension helped the project calibrate the language capabilities
  needed at the call centres and stock the types of inputs farmers were demanding (ICR, para 52).

  Summary: The M&E design was elaborate including baseline, endline, and annual surveys. The system
  was implemented as designed and used to monitor and finetune project activities. Even though the M&E
  design had minor shortcomings in monitoring of outcomes, the ICR provided additional evidence to
  justify the Satisfactory rating. Overall, the M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental

   The project, classified as a category B project, triggered Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and
   Pest Management OP 4.09 safeguards. The mitigation measures specified in the Environmental and Social
   Management Plans (ESMPs) and the Pest Management Plans (PMPs) were implemented. Environmental
   screening and social assessments were carried out at the level of all subprojects financed by the project in
   line with the World Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies. The Project complied with
   environmental management safeguards.

   Social



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



   The Project complied with social safeguards. The project triggered Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP
   4.11 and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 social safeguards. There were no cases of physical
   cultural resources involved in the project.

   The project relied on a joint Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) developed for three Bank-funded
   projects that were being implemented in the same target areas, namely the ProPAD, the Sahel Irrigation
   Initiative Project (P154482), and the Rural Mobility and Connectivity Project (P164747). The GRM was
   accessible to project-affected people. Local resolutions committees were active in regions where project
   activities were being implemented. The project had set up a functional complaints management committee
   in each of the project cantons. The project recorded 18 complaints. All complaints were resolved in an
   inclusive manner involving the complainants, the committees, and the PCU, and were archived. COVID-19
   control measures were adopted consistently throughout the pandemic period although, unfortunately, a
   regional director was lost to the pandemic. There were no reports of Occupational, Health and Safety (OHS)
   incidents during project implementation. The project had not recorded any cases of Gender Base Violence
   (GBV) (ICR, paras 55).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Procurement

   Procurement documents for all contracts financed by IDA proceeds were uploaded into Systematic
   Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) as well as all signed contracts, acceptance certificates and
   payment documents. There was no reported malfeasance in the procurement processes.

   Financial Management

   Interim Financial Reports were submitted on time and were of acceptable quality. Project audits were
   generally submitted on time and financial statements were certified without reservation. The disbursement
   rate under IDA financing was 90.07 percent because of slow project implementation as discussed earlier
   (ICR, para 57). The ICR does not offer any information on whether an independent/external audit was
   conducted or the outcome of one.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment


                                                                                                Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



Outcome                         Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR presents five lessons, which are also presented here with some adjustments by IEG.

E-extension, when curated to meet the audience requirements and preceded by user
publicity, has the potential to expand the outreach of agricultural advisory services. The
experience from the project suggests that extensive testing within a limited geographical area before
the full roll out, widespread publicity to elicit demand, and meeting specific requirements of the
audience (for example, after-hour services or provision for a particular language) are necessary to
make e-extension effective. It also must be complemented with non-electronic services – through
extension staff – in areas without good phone network.

E-vouchers that are delivered to mobiles can be an effective tool for efficiently targeting input
subsidies to poor farmers. The experience suggests that qualification criteria must be clearly
defined, ample time must be provided for enrollment before the season, and input availability needs
to be ensured through coordination with suppliers. Coordination is also necessary with other
programs that can assist households without a mobile and incapable of paying the unsubsidized
component of the price, to make the system inclusive.

A multi-faceted approach to disseminating technologies may contribute to achieving results
in a low institutional capacity environment. This project used a judicious combination of delivery
mechanisms, including (i) strategic partnerships with farmer organizations, (ii) contracting private
operators to provide advisory services, (iii) using “relay farmers” trained and equipped to assist
fellow farmers, and (iv) establishing call-centers for on-demand advise. These combined efforts
helped the project achieve significant results in a country with a poorly staffed, poorly equipped, and
poorly funded agricultural extension service.

Community seed production can complement a private sector-based seed production that is
still in a nascent stage. It required effective collaboration between the primary stakeholders – the
researchers as parent seed suppliers, the government as certifying agent, and farmers’ federations
as producers, support to government certifying agencies to supervise the sites, and support
producers to improve their production conditions through measures like small-scale irrigation.

Focusing on strongly felt needs can enhance the chances of implementing reforms in a
politically and institutionally fragile environment. During this project’s implementation, senior
government officials were changed frequently (e.g., five ministers in charge of agriculture for a
project that was never extended). Yet, the project was able to successfully support reforms in
research and extension, and overall sector management. This project’s experience would suggest



                                                                                                    Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       TD Climate Resilien Ag & Product Proj (P162956)



that for successfully supporting reforms in a fragile environment, the reforms must address felt
needs that transcend the interests of leaders of the day.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

As required by the guidelines, the ICR report comprehensively covers various aspects of the project, beginning
with the relevance of the objective to the outcomes. The evidence presented is drawn primarily from annual
surveys; the report provides adequate details in appendices. The report makes full use of available information.
With a results orientation, the report explains how project activities could have contributed to the outcomes. The
analysis is of acceptable quality. The report draws out lessons rooted in the project experience that are likely to
have wide relevance. The writing is crisp and internally consistent.

The overall quality of this ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 19 of 19
