     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024375

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P158138                                    Youth Economic Inclusion Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Tunisia                                    Social Protection & Jobs


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87830                                 31-Jan-2024                                            5,377,522.88

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 11-Sep-2017                                31-Jan-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                              60,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                               25,824,900.57                                              0.00

 Actual                                           17,493,388.85                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Rosen Asenov                Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As stated in the October 14, 2017, Loan Agreement (p. 5), the project’s development objective (PDO) was "to
   improve economic opportunities for targeted disadvantaged youth in the selected Governorates of the
   Borrower.’’ This statement is consistent with the one provided in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 19),
   where, in the context of this project, “economic opportunities” were defined as the chance to improve earnings
   and access to wage or self-employment of targeted youth, with reduction of gender gaps in accessing key
   economic opportunities being an integral part of the project. In line with the need to redirect project resources
   to contribute to the government’s COVID-19 emergency response, the PDO statement was revised in June

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



   2020 under a level-1 restructuring to read as follows: “to (a) improve economic opportunities for targeted
   disadvantaged youth in the selected Governorates of the Borrower; and (b) support the Borrower’s efforts to
   mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on jobs and earning losses in all Governorates.’’ The second
   project restructuring in December 2022 led to partial funding cancellation and reduced project ambition.
   Normally, with an added objective and subsequent reduction in the project’s scope, a split rating would be
   required. However, neither the original nor revised PDO-level targets were met, resulting in a Highly
   Unsatisfactory overall outcome rating regardless of the application of a split evaluation. Therefore, a split
   evaluation of the project will not be applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Jun-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Identifying and Connecting Target Youth to Jobs (estimated cost: US$17.47 million;
   actual cost: US$0.14 million). The component aimed to help selected targeted youth move from
   unemployment/inactivity to wage or self-employment, or from low to higher-quality jobs (including from
   informal to formal). The Ministry of Vocational Training and Employment (MFPE) was to deliver these
   services through performance-based contracts with private sector/non-governmental organization (NGO)
   service providers. The component was to be implemented in two cycles, starting in Year 1 (first cycle) with
   an estimated maximum targeted number of 5,000 individual beneficiaries and continuing in Year 4 (second
   cycle) with another 5,000 beneficiaries. The process of beneficiaries’ identification and connection to jobs
   included activities divided into two sub-components: (i) program intake and profiling; and (ii) tailored
   performance-based services for connection to jobs.

         Subcomponent 1.1: Carrying out of program intake and profiling of target youth. This
          subcomponent aimed to identify, register, select, and profile target youth. It involved (i) designing
          and implementing targeted outreach and awareness-raising activities to identify and motivate target
          youth to register and to inform applicants about accessing the services; (ii) development and
          implementation of a statistically assisted job profiling system for the selected target youth, which
          would categorize beneficiaries into homogeneous groups with similar labor market barriers and help
          estimate the scope of jobs services (and costs) that would be expected from service providers; and
          (iii) financing incremental operating costs incurred by government agencies involved in these
          activities.
         Subcomponent 1.2: Providing tailored services for connecting target youth to jobs. This
          subcomponent aimed to enhance labor participation and employability of selected target youth by (i)
          providing, through competitively recruited local private sector/NGO service providers, a


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



       performance-based set of tailored support services to increase beneficiaries’ access to job
       opportunities, including soft and/or technical training, counseling, and/or job search assistance; (ii)
       training of trainers to improve their skills in designing and conducting these services; (iii) specialized
       capacity-building to selected government agencies to ensure gradual adoption of the new service
       provision model; and (iv) provision of monthly stipends to selected youth to address income,
       mobility, and social care constraints. These stipends were to be conditional on participation in
       subcomponent 1.2 activities, with—aimed to boost women's labor market participation—50 percent
       higher stipend for young mothers with children under 6 years old and/or with dependents such as
       elderly and persons with disabilities.

Component 2: Supporting Job Creation (estimated cost: US$32.7 million; actual cost: US$0.9
million). This component aimed to help the private sector realize its potential in creating jobs by supporting
the development of value chains that have a high potential of job creation (subcomponent 2.1) and
supporting selected target youth in their micro-projects (sub-component 2.2).

      Subcomponent 2.1. Supporting the development of value chains with high job creation
       potential. The subcomponent aimed to enhance sustainable and quality private sector job creation
       within relevant value chains by addressing coordination failures, lack of information about potential
       markets, and social externalities related to jobs. It was to support technical assistance (TA) to
       stakeholders to conduct analytically underpinned public-private dialogues to identify bottlenecks
       preventing targeted value chains from achieving their full potential. The subcomponent was also to
       provide TA to implement Investment Action Plans (IAPs), which could include advocacy in regulatory
       reforms, promoting vocational training to provide relevant skills to an industry, and awareness
       campaigns to link producers to potential buyers. The IAPs were to inform training and connection
       services for youth in Component 1 and entrepreneurial opportunities for subcomponent 2.2
       beneficiaries. Service providers under Component 1 were to be informed about the IAPs and job
       creation potential and be encouraged to contact firms supported by Component 2.1 to better tailor
       training programs and support services. Technical work was to showcase opportunities that potential
       micro-entrepreneurs could fill, improving the chances of success for beneficiaries of subcomponent
       2.2. The subcomponent was to support public investments to unlock the value chain growth potential
       (e.g. equipment and/or small works, mainly rehabilitation of existing installations/equipment). Micro,
       small and medium enterprise (MSME) competitive matching sub-grants were to be provided to
       selected MSMEs to support their firm-level investments for the development of value chains. The
       matching grant mechanism was important for reducing MSMEs' and the financial sector's risk in
       covering new production modes or venturing into new markets, internalizing social externalities, and
       encouraging more firms to generate jobs.
      Subcomponent 2.2. Supporting the creation of micro enterprises. The subcomponent aimed to
       promote entrepreneurship among hard-to-serve youth by addressing constraints that the target
       youth face in creating economically viable projects, such as lack of startup financing, lack of
       entrepreneurial skills, and limited information about government programs. The subcomponent was
       to finance: (i) provision of a comprehensive set of business development services (BDS) to selected
       target youth covering both pre-creation and post-creation of relevant projects, and including a basic
       package of business and entrepreneurship training (simplified version of the curriculum of
       International Finance Corporation Business Edge or that of the International Labour Organization,
       for example, adapted to the target segment), as well as mentoring, specific consulting, advisory
       services for marketing or technical issues, and modules for financial inclusion, such as saving and
       opening a bank account; (ii) training of the selected BDS providers to address gender gaps in
       business creation by women; (iii) provision of youth sub-grants to selected target youth to cover the

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



       initial investment cost and working capital of their business plans; and (iv) provision of stipends to
       selected target youth, similar to those on the wage employment track, to address income, mobility,
       and social care constraints. These stipends were to be conditional on their participation in
       subcomponent 2.2 activities. Beneficiaries were also to be encouraged to open bank accounts and
       save part of the stipends, contributing to the investment cost of the youth sub-grant provided by the
       project.

Component 3: Building Effective and Accountable Program Delivery (estimated cost: US$6.33
million; actual cost: US$0.62 million). This component aimed to facilitate the implementation of various
interventions by central and regional public agencies and stakeholders through four sub-components.

      Subcomponent 3.1. Developing a management information system (MIS) and other
       information and communications technology (ICT) solutions for data-sharing and
       accountability. The subcomponent was to finance the creation of a MIS and ICT solutions for
       coordinated, agile, and transparent project implementation along two dimensions: (i) supporting data
       exchange and increasing access to information, finances, and services among the project target
       youth, and (ii) supporting monitoring and beneficiary engagement, from the initial outreach phase to
       the capturing of user feedback during implementation (beneficiary report card).
      Subcomponent 3.2: Creating capacity-building and communications with stakeholders. This
       subcomponent was to support project implementation and stakeholder engagement and help
       anticipate and manage potential tensions through effective communication. It was to provide
       capacity building, policy development, or institutional strengthening to ensure the gradual adoption
       and institutionalization of innovative project business processes, such as coordinated job
       approaches, performance-based service delivery, and gender approaches.
      Subcomponent 3.3: Building results-orientation and service delivery accountability. The
       subcomponent was to support (i) designing and implementing monitoring and evaluation activities
       (including mid-term process evaluation, impact evaluations, and a beneficiary survey to detect and
       help correct implementation bottlenecks); (ii) capacity building services to stakeholders; (iii) TA for
       the design and implementation of the report card for selected target youth and selected MSMEs, as
       well as of the grievance redress mechanism (GRM), including recruitment of local firm for technical
       design, allowing independent facilitators to identify solutions and submit action plans for conflict
       resolution; and (iv) monitoring of implementation of the safeguard instruments.
      Subcomponent 3.4: Project implementation support. The sub-component was to finance
       technical advisory services and incremental operating costs for the establishment and operations of
       the Project Management Unit by Objectives (UGO) in the management and coordination of the
       project, and handling of technical, administrative, fiduciary, and safeguard-related matters.

Revisions to components

As noted in the ICR (p. 5), the project underwent two restructurings (in June 2020 and in December 2022),
which made changes to the project’s Results Framework (RF), the number of PDO-level indicators and
intermediate results indicators (IRIs), and their end target values.

The first project restructuring (dated June 8, 2020), was a response to the COVID-19 emergency that
necessitated reprogramming part of the project resources to be used to support Tunisia’s national COVID-
19 response, resulting in reduced project scope and decreased funding of the project’s original components
1 and 2, with the number of expected beneficiaries revised downwards, to free up resources for the newly
added: (i) Component 4: Emergency and post-COVID support to vulnerable groups and private sector firms,

                                                                                                 Page 4 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



and (ii) PDO-level indicator to reflect the addition of COVID-19 mitigation activities under Component 4. The
June 2020 restructuring maintained the original project design, but the reallocation of resources towards the
emergency COVID-19 response led to a recalibration of project targets. The allocated amounts for
Components 1 and 2 were revised from US$17.47 million to US$8.7 million and from US$32.7 million to
US$16.2 million, respectively.

Activities under the newly added Component 4. Emergency and post-COVID support to vulnerable groups
and private sector firms (estimated cost: US$25.5 million; actual cost: US$5 million) had two main target
groups: (i) self-employed and artisans, and (ii) MSMEs in vital job-creating sectors. Subcomponent 4.1
(US$17 million) was to provide an immediate cash transfer of TND 200 and a recovery cash transfer of TND
1,200 in two tranches, contingent on participation in financial and debt management training and post-crisis
recovery planning. Targeting and enrollment were to be conducted through the national digital registration
platform "Batinda," managed by the Ministry of Social Affairs (MoSA) and the Ministry of Finance (MoF),
with eligibility criteria determined between the MoSA, MoF, and MFPE. Subcomponent 4.2 (US$8 million)
provided cash grants to MSMEs to keep them viable and provide incentives to maintain workers. These
grants were to be disbursed in several tranches, conditional on the enterprises' commitment to retain a
predetermined proportion of their salaried workforce. Targeting for this group was to be done through two
other platforms, "HELP" and "Enterprise," managed outside the MFPE. As noted in the ICR (p. 7), the
restructuring paper did not specify the amount of financial support for firms under Component 4.2.
According to the ICR’s Annex 3: Project cost by component (ICR, p. 35), under the second restructuring,
Component 4’s initial cost of US$25.5 million was reduced to US$3.2 million, while the component’s actual
cost was US$5 million. As reported by the Bank team in a written interview dated 12-13-24, the reason for
Component 4’s reported actual cost to exceed its revised cost at the second restructuring by around US$1.8
million was because, while the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) declared that Component 4’s actual cost
was US$5 million equivalent (based on January 2024 exchange rates), it is likely that in the second
restructuring estimation, Component 4 was projected to have spent less due to PIU delays in providing
information on actual costs, audits, and other relevant data.

The second project restructuring was initiated after the government’s thorough assessment of the
project’s implementation progress. The incoming Minister of Employment ordered a hold on project activities
in January 2022, pending a February 2022 World Bank Group portfolio review in Tunisia. The portfolio
review identified the project as one of several underperforming operations experiencing significant delays
due to its design complexity, low implementation capacity, and low disbursement progress. The government
decided to restructure the project, canceling a portion of its loan proceeds rather than closing it. The second
restructuring, approved on December 2, 2022, simplified project design and shifted its focus from vulnerable
populations to entrepreneurship, aligning the project with the Ministry of Employment's evolving priorities.
The restructuring reduced the number of PDO-level indicators from seven to five. The two PDO-level
indicators tracking the increase in monthly earnings among beneficiary youth (male and female) were
dropped to reflect the project's revised scope. The project's theory of change was significantly impacted by
the restructuring, which removed key activities from its initial design and results chain. These included
dropping job matching (subcomponent 1.2) and Value Chain Development activities (subcomponent 2.1),
and shifting the project beneficiary target away from disadvantaged and hard-to-reach youth towards
individuals with entrepreneurial potential. Important project implementation tools like the digital profiling
system, digital one-stop-shop, tailored support curriculum, and project MIS (subcomponent 3.1) were not
delivered, and the related IRI was deleted at the second restructuring. The IT-based GRM mechanism was
not developed. Dropping these subcomponent 3.1 activities at the second restructuring reduced the
project's system-building aspirations. Additionally, the second restructuring interrupted the project's
implementation for over 18 months, resulting in only 14 months remaining to implement revised activities

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



   before the closing date of January 31, 2024. At the time of the December 2022 restructuring, Component 4
   for emergency COVID-19 response was canceled, and the amounts of the remaining project components
   were revised as follows: Component 1: Identifying and Connecting Target Youth to Jobs: reduced from
   US$8.7 million to US$0.2 million; Component 2: Supporting Job Creation: increased from US$16.2 million to
   US$19.8 million in line with the project’s shift towards entrepreneurship grants; Component 3: Building
   Effective and Accountable Program Delivery: reduced from US$6.1 million to US$1.3 million. According to
   the ICR’s Annex 3: Project cost by component (ICR, p. 35), under the second restructuring, Component 4’s
   initial cost of US$25.5 million was reduced to US$3.2 million, while the component’s actual cost was US$5
   million (as outlined above).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost. The total project cost was originally estimated at US$56.5 million equivalent. Final costs were US$6.6
   million equivalent, reflecting low disbursement rate of allocated funds and the government’s partial loan
   cancellation. At the project end, only 27 percent (US$6.6 million equivalent) of the total revised project cost
   of US$24.5 million equivalent had been disbursed.

   Financing and Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed by a loan from the World Bank. Of
   the original loan amount of US$56.5 million equivalent, US$6.66 million equivalent (around 12 percent) was
   disbursed. No contribution from the Borrower was planned or delivered.

   Key Dates. The project was approved on September 11, 2017, and became effective eight months later, on
   May 11, 2018. A mid-term review was conducted in December 2021. The project was restructured twice, on
   June 08, 2020, and December 21, 2022, as described above. The project closed on January 31, 2024, as
   originally planned.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The PDOs were highly relevant to current country conditions. In Tunisia, social and economic
exclusion is increasing for certain groups, especially affecting the youth population, creating a breeding
ground for radicalization. At the core of public dissatisfaction is unemployment, particularly among the poor,
youth, and residents of lagging regions or marginalized peri-urban areas. In 2014, 40 percent of the youth
population were students, 30 percent were working, and 30 percent were classified as Not in Employment,
Education or Training (NEET), with nearly two-thirds of NEETs not having completed secondary education.
NEET rates are higher among young women (38 percent compared to 25 percent among young men).
Although the unemployment rate decreased from 18.9 percent in 2011 to 15 percent in late 2014,
unemployment rates vary across income deciles and age groups. In the poorest decile, workers have an
average unemployment rate of over 30 percent, while in the richest decile, the rate is below 15 percent.
Among youth (aged 15-24), the unemployment rate is 2.5-3 times higher than that of adults, with 2 out of 3
young people with tertiary education unemployed. Tunisia's workforce predominantly works in low-
productivity and low-quality jobs, with 77 percent of the workforce in these sectors. High productivity service
sectors only account for 7.7 percent of total employment. Around 41 percent of the labor force is engaged in
low-quality jobs, such as unpaid work, informal wage employment, or self-employment in agriculture or non-

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



farm activities. Labor market outcomes vary across regions, with regions where a higher share of the
workers is engaged in unpaid work or self-employed in agriculture, and regions where most workers are
wage-employed. In rural areas, women, especially those above age 30, are likely to be engaged in unpaid
family work on farms. Young educated women in these regions are trapped and have limited options for
moving to better opportunities. Being married increases men's employment probability but decreases
women's, suggesting strong social norms surrounding women's labor force participation. These challenges
are exacerbated by slow economic growth, which plunged to an average of 1.4 percent after the 2011
revolution and has recovered only modestly since then. The main response to unemployment in Tunisia has
been through active labor market programs (ALMPs), but these have limited impact due to design and
implementation issues. ALMPs are poorly targeted and fragmented, prioritizing highly educated youth at the
expense of unemployed individuals with secondary education and below, who form the majority of the
unemployed population. Moreover, despite equal opportunities for both young men and women, ALMPs
have failed to address the barriers faced by women in low-income households, such as childcare
constraints and socio-cultural norms.

The PDOs were also aligned with the development priorities of the country. The government is
committed to enhancing job opportunities for the vulnerable segments of the population through various
initiatives such as the 2013 Social Contract, the ongoing national dialogue with trade and employers'
unions, the 2016 emergency employment measures, the Government's Strategic Orientation Note, and the
Five-Year Plan (Tunisia 2020). These government initiatives have translated into specific—albeit
uncoordinated—actions by different ministries (and their respective agencies) to combat poverty, reduce
unemployment and promote job creation, such as launching various employment programs with state
and/or donor funding, actions to improve jobs and earning opportunities for the Social Safety Net Program
beneficiaries, services to exporters and business development services to support startup opportunities,
piloting of investments in youth and female entrepreneurship, etc. Given the limited and unsustainable
impact of these uncoordinated and not well targeted actions, the government has acknowledged the need
for a multi-sectoral, better-coordinated approach to promote more and better job opportunities for youth,
especially for the most disadvantaged and for young women. In this regard, this project was expected to
help establish new systems for integrating supply- and demand-side interventions, finance catalytic
investments, and promote institutional coordination across government agencies. The PDOs were also
aligned with the government's objective of improving the efficiency of value chain development (VCD) in
Tunisia, leveraging synergies and boosting job creation potential of public investments in this area. The
project was to contribute to achieving a joint approach to VCD activities in targeted lagging regions (PAD,
pp. 14-19). Additionally, the PDOs were well aligned with the Bank’s commitment to support countries in
managing the impact of the COVID-19 crisis, as shown by the Bank’s swift restructuring of the project to
redirect substantial project resources to support the government’s efforts to mitigate the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on jobs and earning losses. At project closing, the PDOs remained relevant to the
government's priorities for fostering job creation through entrepreneurship. The government continues to
invest in job creation through public investment in entrepreneurship, particularly through the development of
registration platforms and seed programs, ensuring that the PDOs remains relevant to current government
priorities (ICR, p. 8). At the same time, as noted in the ICR (pp. 15-16), focusing on the most marginalized
adolescents was not the best starting point for reforming Tunisia's youth employment system. National
stakeholders emphasized the importance of first focusing on creating the overarching employment system
and then adapting it to the specific needs of vulnerable categories of youth. This might have been
technically and politically preferable.

The PDOs are substantially aligned with the Bank’s Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) for
Tunisia, both the one in effect at the time of appraisal (CPF for FY16-FY20, extended until 2022) and

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



the subsequent CPF currently in effect (CPF for FY23-FY27). The PDOs were aligned with the
objectives of CPF for FY16-FY22’s: (a) Pillar I (“Restoring Environment Conducive to Sustainable Economic
Growth and Private Sector-Led Job Creation”) by supporting private sector-led job creation initiatives; (b)
Pillar II (“Reducing Regional Disparities”) by enhancing economic opportunities in lagging regions; and (c)
Pillar III (“Promoting Increased Social Inclusion”) by improving policies and programs to connect work-able
young members of social safety net (SSN) household beneficiaries and disadvantaged youth not currently
served by these programs to economic opportunities. Specifically, FY16-FY22’s Sub-Objective III.2
(“Increasing opportunities for young men and women”) was addressed by enhancing employability and
entrepreneurship for youth, with a concentration on youth living in lagging regions and peri-urban
marginalized areas, and by addressing gender issues in the project design. The PDOs were also consistent
with Sub-Objective III.3 (“Improved and more equitable social programs”) by promoting a productive
approach to safety nets and linking work-able youth from SSN households to better economic opportunities.
Additionally, the PDOs were well aligned with the Bank’s commitment to support countries in managing the
impact of the COVID-19 crisis, as shown by the Bank’s swift restructuring of the project to redirect
substantial project resources to support the government’s efforts to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic on jobs and earning losses. At project closing, the PDOs remained consistent with the Bank’s
current CPF for FY2023-27, which maintains a strong focus on jobs, private sector efficiency, social
cohesion, and youth inclusion. The PDOs were aligned with the FY2023-27 CPF's High-Level Outcomes: (i)
Quality jobs created by the private sector (specifically, Objective 1.2.: Improving access to long-term
finance for viable and innovative SMEs and startups, and Objective 1.3.: Reducing economic regional
disparities), and (ii) Strengthened human capital, as well as the cross-cutting theme on gender. In addition,
the PDOs were aligned with the Bank's 2015 MENA Strategy, specifically focusing on its pillar on renewing
the social contract and restoring trust between citizens and the state. The project intended to support
fundamental shifts in Tunisia's job policy-making, promoting effective protection of the poor and vulnerable,
inclusive service delivery, and a stronger private sector that can create jobs and opportunities for youth.
Four fundamental shifts in approach were to be supported: from large untargeted jobs programs to those
specifically targeting poor and disadvantaged youth; from a heavy reliance on supply-side job interventions
to a demand-driven, private sector-led approach; from public sector delivery to performance-based,
competitively recruited service providers; and from a centralized, top-down approach to stronger citizen
engagement and accountability in service delivery. Furthermore, the PDOs were consistent with the Bank’s
strategic goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner, and
consistent with global WBG strategies such as the Social Protection and Labor Strategy, the Trade and
Competitiveness Roadmap (2016), and the updated WBG Gender Strategy (FY 2016-2023). However, the
second restructuring expanded the project target population from disadvantaged youth aged 18-35 to
include business-ready entrepreneurs aged 18-45, this adjustment could have been reflected in a change to
the PDO to clarify that the broadened targeting approach was intended to match the stronger
entrepreneurial focus of the restructured project.

The project was part of the WBG’s long-standing support to Tunisia with regard to private sector
growth, job creation, reducing regional disparities, and promoting social inclusion. The project
sought to enhance synergies with WBG interventions and other partners' initiatives. It complemented policy-
level interventions to support private sector-led job creation by improving the investment climate and
boosting entrepreneurship under the Tunisia Business Environment and Entrepreneurship Development
Policy Financing (P158111). The project also complemented the Tertiary Education and Employability
Project (P151059) and the 2013-2017 Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise facility (P124341) by providing
financing to segments not served by banks or multilateral financial institutions. It also provided continuity for
the Bank's support to the strengthening of the social security system after the closure of the Transition Fund
Project on support to the Social Protection Reforms Support Project (P144674). The operation provided

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



               synergies and complementarities with International Finance Corporation activities in Tunisia that focused on
               youth employability, sector competitiveness, and financial inclusion.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve economic opportunities for targeted disadvantaged youth in the selected Governorates.

                             Rationale
                             Тhe original project objective was expected to be achieved by applying an integrated approach that
                             maximized synergies between the project components through linking supply-side interventions targeted
                             at disadvantaged youth (identifying, training, and matching targeted individuals to wage jobs or internships
                             (Track 1) - Component 1) with demand-side interventions targeted at MSMEs (providing entrepreneurship
                             grants and training that help targeted youth start their own business (Track 2), and developing new value
                             chains that generate jobs and opportunities - Component 2) to ensure that targeted youth have access to
                             the jobs created at the firm level with the project’s support, while supporting systems and capacity-
                             building activities (Component 3) to maximize those linkages and synergies. The project-supported
                             creation of linkages and synergies between supply- and demand-side interventions and activities to maximize
                             them (building capacities and effective and accountable delivery systems) were directly supportive of the
                             original and longer-term PDO: to improve economic opportunities for targeted disadvantaged youth in the
                             selected Governorates, and, as per the project’s theory of change (ICR, p. 3), were expected to contribute to
                             other higher order, longer term outcomes, such as increased economic diversification and job creation, and
                             increased female labor force participation.

                             Outputs and intermediate outcomes

                                        There were 140 beneficiaries of job-focused interventions (73 under Track 1/Component 1 and 67
                                         under Track 2/Component 2), not reaching the target of 20,775 beneficiaries. The RF indicates that
                                         the number of beneficiaries of job-focused interventions increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017 to
                                         47,868 in 2024, which significantly exceeds the target of 20,775 beneficiaries, but the RF also notes
                                         that out of the 47,868 beneficiaries of job-focused interventions, 47,728 (over 99 percent) were
                                         beneficiaries of Component 4 interventions.
                                        There were 58 female beneficiaries of job-focused interventions under Component 1, not reaching
                                         the target of 11,000 female beneficiaries. As above, the RF indicates that the number of female
                                         beneficiaries of job-focused interventions under Component 1 increased from a baseline of 0 in 2017
                                         to 9,924 in 2024, but the RF also notes that these were mostly female beneficiaries of Component 4.



                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)




      The number of youths who completed internships or training increased from 0 in 2017 to 67 in 2024,
         exceeding the target of 45 youths.
        The number of female youths who completed internships or training increased from 0 in 2017 to 27 in
         2024, exceeding the target of 20 female youths.
        The share of supported female youth who indicated feeling confident about running their own business
         increased from a baseline of 0 percent in 2017 to 34 percent in 2024, far exceeding the target of 10
         percent.
        The number of newly established microenterprises by Component 2 beneficiaries increased from 0 in
         2017 to 61 in 2024, not achieving the target of 2,200.
        The number of newly established microenterprises by Component 2 female beneficiaries increased
         from 0 in 2017 to 33 in 2024, not achieving the target of 1,200.
        The number of staff (public and private) trained under Component 3 increased from 0 in 2017 to 4 in
         2024, not reaching the original target of 250, or the revised target of 150. Capacity building and
         institutionalization activities were not implemented.
        The share of supported youth with rating "Satisfied" or above from the Beneficiary Youth Scorecard
         increased from 0 percent in 2017 to 49 percent in 2024, not achieving the target of 70 percent.
        The share of supported female youth with rating "Satisfied" or above from the Beneficiary Youth
         Scorecard increased from 0 percent in 2017 to 26 percent in 2024, not achieving the target of 70
         percent.
        The share of grievances addressed within the timeframe stipulated in the project operational
         manual was 0 percent, not reaching the target of 70 percent.
        A total of 67 young entrepreneurs presented their proposals to the regional committee, out of which 64
         projects were appraised and received funding in the form of a subsidy of up to US$5,000 per project.

Outcomes

      The share of supported youth with wage or self-employment increased from 0 percent in 2017 to 52
       percent, not achieving the original target of 20 percent, as the original indicator was dropped at the
       2022 restructuring, and the 52 percent share reflects the results of a small pilot involving 61
       microenterprises (140 beneficiaries) conducted between 2019-2021 and not the initial beneficiary
       target of 10,500 youth.
      The share of supported female youth with wage or self-employment increased from 0 percent in 2017
       to 26 percent, not achieving the original target of 25 percent, as the achieved share reflects the
       results of a small pilot of 61 microenterprises, with a total of 140 beneficiaries, while the original
       indicator (2,625 female beneficiaries) was dropped at the 2022 restructuring.
      The number of full-time equivalent direct jobs created among businesses supported by the project
       increased from 0 in 2017 to 99 in 2024, not achieving the original target of 750 businesses, or the
       revised target at first restructuring of 400 businesses, or the revised target at the second
       restructuring of 9,000 microenterprises to reflect the project’s pivot towards entrepreneurship
       support, when the indicator was reformulated to replace "businesses" with "micro-enterprises."
      The employment gender gap among project beneficiaries was reduced by 1 percent, not reaching
       the original target of 5 percent reduction.

Additional outcomes reported in the ICR (p. 10) not included in the RF, and hence without target values:



                                                                                                Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)




      Of the 73 youth beneficiaries on the pilot project’s wage employment track (Track 1) who completed
       the training, only 14 (19 percent) subsequently achieved wage employment.
      Of the 64 youth who established microenterprises under the pilot’s Track 2, 56 entrepreneurs (around
       88 percent) maintained their enterprises, and most reported an improvement in their living standards
       and that the project had a positive impact on their income.

The achievement of objective 1 is rated Negligible based on non-achievement of the original and revised
outcome targets, as well as non-achievement of original and revised targets for most intermediate-level
indicators.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support the Borrower’s efforts to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on jobs and earning
losses in all Governorates (added at the first project restructuring).

Rationale
The fourth project component was to finance the provision of emergency cash transfers to the self-employed,
artisans, and MSMEs, which were directly supportive of the intermediate outcome: to support the Borrower’s
efforts to mitigate the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on jobs and earning losses in all Governorates,
representing the second objective of the PDO statement.

Outputs and intermediate outcomes

      The share of supported artisans and self-employed still in operations 6 months after receiving the
       project support decreased from 100 percent in 2020 (pre-COVID-19) to 89 percent in 2024 (post-
       COVID-19), exceeding the target of 60 percent.
      The number of artisans and self-employed that received a cash transfer under the project increased
       from 0 in 2020 to 47,747 in 2024, exceeding the target of 45,000. Importantly, under subcomponent
       4.1, only the first and smaller of the two planned transfers was realized. Moreover, subcomponent 4.1
       faced implementation challenges, with 27,009 eligible individuals not retrieving their transfers, which
       was mainly because they were not notified through SMS (62 percent) and because the withdrawal
       system did not work (17 percent), which required beneficiaries to go to distribution points to collect
       their cash transfers. The second, larger and more transformational transfer of TND 1,200,
       accompanied by a training package, was not delivered. The ICR (p. 11) noted that this was due to lack
       of buy-in from the Ministry of Vocational Training and Employment, the PIU's limited implementation
       capacities, and the difficulties arising from implementing the first unconditional transfer. Additionally,
       the project did not provide the envisaged support to MSMEs under subcomponent 4.2. The activity
       was dropped by the government in early 2022 despite the availability of a targeting mechanism,
       registration platform, and additional financing from as well as strong collaboration with other
       development partners.



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)




                                   The number of female artisans and self-employed who received a cash transfer under the project
                                    increased from 0 in 2020 to 9,866 in 2024, not achieving the target of 15,000.

                            Outcomes

                            A total of 69.7 percent of the full-time equivalent (FTE) direct jobs among businesses supported by the project
                            were preserved 6 months after receiving the COVID-19 grant, almost achieving the target of 70 percent
                            preserved FTE direct jobs among businesses supported by the project.

                            The achievement of objective 2 is rated Modest based on (i) partially achieved outcome target; (ii) partially
                            achieved intermediate-level indicator target on the number of female artisans and self-employed that received
                            a cash transfer; (iii) undelivered support to MSMEs under subcomponent 4.2; and (iv) partial success in
                            delivering emergency cash support to the self-employed and artisans based on the exceeded intermediate-
                            level indicator target of 45,000 recipients of emergency support, which, however, included only one (and the
                            smaller) of the envisaged two types of emergency transfers.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy under the PDOs was Negligible, based on negligible achievement of the first objective
                            (improved economic opportunities for targeted disadvantaged youth) and modest achievement of the second
                            objective (supporting the government’s efforts to mitigate the COVID-19 impacts on jobs and earning losses).

                            In the December 13, 2024, written interview with IEG, the Bank team shared its views of the project's
                            attribution/contribution and counterfactual as follows.

                            Attribution. The results of the project's pilot phase could be solely or largely attributed to the project, as the
                            specially selected youth to benefit from the pilot did not benefit from other initiatives. The COVID-19
                            emergency transfer was conducted through a national registration platform for pandemic response and—
                            given the complementary nature of the project’s emergency support—it likely contributed to the achievements
                            of the government’s COVID-19 response. In addition, while the project did not yield significant direct
                            outcomes, it contributed to positive externalities, as the TA delivered under the project, the policy dialogue
                            with the Bank, and the project-led coordination of international stakeholder engagement in the field of youth
                            economic inclusion in Tunisia contributed to (i) a EUR 10 million Bank-executed Trust Fund, which took on
                            the planned system-level investments (notably curricula and MIS development); (ii) an EUR 8 million French
                            Development Agency grant to MSMEs, initially planned to be implemented under the project’s COVID-
                            response subcomponent 4.2, but successfully implemented outside of the project; and (iii) ongoing interest
                            from the African Development Bank in re-engaging with the integrated jobs approach, using the experience
                            and lessons learned from this project.



                                                                                                                                Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



  Counterfactual. The project failed to deliver on key systems investments and planned beneficiary scale-up,
  leaving the issue of counterfactual—at least for the initial project design—somewhat moot. The absence of
  emergency cash transfers to small business owners may have resulted in higher business closures, but this is
  unlikely, as only a small share of the total planned amount (TND 200 out of a total of TND 1,400) was actually
  transferred to beneficiaries.



  Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
  Negligible                                                 Low achievement


 5. Efficiency
Economic efficiency. The project's cost-benefit analysis at appraisal focused on the expected benefits of
Components 1 and 2, with Component 3 expected to improve the performance of these benefits. Expected
benefits of Component 1 (training and matching youth to wage jobs or internships) include increased
employability and productivity, and hence in earnings, for the target group in the selected Governorates, as well
as difficult-to-quantify positive social externalities, such as beneficiaries’ re-engagement in the labor market as
employers or entrepreneurs, and reduced public financial contributions (i.e. social safety net payments and
public health care expenses) to vulnerable households in the medium and long term. The expected benefits of
Component 2 (supporting youth’s entrepreneurship projects and leveraging public and private investments and
job creation in value chains) included beneficiaries’ (i) increased earnings because of the created jobs through
investment in selected value chains and generation of new activities and micro businesses; and (ii) leveraging
new investments (PAD, p. 48). The economic analysis at appraisal revealed that considering complementarities
between supply- and demand-side interventions increases the social rate of return (SRR) for each project
component, with the SRR for the supply-side component increasing from 19 percent to around 24 percent.
Overall, the analysis found that, under 40 to 50 percent government contribution to the private sector, the SRR
for the project without complementarities was about 18 percent, reaching about 20 to 21 percent by designing
an integrated approach (PAD, p. 118).

The COVID-19 pandemic led to significant changes in the project's initial economic analysis, as redirecting
resources toward Component 4 led to a revision of project objectives and affected the relevance of key
indicators used to estimate the project's economic benefits at appraisal. The project's restructuring dropped the
project’s intended outcome to increase beneficiaries’ earnings, leaving intact only the single intended outcome
of increasing disadvantaged youth's access to wage and self-employment opportunities, which made the project
suitable for cost-effectiveness analysis, as there was no longer a need for cost-benefit analysis (which relies on
assumptions of the monetary value of the benefits accrued through the project). The end-of-project financial and
economic analysis therefore focused on the project’s cost effectiveness in placing beneficiaries in jobs and
creating businesses. Only a small pilot was undertaken between 2019-21 with a total of 140 beneficiaries. The
project’s cost-effectiveness analysis used anecdotal evidence from semi-structured interviews with 17 project
beneficiaries and administrative data from the UGO, which consisted of: Track 1 beneficiaries (vocational
training) who were placed in jobs and Track 2 beneficiaries (entrepreneurship training) whose businesses were
still in operation. Although neither exhaustive nor representative, the interview data provided an indication of the
pilot’s medium-term impact on the permanence of job placement and enterprise creation. The operation’s
investment of over US$1 million in the pilot project resulted in 14 job placements and 64 enterprises created, of
which 56 (around 88 percent) were still in operation, for a cost of around US$10,000 per job and US$16,070 per
business established. Based on the data from beneficiary interviews, the cost per job placement can be
estimated at around US$13,420, and the cost per created business around US$23,440. These data (despite

                                                                                                      Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



their considerable quality and availability limitations) indicate that the costs of Tracks 1 and 2 remain within the
range of similar projects in developing countries. The project underperformed in its Track 1 compared to similar
vocational training projects, while meeting expectations with its Track 2 when benchmarked against
entrepreneurship support initiatives (ICR, p. 37).

Implementation and administrative efficiency. The project had low implementation efficiency due to a poor
ratio between the resources used and results achieved. The project started slowly, with a six-month delay in
validation of the project by the Tunisian parliament after signing the project loan agreement. The project was
implemented with significant freezes in activity. At project closure, the total project cost was US$1.66 million,
excluding the cost of Component 4 (US$5 million), indicating a very low disbursement rate under the original
project components: only around 3 percent of the initially approved amount of US$56.5 million equivalent and
6.8 percent of the revised amount of US$24.5 million equivalent. If counting Component 4 expenditures, the
disbursement rate was 11.8 percent of the initially approved loan amount and 27 percent of the revised loan
amount. Administrative costs, including Component 4, were 9.3 percent, rising to 37.5 percent of total actual
project disbursement, if not counting Component 4. The project's low implementation efficiency was a result of
several factors, within and outside the project’s control, that had a negative impact on the project's efficacy,
timeliness of its delivery, and the amount of support that was planned to be provided. As stated in the ICR (p.
12), the project design was too complex for the capacities of the multiple agencies involved, significantly
increasing operational risk. The limited capacity to coordinate and implement preparatory activities led to critical
delays and inability to provide support to project beneficiaries. At the first restructuring, the project’s overall
progress towards PDO achievement was rated moderately satisfactory, while overall implementation
performance was moderately unsatisfactory, which was partly due to the project’s slow start due to the long
approval process associated with the ratification of the project by the Parliament, and major delays in setting up
the PIU. At the second restructuring, according to the latest (at the time) Implementation Status and Results
Report (ISR) of January 26, 2022, progress toward the achievement of PDO and the overall implementation
progress were rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU). The downgrade to MU stemmed largely from delays
associated with the implementation of Component 4 activities. Procurement challenges, due to UGO’s limited
capacity and institutional hurdles, were significant, affecting the entire World Bank Group Tunisia portfolio at the
time. The UGO dedicated 12-18 months between year 2 and year 3 to a small pilot project that was not part of
the initial design. The COVID-19 pandemic in year 3 blocked face-to-face activities and diverted efforts from
core project components, disrupting the implementation of the pilot project and the preparation for project scale-
up, as well as limiting training opportunities for UGO staff due to travel and public administration employee
training restrictions, which negatively impacted capacity development. Human resource challenges occurred
during implementation, with UGO having three different managers over the course of the project and facing
difficulties staffing up, high turnover, and skills mismatches. Political risk was also present, with high turnover of
MFPE leadership, an 18-month pause in activities, and a project restructuring that effectively froze the project
for 18 months between 2021 and 2023. At the same time, UGO staff's efforts in implementing this complex
project in a challenging environment, despite understaffing, were commendable. The UGO managed to carry the
project forward, filled in recruitment gaps, and continued to push the implementation of the second project
restructuring to the end despite a tight timeline and an increasingly unfavorable environment for the project.

The project was not implemented at the planned scale, and the end-of-project cost-effectiveness analysis was
based on limited administrative and anecdotal data for a small-scale pilot, which indicated mixed results:
underperformance of Track 1 compared to similar vocational training projects, and Track 2 that met
expectations. Overall efficiency is rated Negligible due to low economic and implementation efficiency, minimal
disbursement, and high administrative costs compared to outcomes.




                                                                                                       Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



Efficiency Rating
Negligible


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                 0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                              0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of PDO is rated substantial; efficacy is rated negligible for the first objective and modest for the
second objective; and efficiency is rated negligible. These ratings produce an overall outcome rating of Highly
Unsatisfactory, reflecting severe shortcomings in the operation’s preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

As reported by the Bank team in a written interview dated 12-13-24, the main channel for the project’s
achievements to be sustained would be through an upcoming African Development Bank (AfDB)-supported
youth employment program, which draws on the integrated design of this project. Going forward, the risks for
the successful implementation of the AfDB-supported project will be tied to political context, institutional
arrangements, and government coordination and implementation capacities.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project design—based on an extensive analytical and evidence base, and on the 2013 World
  Development Report—was ambitious, reflecting the high priority that youth employment had for Tunisia's
  government and the WBG. The project components were clearly structured, and the activities were
  comprehensive, complementary to each other, and relevant to the country and sector context. The PAD

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



correctly ranked the overall project risk as high, based on identified key risks, including (i) high and/or
substantial risks linked to political and governance issues, macroeconomic issues, and sector strategies;
(ii) substantial risks related to the project's technical design, and specifically to the integrated approach to
jobs; (iii) high risks related to institutional and implementation capacity, including low implementation
capacity in lagging regions; (iv) substantial fiduciary risks, (iv) high stakeholders risks; and (vii) high
security risk. A number of risk mitigation measures were identified at appraisal, including measures
to ensure implementation readiness, appropriate technical staffing of the UGO, a phased approach for
various activities, technical assistance and institutional development for gradual appropriation of technical
design features by central and regional agencies and other stakeholders, maintaining the coalition and
coordination across different stakeholders and administration levels, ensuring transparency and selection
criteria as well as mechanisms to monitor for risks of elite capture in selection processes, and help with
design of workable and Tunisia-sensitive GRM (PAD, p. 43). However, as the experience of this project
showed, these mitigation measures were insufficient.

Certain design features increased the project’s risk, especially when combined with the UGO's limited
operational capacity and institutional arrangements. More specifically, stakeholders interviewed for the
project’s ICR identified the following design flows that increased the project’s risk: (i) complexity,
frontloading, and operational sequencing: the design overestimated the implementing agency's ability to
coordinate the implementation of the complex preparatory work that was required in order to provide the
project support at the envisaged scale; (ii) redesigning Tunisia’s youth employment system starting with
the marginalized youth: in line with national stakeholders’ views, it may have been technically and
politically preferable to build the overarching employment system then adapt this system to the specific
needs of vulnerable categories of youth; (iii) externalization of service provision: establishing
performance-based contracting of firms providing accompanying services—such as training, mentoring,
job matching, support to firms and value chains—despite its conceptual soundness, was not customary
practice in the Tunisian public administration.

The project's institutional arrangements led to significant risks that affected its implementation. These
included: (i) project placement within MFPE, which had not implemented large-scale projects before, had
no knowledge of WBG procedures, and had limited convening power and experience for effective inter-
ministerial coordination; (ii) operational dependence on MFPE’s implementing agency, ANETI (National
Agency for Employment and Independent Work): the project design required the UGO to use ANETI's
resources and expertise for key deliverables, such as job-matching systems and training curricula, which
ANETI would then implement as part of its own programs. However, as reported by key informants,
ANETI—which, despite its nominal authority, operated with significant independence due to its
substantial resources and involvement with international donors—was resistant to this arrangement, as it
added to their workload without providing control over project funding, resulting in ANETI’s reluctance to
allocate resources to important aspects of project implementation, such as procurement, financial
management (FM), and M&E; (iii) the project delegated VCD activities (subcomponent 2.1) to CEPEX,
which was beyond the influence of the UGO or MFPE. The rationale was to develop CEPEX’s role as a
technical hub for VCD in Tunisia. However, this decision left a key activity outside the direct control of
primary implementing entities, complicating coordination and oversight. CEPEX also experienced
significant instability during project implementation, with seven different chief executive officers. As noted
by the Bank team in a written interview dated 12-13-24, VCD activities initially involved preparatory work
(i.e., identifying relevant value chains and preparing value chain assessments and action plans), which
was delegated to a dedicated Task Force platform anchored at CEPEX within the Ministry of Commerce,
supported by a contracted private sector service provider. This was done under a complex inter-
ministerial institutional platform and a framework contract with the PIU. The staff salaries and all

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



  operating costs were funded by four parallel WB-funded projects, including this project. The Bank was
  heavily involved in the preparation of this arrangement. However, the project design underestimated risks
  related to institutional ownership, turnover, interdependence with other World Bank-funded projects,
  burdensome contractual arrangements, and externalization of activities to stakeholders outside the
  project's direct control. In this regard, the Bank team noted that simpler implementation arrangements
  with greater control by the Ministry/PIU could have been more effective and avoided challenging inter-
  ministerial coordination arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team—with a Task Team Leader based in Tunis for much of the project’s duration—provided
 intensive implementation support, promptly identifying activity-level constraints and bottlenecks, and
 providing guidance to resolve them, as evidenced by the clear action points agreed upon at the end of
 each implementation support mission and as detailed in the aide-memoires. As noted above, under the
 second restructuring, the project's original integrated approach was shifted towards a simpler
 entrepreneurship support mechanism by eliminating job matching and VCD activities, while dropping the
 MIS and curriculum development reduced the project's system building aspirations. System building
 activities, however, were later implemented through the World Bank-executed EU4YOUTH Trust Fund of
 EUR 10 million, which aimed to help mitigate capacity gaps and provided critical assistance to ANETI,
 including job-matching platforms and service enhancements like new training curricula. Additionally, the
 integrated approach that formed the project's initial vision and design is now serving as a foundation for
 financing from the AfDB. In response to the COVID-19 crisis, the Bank team swiftly restructured the project,
 and during thе second project phase, maintained robust virtual support and supervision, and formed
 strategic partnerships with key development actors like AFD and GIZ for implementation and scaling. After
 the second project restructuring (third phase), the Bank team continued to provide crucial support to the
 UGO, assisting in the submission of hundreds of business development applications from entrepreneurs
 during the remaining twelve months until project closure in January 2024. National stakeholders praised
 the Bank team for its practical, hands-on approach. The UGO's managers appreciated the strong technical
 support that the Bank team provided in the complex operational and political environment of Tunisia.

 The project faced persistent challenges, including procurement delays, staffing shortages, and political and
 coordination difficulties, which likely warranted from the Bank earlier and more decisive corrective
 measures, including structural adjustments or even closing the project. While weak project monitoring
 impeded full visibility into these issues, the consistent and critical issues, which were also identified through
 the February 2022 portfolio review, should have prompted stronger intervention by the Bank team.

 Overall, the Bank's failure to mitigate risks, ineffective adaptation to Tunisia's institutional context, and
 excessive complexity at entry led to significant shortcomings in project implementation, resulting in
 Unsatisfactory overall Bank performance.




                                                                                                        Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original and revised PDO were clearly articulated. The PAD identified baselines and targets, as well as
 data sources, frequency of reporting, data collection methodology, and responsible authorities for each
 indicator (PAD, pp. 56-69). The PDO-level indicators were clearly defined and provided good measures of
 outcomes. However, as noted in the ICR (p. 16), the project RF prioritized job creation outcomes over
 systems-strengthening and activity output monitoring, limiting its ability to track progress and identify
 bottlenecks. While the second restructuring expanded the project target population from disadvantaged
 youth aged 18-35 to include business-ready entrepreneurs aged 18-45, as noted in the ICR (p. 5), this
 adjustment could have been reflected in a change to the PDO to clarify that the broadened targeting
 approach was intended to match the stronger entrepreneurial focus of the restructured project. Additional
 indicators could have been included in the RF to monitor the development of the digitalized job profiling
 system, various training curricula, and the VCD objectives under Component 2.1. Also, the RF could have
 segregated between Track 1 and Track 2 beneficiaries, payment tranches, completion of training, or
 accompanying measures. At appraisal, it was envisaged that the project’s M&E would be based on the MIS
 that was to capture selected youth and MSMEs. The M&E system was to be closely linked to the project
 job profiling system, financed under Component 1. At intake and registration, selected youth or MSMEs
 were to provide data to establish a baseline, which was to be repeated at mid-term and end-project through
 tracer surveys. The M&E system was also to incorporate reporting from performance-based service
 providers who were to provide data on support to each beneficiary/firm and status, linked to the
 performance contracts and subject to quality control by the UGO.



b. M&E Implementation
  The Bank team consistently monitored and reported on the project's progress despite data availability
  constraints. However, the UGO did not hire an M&E specialist or develop the planned M&E system,
  leading to weak monitoring results and ineffective progress tracking. The Bank team took a proactive
  approach, facilitating communication among stakeholders and collecting data for project oversight. At the
  request of MFPE, in December 2021, the Bank conducted a comprehensive stocktaking exercise and
  review with the government, which served as the project's mid-term evaluation. Although a baseline
  assessment and mid-point survey were conducted for a small pilot phase in 2018, no follow-up online
  assessment was carried out, limiting opportunities for evidence generation and project learning.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used to monitor project implementation and progress, and to inform the project
  restructurings and the analysis of the ICR. Given the unavailability of the planned M&E system and the

                                                                                                 Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



  absence of an M&E expert, the Bank's supervision missions were crucial for gathering information on
  project status, identifying issues, and finding solutions. The two restructurings were carried out based on
  implementation challenges identified during these missions.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project's subcomponent 2.1 (Support for Value Chain Development) and subcomponent 2.2 (Support to
   Microenterprise Creation) included building of small civil works that could potentially generate site-specific
   environmental impacts, expected to be minimal and easily mitigated. In addition, the project was expected
   to target value chain investments in potentially high-risk sectors, like agriculture, that pose risks related to
   child labor, occupational health, and biodiversity. Investments in small microenterprises could also generate
   adverse impacts. The rest of the project components focused on institutional development, TA, and capacity
   building (PAD, p. 54). In compliance with World Bank OP/BP 4.01 and based on the safeguards
   assessment at the time of project preparation, given that that the project’s effects were to be limited, easily
   controllable/manageable, and not irreversible, the project was rated as Category "B" partial assessment. An
   Environmental and Social (E&S) Management Framework was prepared and disclosed before appraisal,
   but the project's compliance with E&S safeguards policies was rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory. Except
   for the rehabilitation work conducted in Daouer Hicher in 2020—where simplified checklists were used to
   monitor the implementation of mitigation measures—critical E&S actions were not implemented, such as
   appointing a dedicated full-time E&S focal point, and recruiting an E&S consultant to support the focal point
   and the UGO in the implementation of E&S activities, including the preparation of the E&S management
   plan, monitoring, reporting, and training. The project GRM was finalized only at the end of the project (ICR,
   p. 20).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management. As reported in the ICR (p. 2), the project’s FM faced many challenges, including
   delays in submitting FM documentation and audit reports, and ineffective monitoring of annual work plans
   and budget execution. FM performance was consistently unsatisfactory, with significant risk. From the
   outset, the project struggled to submit Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) on time. At the time of ICR
   preparation, the project had several key financial documents still outstanding, including statements of
   expenditures, two Interim IFRs for 2023, and audit reports for 2022, 2023, and January 2024. The 2021
   audit report received a clean "unmodified" opinion from the external auditor. EUR 11 million in the
   designated account was undocumented by the deadline, which was at the end of the grace period on May
   31, 2024. By the time of ICR Review preparation (December 2024), as reported by the Bank team in a
   written interview dated 12-13-24, the previously undocumented EUR 11 million in the designated account
   had been documented, the two outstanding IFRs for 2023 had been submitted and cleared, and the audit
   report for 2022 had been submitted with unqualified opinion, but the audit reports for 2023 and January


                                                                                                    Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



   2024 are still outstanding and will be submitted by the end of December 2024, and the external financial
   audit at project closing has yet to be submitted.

   Procurement. The UGO faced procurement challenges throughout the project. At Mid-Term Review - due
   to limited internal capabilities and complex regulations - fourteen out of the thirty-eight planned contracts in
   the Bank’s tool for Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) were canceled. While the
   Bank procurement team's assistance helped improve procurement capacity over time, the project's
   procurement performance was rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to persistent delays and discrepancies
   in clause interpretation by state procurement control and the departmental procurement commission.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   Gender. The project aimed to reduce gender gaps in accessing economic opportunities for female
   beneficiaries, as shown by the PAD's PDO elaboration (i.e., reduction of gaps between male and female
   beneficiaries for accessing key economic opportunities is an integral part of the project). The project
   included two PDO-level and five intermediate indicators on female beneficiaries. Female-specific project
   activities included higher stipends for female participants with dependents, and special training on
   overcoming gender norms and entrepreneurship self-confidence. However, under the second restructuring,
   most of these activities were eliminated, while 70 percent of Component 4 beneficiaries were male.



11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Highly
Outcome                                                Highly Unsatisfactory
                                 Unsatisfactory
Bank Performance                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   High


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 22-24) presents several lessons generated through this project:

It is essential that institutional arrangements are based on a thorough analysis of
institutions' technical, operational, and convening capabilities. The project's chosen
arrangement aimed to improve the MFPE’s capacity and authority over the MFPE’s implementation

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



agency (ANETI). However, issues like limited internal capacity, lack of experience with World Bank-
financed projects, procurement challenges, and recruitment rules affecting government staff were
known during project design and should have been considered during decision-making at the time,
along with issues related to mandates, funding, legal responsibilities, and political risk.

To avoid delays that can affect project outcomes, it is important to ensure early on that PIUs
and implementing agencies have the capacity to manage procurement processes effectively.
Public procurement in Tunisia is regulated by multiple institutions, including the Public Procurement
Authority, Market Control Commissions, Evaluation Committees, and Opening Committees. All
procurement activities for World Bank-financed projects must pass through these entities before
contracts can be signed. Obtaining clearances from each institution is time-consuming and requires
expertise from PIUs and implementing agencies. This suggests that, in order to avoid delays that
could jeopardize project outcomes, it is crucial to ensure that PIUs and implementing agencies have
the necessary capacity and readiness to manage and expedite procurement processes effectively.

Strong innovation or system-strengthening project outcomes cannot be effectively captured
if these objectives are not included in the project’s RF. In this case, the project's objectives were
not clearly reflected in its RF, limiting the ability of the Bank and the government to track progress
and provide timely oversight.

Simplifying project design and focusing on core activities that are better aligned with the
vision and mandate of the implementing agency can increase implementation efficiency. The
project required numerous preliminary actions, including setting up a MIS, data systems, and VCD
analyses, before beneficiaries could be processed and funds disbursed, suggesting that the range of
innovations might have been better implemented through a phased approach over a longer time
horizon, potentially across several projects (including TA or capacity-building-focused programs). In
this regard, the project's entrepreneurship component showed promising results, with the
straightforward design under the second restructuring being effective in supporting entrepreneurs
during its implementation over 12 months. By streamlining and refocusing on core activities, the
project could efficiently solicit, process, and select many entrepreneurial projects for funding. While
this shift meant that some important innovative and system-strengthening elements were lost, the
simpler design better matched the MFPE’s vision and mandate, resulting in accelerating the
implementation of the remaining activities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well written, with its various parts logically linked and coherent, giving a good picture with plenty of
details and insights. It was candid about implementation delays and provided an overall adequate, critical
assessment of the project's achievements and shortcomings, as well as detailed explanations of the project’s
changes introduced at the two restructurings. The ICR’s efficiency and Bank performance sections were
particularly insightful, presenting a detailed analysis of the key factors affecting implementation, Bank

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)



performance, and M&E. The lessons presented in the report were useful and derived from project experience.
This ICR provides an excellent basis for learning and sharing lessons more broadly in the Bank.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                               Page 22 of 22
