     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024202

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P160801                                     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Republic of                          Governance


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60230                                   31-May-2022                                         40,398,379.93

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 04-May-2017                                 31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              40,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          40,398,379.93                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Kandi Magendo               Vandana Chandra               Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC (Unit 1)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO), as stated in the original financing agreement (FA) dated June 23,
   2017, was “to improve public resources management and accountability in the Republic of Congo." The
   objectives stated in the FLA and the PAD (p. 11) are identical.

   For this review, the two objectives are as follows:

           PDO1: Improve public resources management in the Republic of Congo (RoC).

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



         PDO2: Improve accountability in the RoC.

   The PDO was not modified during the project implementation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Strengthening Revenue Mobilization and Public Expenditure Management (US$19.6
   million at appraisal; US$21.2 million actual).

   Component 1 aimed to improve non-oil revenue collection and rationalize the expenditure chain through
   technical assistance (TA) and material support.

   Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening Revenue Mobilization focused on enhancing institutional capacity for
   tax collection, including implementing the Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment Tool (TADAT) and
   developing and implementing a tax strategy, modernizing/computerizing the tax administration, and
   developing a property tax system (PAD, para 43). The restructuring dropped some initially planned
   activities, including, the review of exemptions in non-oil sectors, and the design of a communication strategy
   (RES46642, Table 3).

   Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening Public Expenditure Management aimed to improve the budget
   allocation process. Key activities included identifying policy priorities for the national development plan
   (NDP), updating macro-economic data for the medium-term expenditure framework (MTEF), reviewing and
   reforming public investment management (PIM), improving oversight of state-owned enterprises (SOEs),
   and integrating regional Public Financial Management (PFM) directives into the national law (PAD, para 44).
   The restructuring dropped plans to develop a strategic PFM reform action plan since one already existed.
   Instead, the focus shifted to supporting the implementation of the existing PFM action plan as needed.
   Additionally, the design and launch of a website for the Ministry of Planning were dropped. The initial plan to
   computerize public expenditure management was narrowed to developing a few modules. Additional
   activities following the restructuring included developing an SOE debt database, supporting the debt
   steering committee, and implementing an electronic document management system (RES46642, Table 3).

   Component 2: Modernization of the Public Administration (US$10.5 million at appraisal; US$5.9
   million actual)

   Component 2 aimed to modernize public administration in pilot departments and agencies, through TA and
   material support.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



Subcomponent 2.1: Improving Civil Service Management Capacity focused on developing a more
effective civil service system. The operation planned to review the legal, regulatory, and institutional
framework of the civil service, design and implement a strategic action plan for public administration reform,
create a civil service registry, establish an employee reference system, adopt a new manual for civil servant
management and implement a computerized career management system (PAD, para 48).

Subcomponent 2.2: Modernization of the Departments Implementing the Reducing Emissions from
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries Initiative (REDD+) aimed to support
the implementation of the Sangha/Likouala emissions-reduction program (ER-P). It included building the
capacity of REDD+ Committees in Sangha and Likouala, and the Forest Economy Directorates (MEFDDE)
for overseeing logging operations. However, the MEFDDE capacity-building activities were dropped during
restructuring (RES46642, Table 3).

Subcomponent 2.3: Improving Procurement Management initially focused on enhancing procurement
systems, including legal reviews, audits, institutional restructuring, and developing an e-tracking system
(PAD, para 48). Most of these activities were dropped during restructuring, except for restructuring and
strengthening Public Procurement Management Units (CGMPs) in the health sector (RES46642, Table 3).

Component 3: Improving Transparency and Accountability (US$4.2 million at appraisal; US$4.9
million actual)

Component 3 focused on improving transparency and accountability in public finance, with key activities
aimed at strengthening oversight institutions, social accountability, and transparency in forestry and
extractive industries.

Subcomponent 3.1: Supporting the Supreme Audit Authority (CCDB), the General Inspection of
Finance (IGF), and the Parliament's Economic and Finance Committee (EFC) aimed to strengthen
public oversight institutions. Activities included finalizing the CCDB's organic law and ethics code,
implementing audit methodology guides, developing annual work plans for IGF, and providing training to
IGF, CCDB, and EFC. Other efforts focused on improving audit archiving systems and creating a CCDB
website (PAD, para 50). Supporting coordination between CCDB and the Parliament's EFC was dropped
during restructuring (RES46642, Table 3).

Subcomponent 3.2: Supporting Social Accountability and Citizen Engagement aimed to strengthen
civil society organizations (CSOs) as independent budget monitors. Activities included engaging CSOs in
budget monitoring, informing citizens about governance reforms, and gathering public feedback on service
delivery (PAD, para 51). Collaboration with oversight institutions and monitoring audit recommendations
were dropped during restructuring. CSO participation was reformulated to focus solely on budget execution
oversight (RES46642, Table 3).

Subcomponent 3.3: Enhancing Transparency in Forestry Management aimed to improve forestry
revenue collection and the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) compliance by designing a
forestry tax guide and publishing data on forestry contracts and permits. This subcomponent was dropped
completely during restructuring (RES46642, Table 3).

Subcomponent 3.4: Improving Transparency in the Extractives Sector supported efforts to maintain
EITI compliance by producing reports on oil sales, revenue transfers, and production sharing contracts.
After restructuring, only the EITI compliance reports were retained (RES46642, Table 3).


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



   Component 4: Project Implementation Support (US$5.7 million at appraisal; US$8.0 million actual)

   Component 4 aimed to enhance implementation capacity under the Project, and strengthen the
   government’s monitoring and evaluation function (PAD, para 54).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$40.0 million. The actual amount disbursed was US$40.4
   million, with the difference due to exchange rate fluctuations. The project, fully funded by IDA (Credit 6023-
   CG) with no government contribution, was approved on May 4, 2017, and became effective on July 17,
   2018. A Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted between October 5 to December 23, 2020. The project
   was restructured on November 12, 2021, when the disbursement rate stood at 47percent. This restructuring
   aimed to refocus activities and address implementation challenges identified during the MTR. Initially
   scheduled to close on May 31, 2022, the project's end date was extended to December 31, 2023, to allow
   for the completion of ongoing activities.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context: At the time of project appraisal in 2017, the RoC faced significant constraints
in achieving its development ambitions. The sharp decline in global oil prices and reduced oil production led
to a drop in revenue mobilization, causing high uncertainty in public revenues. Oil contributed over 37.0
percent of GDP, 32.6 percent of government revenues, and 69.2 percent of exports, making the economy
vulnerable to global market fluctuations. Despite its natural wealth, including forests, arable land, and a
strategic deep-sea port, the RoC struggled with high poverty, unemployment, and inequality. Weak public
institutions and limited implementation capacity hindered the country's ability to leverage these resources
for inclusive economic growth. The project aimed to address significant challenges to development as
further described below:

      Low non-oil revenue generation: Despite some improvement through tax reforms, such as
       increases in the Value Added Tax (VAT), challenges persisted. The automated tax collection system
       was not fully operational, and inefficiencies in forestry taxation hindered revenue from this sector.
       Forestry, a potential revenue source, contributed significantly less due to mismanagement and tax
       evasion.
      Inefficient public expenditure management: Despite increased allocations to strategic sectors like
       health, education, and energy, low execution rates hindered improvements in service delivery.
       Large-scale investments, especially in infrastructure, averaged US$600 million annually, but the PIM
       system struggled with poor project selection, weak coordination, and limited capacity in the
       construction sector.
      Public procurement remained impacted by inefficiencies, corruption, and weak oversight:
       Despite reforms in 2009, capacity in procurement management units was uneven, and many




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



       ministries faced staffing disruptions due to changes in government. Procurement audits were limited,
       with high-value contracts often excluded from reviews, undermining transparency and accountability.

      Challenges in public administration: The absence of a civil service biometric census and a
       coordinated database between the Ministry of Civil Service, Labor and Social Security (MFPRE) and
       the Ministry of Economy, Finance, Budget, and Public Portfolio (MFBPP) made it difficult for the
       government to accurately track and manage its estimated 80,000 civil servants, which accounted for
       19 percent of public spending. Corruption in civil service personnel management further
       compounded the problem. Civil servants experienced low morale due to stagnant pay since 1994,
       poor working conditions, lack of performance evaluations, and insufficient training opportunities.
       Additionally, recruitment processes were decentralized, leading to irregular hiring practices without
       proper oversight. The absence of a computerized HR management system allowed staff to move
       freely between departments and cities without proper authorization.
      Transparency in extractive industries: Despite achieving Extractive Industries Transparency
       Initiative (EITI) compliance in 2013, the country struggled with maintaining transparency. In the
       forestry sector, the RoC committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions through the REDD+
       program. However, institutional constraints, including weak governance and limited administrative
       capacity, hampered efforts to manage forests sustainably and unlock performance-based financing
       for climate mitigation.
      Governance of SOEs: Outdated regulations governing SOEs added to the inefficiencies. Many
       SOEs, especially in critical sectors like energy and water, were unprofitable, failed to meet
       transparency requirements, and contributed little to the broader economy.
      Transparency and accountability in the Public Sector: The country also faced significant
       challenges to public sector transparency and accountability. Oversight institutions, such as the IGF
       and CCDB, were hampered by inadequate funding, lack of staff training, and insufficient capacity.
       The CCDB, in particular, struggled with independence and could audit less than 50 percent of total
       expenditures. Additionally, audit reports were delayed, and recommendations were rarely
       implemented due to weak follow-up and lack of enforcement by central authorities. The Parliament's
       ability to oversee budget execution was limited by poor-quality reports and insufficient capacity.
       CSOs also faced constraints, including limited resources and access to information, reducing their
       effectiveness as external watchdogs.

The PDO to improve public resources management and accountability in the RoC was aligned with
the strategy agreed upon between the WB and the RoC. In its Country Partnership Framework (CPF) at
closing (FY20-25), the WB planned to support government efforts to improve efficiency and accountability in
public resources management (Objective 1.1), implement adequate and sustainable macro-fiscal
management (Objective 1.2), and improve sustainable management of natural resource (Objective 2.4).
The PDO was also aligned with the RoC National Development Plan (PND 2022-206) at closing which
identified strengthening governance as a cross-cutting objective of the PND. However, the restructuring
process eliminated several activities relevant to the CPF, including the review of exemptions in non-oil
sectors, support for improving procurement management, and efforts to enhance transparency in forestry
management and the extractive sector, except for the EITI compliance reports.

The PDO was aligned with key components of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS FY13–FY16)
and the RoC’s PND (2012–2016) at appraisal. The CPS aimed in part to improve budget management,
procurement, statistical system, and the institutional framework for the management of extractives. The



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



               PND aimed to intensify efforts to promote economic diversification, improve service delivery, and
               strengthen governance.

               The project was part of a sustained and continued engagement of the WB in the RoC to improve
               governance and public resource management. It followed two Transparency and Governance
               Projects (P073507, P122990 – US$27 million) implemented from 2002 to 2015, which aimed to strengthen
               the capacity of targeted public sector ministries, agencies and accountability structures for improved
               management of human and financial resource. These two operations facilitated the implementation of the
               Post Conflict Economic Rehabilitation Credit (P073316, US$38 million) approved in 2002 and the Economic
               Recovery Credit (P083627 – US$30 million) approved in 2005, which in part aimed to introduce greater
               transparency and improved governance in the management of key areas (oil and forestry resources, public
               funds) and orderly and transparent clearance of domestic arrears. The RoC had also benefited from
               support from the WB to develop and institutionalize the EITI initiative (P129383, FY12-14).

               Relevance is rated substantial. The PDO to improve public resources management and accountability was
               aligned with the country strategy at closing. Although the project’s design covered a wide range of areas,
               the PDO was pitched at a level that was appropriate given the country context, and WB engagement in the
               sectors and country and was a meaningful contribution toward solving many development problems
               identified above.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve public resources management in the RoC

                             Rationale
                             The project did not provide a clear Theory of Change (ToC) for improving public resources management in
                             the RoC - neither in the PAD, the restructuring document, nor the ICR. However, based on the project
                             activities and results framework (RF), the ToC suggested that strengthening tax administration through
                             improved automated processes, e-filing and payments, and taxpayer audits; enhancing PIM by applying
                             rigorous project selection criteria; improving HRM by conducting a biometric census of civil servants and
                             digitalizing the HRMIS, and a relevant training program, would lead to better public resources management in
                             the RoC. In theory, these activities, if accompanied by a solid change management strategy, enforcement
                             mechanisms, and pollical will, could improve public resources management. Highlighting these factors in the
                             ToC would have made it more robust.

                             PDO Indicator 1 was revised from “increase in non-oil tax revenue” in nominal value to “development of an
                             integrated, simplified, and secure tax management system” measured as the percentage of registered large

                                                                                                                            Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



taxpayers filing and paying online. According to the ICR (p. 12) the original indicator was dropped as it was
highly correlated with economic fluctuations beyond the control of the project. IEG concluded that a split
rating was not required because the project did not become less ambitious as a result of this change.
The effective adoption and use of an integrated tax management system by taxpayers can be an adequate
PDO-level indicator.

PDO Indicator 2 was revised from “increase in the Capital expenditure execution rate” to “share of budget
allocated to new investment projects, which have been selected based on the PIM evaluation process, in
priority NDP sectors”. According to the ICR (p.12), the change was required because “no original activity in
the project was contributing to the achievement of the indicator.” IEG concluded that a split rating was not
required because the project did not become less ambitious as a result of this change. However, the revised
indicator could pose measurement challenges as the rigorous application of the PIM evaluation process may
not be objectively measured.

PDO Indicator 3 was revised from measuring the "increase in civil servants managed through the civil
service registry" to “Active civil servants at central and deconcentrated levels registered in the HRMIS.” The
new indicator measured the percentage of civil servants registered in the HR database through biometric
enrollment. According to the restructuring document (Table 5), the civil service registry functions only as a
database, not as a tool for managing civil servants, necessitating the reformulation of the indicator. While
acknowledging the shortcomings of the original PDO indicator, IEG notes that the revised indicator is also
inadequate for measuring the project's achievement of its PDO. This aligns with the ICR's assessment (para
72) that "the true measure of success would have been the effective management of civil servants, including
records and career management linked to payroll, in the HRMIS." The HRMIS had not been deployed at the
time of the ICRR.

According to the ICR, the following outputs and outcomes were achieved (ICR, p.15):

Outputs:

      DGID adopted and published a strategic plan for revenue mobilization 2023-2026 based on TADAT
         recommendations.
        Audit of the existing taxpayer register was successfully carried out, 132 large taxpayers in Brazzaville
         and 245 in Pointe-Noire were identified and entered into the tax register, and a roadmap for
         transitioning to a central taxpayer register was adopted.
        Eleven ministries (out of a target of 8) adopted and validated strategic plans aligned with medium-term
         budgetary frameworks.
        33 out of 35 ministries put into practice the new procedure for selecting investment projects.
        343 development projects listed in the PND, and 212 included in the 2024 budget were selected using
         the new investment project selection procedure.
        Biometric enrollment of 99percent of civil servants and volunteer teachers.
        The electronic register of civil servants was harmonized with the HRMIS; however, the system was not
         deployed.

Intermediate Outcomes:

      Improved taxpayer identification with the taxpayer audit and integration of large taxpayers into the tax
         system.

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)




      Enhanced PIM with the implementation of project selection procedures.
      Modernized public administration through centralized and digitalized HRM, though the system is not
       yet fully deployed.

PDO outcomes:

PDO Indicator 1: Development of an integrated, simplified, and secure tax management system (percentage
of registered large taxpayers filing and paying online). Baseline (2016): No effective and integrated tax
management system. Target (2023): 50 percent of registered large taxpayers filing and paying taxes
electronically. Result: 50 percent of registered taxpayers filed but did not pay online. Achievement: Partly
Achieved.

Intermediate Outcome indicators:

IRI1.1.1: Adoption and implementation of a strategic plan for revenue mobilization. Baseline: No. Target: Yes.
Actual: Yes. Achieved.

IRI 1.1.2: Strengthening the integrity of the taxpayer register. Baseline: No. Target: Yes. Actual: Yes.
Achieved.

PDO Indicator 2: Share of budget allocated to new investment projects, which have been selected based on
the PIM evaluation process, in priority PND sectors (Percentage). Baseline (2016): 0percent. Target:
30percent. Result: 52percent. Achievement: Exceeded.

According to the ICR (p. 14), 212 of the 343 projects listed in the PND 2022-2026 were selected based on the
reformed PIM process and criteria and included in the 2024 finance law. These projects represented 52
percent of the total investment budget of 2024.

Intermediate Outcome indicators:

IRI1.2.1: Number of ministries whose strategic plans are aligned with medium-term budgetary frameworks.
Baseline: 0. Target: 8. Actual: 11. Exceeded.

IRI 1.2.2: Number of Ministries using the new investment project selection procedures. Baseline: 0. Target:
30. Actual: 33. Exceeded.

PDO Indicator 3: Active civilian civil servants at central and deconcentrated levels registered in the HRMIS
(Percentage). Baseline (2016): 0percent. Target (2023): 60percent. Result: 99percent. Achievement:
Exceeded.

According to the ICR, to fully digitize the HRMIS, biometric enrollment was carried out across the country
migrating the manual HR register with 56,968 civil servants into a HRMIS. 99 percent of state civil servants as
well as volunteer teachers were enrolled across the 12 geographic departments of the country. The 1 percent
remaining involved state agents and consulate staff based abroad in embassies (ICR, p.14). However, the
new HRMIS was not operational at the time of the ICRR.

Intermediate Outcome indicators:


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



IRI2.1.1: Implementation of a digitized Human Resources Management (HRM) system -SIGRHE (Système
intégré de gestion des ressources humaines de l’Etat). Baseline: No system in place. Target: Harmonized
system in place. Actual: Harmonized system in place. Achieved.

The efficacy of the PDO to improve public resources management is rated as Substantial. The project
almost fully achieved this objective. PDO Indicator 1 was partly achieved, as the e-tax system was
implemented for filing taxes, but its integration with the payment system to enable electronic payments was
still pending. The project exceeded the target for PDO Indicator 2, with 52 percent of the 2024 investment
budget allocated to projects selected based on the reformed PIM process and criteria. Out of 5 IRIs targets, 2
were exceeded, and 3 were achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improve accountability in the RoC

Rationale
There was no ToC for improving accountability in the RoC in any of the project documents or the ICR.
However, based on the project activities and RF, the ToC suggested that legal reforms, improved guidelines
and procedures, the publication of budget monitoring and EITI reports, and training, would strengthen public
oversight institutions (CCDB, IGF, Parliament), enhance budgetary oversight, and empower parliamentarians
and CSOs to monitor public finances, thereby improving accountability.

While improvements in the regulatory framework, training, and increased publication can contribute to better
public finance accountability, this ToC did not address some critical constraints to improving accountability
highlighted in the PAD. These constraints included the lack of independence of the CCDB, inadequate
funding for oversight institutions, lack of enforcement by central authorities, overall insufficient capacity
beyond staff training, and the limited resources available to CSOs. None of these critical issues
were addressed in the operation, thereby weakening the coherence of the ToC.

The original PDO outcome indicator which measured the percentage of total expenditure covered by internal
audit (with a baseline of 50 percent in 2016 and a target of 70 percent at project closing), was dropped.
According to the ICR (p. 12), the indicator presented measurement challenges because audits conducted by
the IGF are reported by number of institutions audited rather than as a percentage of total expenditure. The
reported baseline of 50 percent could not be validated. Furthermore, the Public Finance Reform Support
Project (PARFIP) funded by the African Development Bank was supporting the MFPRE in the modernization
of the internal audit function. This indicator was replaced with: “number of citizens reached through
workshops and awareness-raising efforts on budget transparency in priority sectors by CSOs.” This revised
indicator tracked the number of citizens participating in events organized by CSOs. Although the project’s
scope and level of difficulty became less ambitious, a split rating was not applied due to challenges in
measuring the original PDO indicator and the lack of activities directly contributing to it.



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



According to the ICR, the following outputs and outcomes were achieved (ICR, p.16):

Outputs:

      Adoption of the organic law amending the legal regulatory frameworks (promulgated in August 2023).
      The CCDB adopted its code of ethics, and 7 audit guides and procedure manuals were developed and
         validated.
        73 agents from control institutions (IGF, CCDB, IGE) trained in ISSAI audit techniques.
        Over 50 agents from civil society and parliament trained by CREFIAF on the audit of contracts and
         revenues from the extractive sector, 74percent are women.
        Budget monitoring (2014 to 2022) and public investments monitoring (2020 to 2022) reports in health
         and education published.
        2021 and 2022 EITI report produced in 2023. The 2021 report was validated and published in 2023,
         the 2022 report is not yet validated by the EITI National Committee.
        15 workshops on EITI reports, 2 workshops on beneficial ownership, and 2 on EITI processes
         conducted.

Intermediate Outcomes:

      Strengthened capability of parliamentarians and CSO members to scrutinize public revenue and
         spending through training.
      Increased women's participation in budget monitoring, with 73.8 percent of women trained, surpassing
         the 50 percent target.
      Improved budgetary oversight through the publication of budget monitoring reports for priority sectors,
       such as health and education.
      Enhanced transparency in the extractive sector by publishing the 2021 EITI reports.

PDO outcome:

Original PDO Indicator 4: Coverage of internal audit (as percentage of total expenditure). Baseline (2016):
50percent. Target (2023): 70percent. Result: the indicator was not measured at project closing.

According to the PAD, this indicator aimed to measure the effectiveness of audit institutions (PAD, Annex VII,
p.29). Therefore, to assess this outcome, IEG compared the RoC’s performance on the “Effectiveness of
internal audit” indicator (PI-26) in the most recent PEFA (2022), to its performance in the 2014 PEFA (PI-21).
The overall rating improved slightly from D in 2014 to D+ in 2022. However, because there weren’t significant
activities in this project contributing to this outcome, this result cannot be attributed to the current operation.

PDO indicator 4 was changed from “Coverage of internal audit (as percentage of total expenditure)” to
“Number of citizens reached through workshops and awareness-raising efforts on budget transparency in
priority sectors (health and education) by CSOs,” with a baseline of 0 and an end target of 5,000 citizens. The
ICR reports that this target was exceeded, with 5,032 citizens reached by the end of the project in 2023.

CSOs conducted 15 workshops in seven cities, carried out data collection missions throughout the country,
and disseminated budget monitoring reports. In total, 211 citizens participated in CSOs held events in 2021,
2,736 in 2022, and 2,085 in 2023 (ICR, p. 14).


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



                            Revised PDO Indicator 4: Number of citizens reached through workshops and awareness-raising efforts on
                            budget transparency in priority sectors (health and education) by CSOs. Baseline (2021): 0. Target (2023):
                            5,000. Result: 5,032. Achievement: Exceeded.

                            Intermediate Outcome indicators:

                            IRI3.1.1: - Support for the institutionalization and capacity building of the CCDB. Baseline: No. Target: Yes.
                            Actual: Yes. Achieved.

                            IRI3.1.2: Number of civil servants, parliamentarians, CSO members trained in auditing, including
                            ISSAI/INTOSAI training. Baseline: No. Target: 50. Actual: 120. Exceeded.

                            IRI3.2.1: Percentage of women among the number of civil servants, parliamentarians and members of CSOs
                            trained in audit techniques. Baseline:0 Target: 50 percent. Actual:73 percent. Exceeded.

                            IRI3.2.2: Number of reports on budget monitoring published by CSOs in priority sectors (Health and
                            Education). Baseline:0. Target: 2. Actual: 2. Achieved.

                            IRI3.5.1: EITI report produced. Baseline: 0. Target: 2. Actual: 2. Achieved.

                            IRI3.5.2: Number of training courses and workshops with civil society (on transparency in the extractive
                            sector, diagnosis of the mining sector, real ownership). Baseline: 0. Target: 6. Actual: 19. Exceeded.

                            Efficacy is therefore rated Substantial. The revised PDO Indicator 4 on the number of citizens reached
                            through workshops and awareness-raising efforts was achieved. All IRIs were also achieved or exceeded.
                            However, the RF included very modest targets, such as training 50 agents from civil society in a country with
                            an estimated population of 6 million people.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy under the PDO and associated outcome targets is rated substantial. Both objective 1,
                            to improve public resources management and objective 2 to improve accountability are rated substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                              Page 11 of 18
         Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
         Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



 5. Efficiency
The ICR provided an ex-post financial analysis but did not attempt to re-estimate the ex-ante analysis based on
the information available at project closure. The ex-ante financial analysis had estimated an increase in
domestic revenue resulting from a new tax system, improved processes, and a rationalized tax exemption
system, as well as efficiency gains from enhanced HRM and PFM capacity.

At closure, the ICR reported that tax administration reforms resulted in a 48 percent increase in non-oil domestic
revenues, rising from CFAF595 billion to CFAF880 billion between 2018 and 2023, with a 21.8 percent annual
growth rate post-restructuring. Project returns were estimated to have an NPV ranging from US$189.3 million to
US$521 million by 2028, with an internal rate of return (IRR) between 31 percent and 42 percent. IEG
determines that the increase in non-oil revenues could not be reasonably attributed to the WB intervention,
which had a limited impact on the tax system. This conclusion aligns with the ICR's assessment that the
increase in non-oil tax revenue was “highly correlated with economic fluctuations beyond the control of the
project” (ICR, p. 12).

The ICR also estimated that the removal of 6,525 ghost workers (11 percent of the workforce) saved between
U$182 million and US$300 million, with an IRR of 89 percent. Applying the fiscal multiplier effect, the
ICR estimated that reallocating savings from the elimination of ghost workers could generate between US$258
million and US$341.9 million, with an IRR of 101.8 percent; IEG concurs that removing ghost workers from the
payroll would provide financial benefits. However, because the revised payroll system containing the cleaned-up
database had not been deployed at the time of the ICR, there is significant uncertainty regarding whether the
potential gains from this intervention will ever materialize. Furthermore, PFM challenges can severely limit how
effectively those funds are reinvested into the economy.

The ICR estimated the impact of reforms on growth and stated non-quantifiable benefits expected to accrue
from the project activities. It concluded that public investment reforms were expected to drive GDP growth of
0.28 to 0.84 percent and that PFM reforms were projected to increase Gross Fixed Capital Formation by 8.68
percent over a decade. In addition, according to the ICR, non-quantifiable benefits from the project included
reduced corruption, increased transparency, improved governance, and efficiency gains. However, attributing
these potential benefits to specific project activities was challenging due to the limited scope of project activities.

IEG identified some aspects of operational inefficiency, including:

      The involvement of numerous counterparts and government agencies across several ministries, which
         overstretched both the client and WB team resources (ICR, para. 44).
        Insufficient project appraisal, leading to the cancellation of activities due to insufficient financial resources
         or because desired outputs were already available outside the project (ICR, para. 45).
        The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was technically under-resourced from the project's outset until
         restructuring, causing significant delays in the implementation of activities (ICR, para. 45).
        Limited commitment from government officials due to frequent turnover of senior staff following the 2021
         presidential elections, particularly in the MFPRE (ICR, para. 47).
        Initially scheduled to close on May 31, 2022, the project's end date was extended by 19 months to
         December 31, 2023, to allow for the completion of ongoing activities.


Efficiency Rating


                                                                                                           Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
Appraisal                                                     0
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
ICR Estimate                                                  0
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The overall outcome rating for the project is Moderately Satisfactory. This reflects a substantial rating in both the
relevance of objectives and overall efficacy, and a modest efficiency rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

IEG concurs with the ICR’s assessment of a high risk to development outcomes. The project heavily relied
on reform champions in the Prime Minister’s office and the Ministry of Planning and Civil Service to
implement reforms. Changes in government could disrupt the dynamic, leaving the few project gains
unattended. However, the establishment of a governance unit in the Prime Minister's Office (supported by
the current project) could help mitigate this risk. Additionally, resistance from vested interests, particularly in
sensitive areas like PFM and oil and gas, remains a challenge. There are also risks arising from the
government's fluctuating commitment to reforms, which is closely tied to oil revenues, with enthusiasm for
reform often waning during periods of abundance. High staff turnover, weak productivity, and limited
incentives increase the risk that project outcomes may not be sustained.

IEG further notes that some key project outputs, such as the e-payment module of the e-tax system and the
HRMIS, were not fully deployed at the time of the ICRR, raising concerns that the deployment of these
systems post-project may not occur.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                        Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  IEG concurs with the shortcomings in WB performance regarding quality at entry identified in the ICR.
  The key shortcomings include an overly ambitious scope, insufficient attention at the appraisal stage to
  areas that were already covered by other Bank projects, a weak RF (ICR, p.20). Failure to adequately
  appraise the project at the design stage, particularly the cost of components, led to the cancellation of
  activities due to insufficient financial resources. The ICR notes that “Beneficiaries also noted that the
  team overpromised on the activities to be delivered under the program with seemingly no accompanying
  costing conducted prior to adding them to the RF. As a result, the activities were dropped due to lack of
  finances,” (ICR para 45). Additionally, some planned activities were dropped because the
  expected outputs were already available outside the project (ICR, para 45).

  The project’s design covered a wide range of areas, involving multiple government agencies which
  stretched both WB and client resources.

  While the PDO was simple, the activities envisioned covered a broad range of areas from extractives and
  forestry to domestic tax systems, to human resource management, and budget transparency. This broad
  scope was not adequately supported by strong government ownership at the outset, making
  implementation difficult. As the dialogue with the government had just been reinvigorated, such extensive
  engagement was challenging and could have been avoided by keeping the scope narrower and simple at
  the start, especially because there were several other PFM projects being implemented or designed in
  parallel.

  The project’s RF had significant design flaws. PDO indicators 1 and 4 required replacements during
  restructuring because they were either not suited to the local context or could not be measured reflecting
  weaknesses in the initial project design. The remaining two PDO indicators had to be reformulated. There
  were also flaws in the PDO indicators that were retained. As an example, at project close, the electronic
  register of civil servants and the HRMIS were harmonized and interfaced with payroll but still not
  deployed by the public service. This is a flaw in the design as the PDO indicator only required that the
  civil servants be registered in the HRMIS. A final activity on its actual use should have been part of the
  design (ICR para 27).

  Key project management documents were insufficiently detailed, contributing to delays in launching and
  implementation (ICR, para 46). The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was not set up properly prior to the
  effectiveness of the project. In addition, while a Project Implementation Manual was developed before
  effectiveness of the project, it was not sufficiently detailed and therefore did not provide enough guidance
  to the PCU. The modalities for the implementation of technical aspects of the project such as the
  procurement and deployment of electronic tax systems were to be covered by a separate operation
  manual in accordance with the requirements of the FA and those of the PAD. This was not available at
  effectiveness. An important but dropped PDO indicator related with audits that would have directly
  supported PDO2 related with transparency, was also being covered by the Bank teams in an ongoing
  project (Public Finance Reform Support Project (PARFIP)). Coordination with other Bank teams working
  on PFM projects in RoC would have avoided the choice of incorrect indicators and contributed to better
  design.

  Due to these design and quality-at-entry issues, the rating for Bank Performance (Design) is Moderately
  Unsatisfactory (MU).


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 IEG concurs with the ICR’s assessment that supervision was moderately satisfactory, with notable
 improvements post-restructuring (ICR, p.21).

 Before restructuring, infrequent communication between the task team and the PCU, coupled with internal
 coordination and collaboration, hindered effective supervision. The absence of a dedicated M&E specialists
 in the PCU and a functional M&E system also made it difficult to track progress and resolve issues in a
 timely manner. In addition, lack of communication and information-sharing within the PCU between M&E,
 procurement, and financial management units significantly slowed down implementation of project activities
 before restructuring.

 The location of a TTL based in-country significantly improved pro-activeness and supervision. Improved
 procurement oversight and enhanced M&E systems helped overcome many of the earlier challenges.

 IEG notes that while an explicit ToC was not required when the project was approved, the team failed to
 introduce a ToC during the 2021 restructuring. An explicit ToC would have highlighted some significant
 shortcomings in the results chain, including the fact that project activities did not tackle the key constraints
 to improved accountability (refer to the Efficacy analysis).

 Nevertheless, while initial supervision was weak, the WB’s proactive measures after restructuring
 enhanced project performance.

 The quality of Bank supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 As described in the Efficacy section, both the original and revised RF were inadequate for effectively
 assessing outcomes. The four PDO-level indicators faced attribution and measurement issues,
 necessitating significant revisions to the RF during implementation. PDO Indicator 1, “increase in non-oil
 tax revenue,” was dropped due to its strong correlation with economic fluctuations beyond the project’s
 control. Similarly, PDO Indicator 2, “increase in the capital expenditure execution rate,” was dropped

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



 because no original project activities contributed to its achievement. PDO Indicator 3, “increase in civil
 servants managed through the civil service registry,” required reformulation, as the registry functioned
 solely as a database, not as a management tool. PDO Indicator 4, which measured the percentage of total
 expenditure covered by internal audit, was dropped because the indicator could not be measured, and
 there were no significant activities implemented to enhance the effectiveness of internal audit institutions.

 The RF included modest IRI targets, such as training 50 agents from civil society in a country with an
 estimated population of 6 million people.

 The revisions to the RF further weakened the M&E system by introducing output indicators as PDO-level
 indicators. Consequently, the revised PDO 3, “active civil servants at central and deconcentrated levels
 registered in the HRMIS,” and the revised PDO 4, “number of citizens reached through workshops and
 awareness-raising efforts on budget transparency in priority sectors by CSOs,” were inadequate measures
 of the PDO, as they were merely outputs contributing to project outcomes.

 Initially, no specific M&E system or dedicated specialists were present in the PCU. This persisted until
 restructuring, after which two specialists were recruited, resulting in improved data quality for the ICR (ICR,
 para 53). However, the absence of a ToC following the restructuring hindered a coherent understanding of
 how key activities and outputs would lead to improved public resources management and accountability,
 leaving critical constraints to improved accountability unaddressed.



b. M&E Implementation
  Before restructuring, minimal efforts were made to implement M&E activities. The absence of baseline
  data and weak data collection efforts hindered the ability to assess project performance. However, after
  restructuring, two experienced M&E specialists were recruited, and new tools were introduced to collect
  and analyze project data (Ex: GEMS and KoboToolbox). Regular field visits alongside the TTL helped
  ensure that data collection was accurate and timely (ICR, para 54).



c. M&E Utilization
  Weaknesses in the M&E significantly reduced its usefulness. As a result, although post-restructuring,
  progress towards achieving the PDO was tracked with data provided to the WB team during
  implementation support missions (ICR, para 55), the RF could not be used for efficient project
  management and decision-making.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards


                                                                                                     Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



   The project was not expected to have any negative environmental or social impacts and was categorized as
   C, as it focused solely on building institutional capacity and providing advisory services. Therefore, no
   environmental impact assessment was required (ICR, para. 57).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Overall, FM arrangements were adequate, though some fund advances remained pending or unjustified at
   project closing (ICR, para. 58). Additionally, nine procurable activities were unfinished and had to be
   canceled. Nevertheless, procurement significantly improved in the second half of the project (ICR, para.
   59).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None identified.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory             Moderately Satisfactory   Modest Project Efficiency
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                         Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                                                                   Significant shortcomings in the
Quality of M&E                  Substantial              Modest                    M&E system’s design and
                                                                                   implementation.
Quality of ICR                  ---                      Modest


12. Lessons

IEG agrees with the ICR’s insightful lessons on program design and implementation.

IEG offers the following additional lesson on the importance of articulating a coherent ToC following
significant project restructuring:

A well-defined ToC should outline the logical relationships between activities, outputs, and
outcomes. Therefore, significant changes to these aspects should prompt task teams to reassess
the ToC, ensuring it continues to provide a framework for understanding how project interventions

                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Integrated Public Sector Reform Project (P160801)



will lead to the intended outcomes. During the 2021 restructuring, many activities were dropped, and
the RF was redesigned; However, a ToC was not articulated. As a result, critical constraints to
achieving the PDO were not identified, gaps in the results chain were overlooked, and some PDO-
level indicators were inadequate.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid and offers a satisfactory account of the project context, design, restructuring, outputs, and
operationally relevant lessons. However, it fails to present the ToC underlying the operation, does not break
down the compound PDO to assess outcomes separately, and lacks a critical analysis of whether changes to
the PDO outcome indicators warranted a split rating. The ICR does not establish that the level of ambition,
difficulty, and scope remained unchanged after the restructuring, which dropped many activities and modified
PDO-level indicators; thus, it does not justify applying the split rating.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                   Page 18 of 18
