     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024344

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P151324                                    CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                              Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-60620                                 30-Jul-2022                                          119,625,613.20

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Jun-2017                               30-Apr-2024

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          120,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                           117,999,136.10                                                0.00

 Actual                                       118,294,680.64                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Peter Nigel Freeman          Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the Financial Agreement (FA) on page 6, "the proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to
   create conditions for improved competitiveness in the targeted secondary cities in the territory of the
   Recipient". More specifically, the FA indicates on pages 6-7 that (i) Component 1 aimed to strengthen
   infrastructure in the cities of Bouaké and San Pedro to improve the competitiveness of these two cities, (ii)
   Component 2 intended to be facilitating the growth of micro, small and medium size enterprises (MSMEs) in
   Bouaké and San Pedro with a special focus on agri-business and trade logistics value chains, and (iii)


                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



   Component 3 aimed to strengthening the service delivery capacity of the cities of Bouaké and San Pedro with
   respect to managing urban development and providing administrative services.

   The statement of the PDO in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) on page 7 was similar to the one in the
   FA and was unchanged throughout the period of project implementation. For both the FA and the PAD, the
   conditions for improved competitiveness were defined as better urban mobility, improved revenue of micro,
   small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), and improved administrative services of the municipalities.

   Assessment methodology. The ICR validation will apply the 2021 World Bank guidelines which specify that
   “compound PDOs with multiple outcomes linked together in a single sentence are unpacked and each
   outcome assessed separately". Therefore, echoing the ICR approach, project efficacy will be assessed
   toward the achievement of the three following specific objectives which are summarized in the PDOs stated
   both in the FA and the PAD:

         PDO-1: To enhance the performance of economic infrastructure (better urban mobility),
         PDO-2: To support private sector development (improved revenues of MSMEs), and
         PDO-3: To improve institutions, regulations, and urban management (improved administrative services
          of the municipalities).

   While there were changes in the results framework, there will be no split assessment, because the key
   performance indicators remained unchanged throughout the period of project implementation.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
       Component 1: Enhancing the Performance of Economic Infrastructure (US$63.4 million at
          appraisal, US$68.4 million at completion). This component aimed to strengthen key economic
          infrastructure in Bouaké and San Pedro, focusing on enhancing urban mobility and improving trade
          and logistics infrastructure. The first sub-component was to finance the rehabilitation of the Marché
          de Gros de Bouaké (MGB) and construction of major infrastructure. The second sub-
          component aimed to rehabilitate infrastructure to decongest Bouake traffic and improve accessibility
          to the key city’s economic zones.
         Component 2: Supporting Private Sector Development (US$25.6 million at appraisal, US$31.5
          million at completion). This component was designed to facilitate MSME growth in Bouaké and
          San Pedro through capacity building, access to finance, and formalization support. The first
          subcomponent aimed to finance an entrepreneurship program to support MSMEs through capacity
          building, mentoring, matching grants, and seed grants for promising business ideas. The
          second subcomponent aimed at strengthening local business development services, including
          technical assistance to the Ministry of Commerce and capacity building for SME promotion and
          service providers, The third subcomponent, added during the first restructuring, aimed to capitalize



                                                                                                  Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



          and operationalize a new partial portfolio credit guarantee (PPCG) fund to stimulate access to
          finance for Small and Medium Enterprises.
         Component 3: Improving Institutions, Regulations, and Urban Management (US$24.2 million
          at appraisal, US$13 million at completion). This component aimed to strengthen the service
          delivery capacity of municipalities in Bouaké and San Pedro by supporting urban master plans and
          improving municipal services. The first subcomponent was to finance the preparation and
          implementation of detailed urban plans, focusing on land use optimization, city amenities, and waste
          management; included the rehabilitation of the Bouaké City Hall. The second subcomponent was to
          support the modernization of municipal services through capacity-building, including on land
          regularization, citizen engagement, and transparency
         Component 4: Project Management (US$14.8 million at appraisal, US$13.8 million at
          completion). This component was to cover the cost of project management, including procurement,
          financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and safeguards management.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost: The total project cost was estimated at US$120 million equivalent at appraisal. The actual
   disbursement amount totaled US$119. 6 million equivalent, or 99.7 percent of the original project
   commitments.

   Project Financing: The project was financed entirely through an IBRD loan.

   Borrower Contribution: There was no planned contribution from the borrower at appraisal, and there was
   none during implementation.

   Dates: The project was approved on June 02, 2017, and made effective on September 11, 2017. The
   Project was restructured twice as follows:

   (i) the first restructuring, approved in June 2021, aimed to mitigate the effects of the COVID19 on private
   sector development, and a new subcomponent was introduced to create the Partial Portfolio Credit
   Guarantee (PPCG) Fund, aimed at improving access to finance for MSMEs. This restructuring primarily
   shifted resources toward supporting MSMEs while extending the project’s closing date by 12 months to
   ensure that critical activities could be implemented. Moreover, this restructuring revised the Results
   Framework, by adding new intermediate indicators, deleting others, and modifying certain targets; (ii) the
   second restructuring, approved in February 2023, aimed to ensure the completion of roadworks and other
   infrastructure investments. The restructuring reallocated remaining uncommitted funds to further capitalize
   the PPCG. While some intermediate indicators were adjusted to match the revised implementation scope,
   the restructuring maintained the focus on MSME access.

   The project closed on April 30, 2014, 27 months after the original closing date of July 30, 2022.




3. Relevance of Objectives


                                                                                                       Page 3 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)




Rationale
The validation of the relevance of objectives draws from the ICR discussion presented on pages 2-3 of the
ICR.

                        Country context: The cities of San Pedro and Bouaké play a critical role as country's trade hubs
                         and regional connectors. The Côte d'Ivoire Urbanization Review found that strategic investments in
                         infrastructure and services were needed to enhance competitiveness, boost job creation, and
                         reduce poverty in regional cities. San Pedro and Bouaké were identified as priority cities for such
                         interventions. Moreover, the project rationale was underpinned by key studies and frameworks that
                         emphasized urban competitiveness as a driver of growth. Technical studies included urban audits
                         and market assessments, and provided further evidence that investing in infrastructure, improving
                         land use, and supporting MSMEs would lead to stronger economic outcomes for both cities.

                        Alignment with Government strategy: The project supported key goals in the National
                         Development Plan (2016–2020), which prioritized reducing regional disparities and empowering
                         secondary cities to drive economic growth. Through strengthening municipal capacities and
                         improving infrastructure, the project aimed to support decentralization and strengthen MSME growth
                         outside of Abidjan. The project aimed to address the infrastructure and institutional gaps that were
                         hindering economic growth and private sector development in San Pedro and Bouaké. By focusing
                         on improving urban infrastructure and municipal services, the project aimed to create a conducive
                         business environment for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), fostering job creation and
                         inclusive economic growth.

                        Alignment with Bank strategy. The PDO remained closely aligned with the World Bank’s Country
                         Partnership Framework (CPF) for Côte d’Ivoire FY2023-2027. Through investments in urban
                         mobility and infrastructure in Bouaké and San Pedro, the project was aligned with the CPF Objective
                         6 “Support Development of Sustainable Cities for Inclusive Growth” and Objective 4 “Expand
                         Connectivity through Quality Climate-Resilient Infrastructure”. Additionally, its support for MSMEs
                         through entrepreneurship programs and the Partial Credit Guarantee Fund (SGPME) directly
                         contributes to CPF Objective 9 “Improve Business Environment and Access to Finance”, promoting
                         private sector growth and job creation in secondary cities. The PDO directly supports the CPF High-
                         Level Outcomes (HLO) 2 “Reduced Spatial Disparities and Strengthened Resilience”, and HLO 3
                         “Jobs Created through Private Sector-Led Growth”. Moreover, the PDO was aligned with the World
                         Bank’s Western & Central Africa Region Priorities (2021-2025), particularly as the project's focus on
                         improving urban mobility, supporting MSMEs, and enhancing local administrative services
                         contributed to removing bottlenecks to economic activity and promoting better job creation, while
                         rebuilding trust between citizens and local governments through enhanced service delivery.

                        Based on the country context, the project alignment with the Government priorities and the World
                         Bank strategy as discussed hereabove, the relevance of objectives is rated as High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance the performance of economic infrastructure (better urban mobility),

               Rationale
               Theory of change:

                     There was no explicit theory of change in the PAD or in the restructuring papers outlining the linkage
                        between the project activities and the PDO. The ICR reconstructed a theory of change (Annex 4 on
                        page 37), which summarized the causal logic linking the project’s interventions and the PDO. This
                        review draws from the ICR Annex 4 to present the results chain underlying the process of achieving
                        the three project development objectives.
                       Toward enhancing the performance of economic infrastructure (better urban mobility), the key
                        activities for Bouake included (i) the rehabilitation of the urban section of the A3 road, (ii) the
                        construction of a truck parking and rest area, and (iii) the upgrade of the urban access roads. Key
                        activities for San Pedro were; (i) the rehabilitation of the main access to the Port of San Pedro and the
                        Route des Grumiers, (ii) the upgrading of the urban access road to the Port of San Pedro and the
                        access road to the San Pedro Airport, (iii) the rehabilitation of access roads to the commercial zone
                        along the coast; and (iv) the construction of a truck parking and rest area.
                       Expected outputs included (i) roads upgraded or rehabilitated in both cities, (ii) areas of parking or rest
                        stops built or rehabilitated in both cities, and (iii) the signing of an operating contract for the newly built
                        parking and rest stop area in San Pedro. Expected outcome was the reduction of the travel time on all
                        the project's built or rehabilitated infrastructure.
                       The results framework discussed under Section 9 showed how identified activities would enhance
                        urban infrastructure and mobility. Overall, there was a logical chain between the identified activities,
                        the expected outputs and outcome in both cities. In the hindsight, there was room for selecting better
                        and achievable PDO indicators as discussed under the M&E section.
                       However, the ICR neither discussed the assumptions underpinning the theory of change nor the
                        attribution of achieved outcome.

               Based on the ICR material on pages 8-10 and the Annex 4, achieved outputs and outcomes are summarized
               below:

               Outputs:

                     The target for the length of roads upgraded or rehabilitated was largely exceeded, reaching
                      28.882 kilometers, largely exceeding the target of 25 kilometers, including (i) the construction of 5.724
                      km of new roads and the rehabilitation of 10.120 km of roads in Bouaké, and (ii) the construction of
                      5.640 km, and the rehabilitation of 7.398 km in San Pedro.
                     The target for the area of parking or rest stops built or rehabilitated was practically achieved, as 97.8%
                      of the targeted 4 hectares was completed.

                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)




      The target for the sensitive areas benefiting from physical measures to prevent accidents was
         exceeded, reaching 108.4 percent of the target, and data were related to the six (6) upgraded or
         rehabilitated roads under the first indicator.
        While an operating contract for the newly built parking and rest stop area in San Pedro was signed,
         and a firm was recruited, an operating contract for the newly built parking and rest stop area in San
         Pedro has yet to be signed, because the stakeholders decided to ensure efficient and sustainable
         management of this infrastructure, and this process is still under way.
        The target for the percentage of citizens consulted who consider that their views have been taken into
         account in detailed urban plan elaboration process in Bouake was partially achieved, reaching 63.82%
         against a target of 75 percent. However, the target for the women participation was exceeded,
         reaching 53.49 percent against a target of 50 percent.
        The target for the percentage of citizens consulted who consider that their views have been taken into
         account in detailed urban plan elaboration process in San Pedro was also only partially achieved,
         reaching 62.65 percent against a target of 75%. However, the target for the women participation was
         again exceeded, reaching 55.06 percent against a target of 50 percent.
        Other outputs are as follows:
              o Acquisition and installation of 2 weighbridges, development of a washing station, rehabilitation
                 of public lighting, building painting, and the renovation of sanitary facilities at the Wholesale
                 Market of Bouaké.
              o Development of a Wholesale Market of Bouaké business plan, an internal control framework,
                 and a procedures manual.

Outcomes:

      The target for the travel time on all the project's built or rehabilitated infrastructure was partially
         achieved, as it decreased from 44.83 min to 33.86 min on average, a reduction of 24.47% against a
         target of 50%.

Overall, roads, parking and rest stop areas, and other urban infrastructure in San Pedro and Bouake were
either rehabilitated or newly constructed, sometimes beyond the targeted levels. As a consequence, the travel
time on the built or rehabilitated infrastructure decreased significantly, but at a lower than the targets set.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To support private sector development (improved revenues of MSMEs)

Rationale
Theory of change:

      Toward supporting private sector development (improved revenues of MSMEs), the key activities
         included (i) the funding of an entrepreneurship program to support MSMEs, (ii) the strengthening of

                                                                                                        Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



      local business development services, and (iii) the operationalization of a new partial portfolio credit
      guarantee (PPCG) fund. The expected outputs included (i) the operationalization of the PPCG, (ii)
      increased technical capacity in both Government and firms, and (iii) the operationalization of the
      MSMEs database. Expected outcome included enhanced competitiveness of MSMEs, and an
      increased access to credit by MSMEs.
     The results framework discussed under Section 9 was robust and showed how identified activities
      would generate improved competitiveness and revenues for firms operating in the two cities. Overall,
      there was a logical chain between the identified activities, the expected outputs and the outcome of
      enhanced private sector development.
     However, the ICR neither discussed the assumptions underpinning the theory of change nor the
      outcome attribution. In respect of attribution, there were also activities at national level undertaken by
      the Government and its entities and other partners toward the promotion and growth of firms.

Based on the ICR material on pages 10-12 and the Annex 4, achieved outputs and outcomes are
summarized below:

Outputs:

     The target for the number of MSMEs supported was practically achieved, reaching 249 against a
      target of 250. The target for those that are still in operation was exceeded, as 100 percent of them
      remain active against a target of 70 percent. However, the number of those led by women is
      unknown.
     The number of new businesses formally created was exceeded and reached 45, largely exceeding the
      target of 30. All supported businesses are still in operation, exceeding the target of 50 percent.
      Specifically, the project supported 249 MSMEs, and the survival rate of supported businesses was
      100 percent, exceeding the target of 70 percent, and 45 new firms were formally created, with 51
      percent led by women.
     The target for the number of financial institutions participating in the Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee
      (PPCG) was exceeded, as 6 conventions with Partner Financial Institutions were signed against a
      target of five (5).

Outcomes:

     The target for the number of loans introduced in the PPCG by participating financial institutions was
      partially achieved as a cumulative total of 940 loan operations were introduced against a target of
      1000, with a cumulative volume of loans guaranteed of FCFA 24,7 billion (US$41.8 million equivalent)
      as of August 2024.
     The target for the guaranteed loans default was largely exceeded, because there were only 2 calls
      about underlying operations, representing less than 0.01 percent of the guaranteed portfolio, against a
      target of 4.5 percent.
     The target for the increase in annual sales revenue of firms directly supported through the project was
      not fully established in the ICR. The data, drawn from 43 firms participating in the Cost Sharing Fund,
      revealed that 33 firms successfully increased turnover while 10 firms did not. The equipment financed
      through the matching grants was delivered in late 2023, giving firms less than a year to record gains,
      suggesting that further productivity gains and revenue increases are likely to emerge over time.



                                                                                                   Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



Overall, achieved outcome was mixed. Several MSMEs were supported by the project, a PPCG was made
operational and MSMEs loans were successfully guaranteed. While there was some increase in annual sales
revenue for a number of firms, equipment was delivered to firms with delay, and its impact is expected to
emerge over time.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To improve administrative services of the municipalities (institutions, regulations, and urban management)

Rationale
Theory of change:

      Toward improving administrative services of the municipalities (institutions, regulations, and urban
       management), the key activities aimed to strengthen the service delivery capacity of municipalities in
       Bouaké and San Pedro and to finance the preparation and implementation of detailed urban plans,
       and the modernization of municipal services through capacity-building.
      Expected outputs included the following: (i) masterplans were delivered and selected urban
       interventions completed, (ii) the Bouake City Hall became operational, (iii) the website for the two
       cities became operational, and (iv) municipal staff were trained. The expected outcome was more
       efficient services of the municipal administrations of the two cities.
      The results framework discussed under Section 9 was robust and showed how identified activities
       would underpin an improvement of the quality of services of the municipal administrations of the two
       cities. Overall, there was a logical chain between the identified activities, the expected outputs and
       outcome of improving administrative services in the two cities.
      However, the ICR neither discussed the assumptions underpinning the Theory of Change nor the
       outcome attribution. Particularly regarding attribution, there were also activities at national level
       undertaken by the Government and its entities and other partners toward the modernization of
       municipal administrations.

Based on the ICR material on pages 12-13 and the Annex 4, achieved outputs and outcomes are
summarized below:

Outputs:

      The Bouaké City Hall was fully rehabilitated.
      The cadastral plans and detailed urban masterplans for Bouaké and San Pedro were updated through
       a participatory process.
      The number of people trained reached 517 substantially exceeding the target of 400. However, the
       share of trained women was not provided.



                                                                                                  Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)




                                  The target for the number of users of Bouake's website reached 35,554, substantially exceeding the
                                   target of 10,000, and illustrating the level of interest by investors and individuals in the city of
                                   Bouaké.
                                  The target for the number of users of San Pedro's website reached 9,779, falling a little short of the
                                   target of 10,000.

                            Outcome:

                                  The target for the land for which the usage and ownership rights are recognized was partially
                                    achieved, as the data transmitted by the Land Registry services as of December 2023 gave a
                                    completion rate of 58.5% of the taxed plots against a target of 80 percent by the end of March 2024.
                                    However, the Land Directorate is working toward streamlined procedures which will increase the
                                    coverage ratio.

                            Overall, cadastral plans and detailed urban masterplans for Bouaké and San Pedro were updated through
                            a participatory process, and some municipal services were improved in the two cities. However, the
                            strengthening of the Land Directorate in both cities is still under way to ensure that the land usage and
                            ownership rights are appropriate.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            On balance, the project efficacy was substantial with moderate shortcomings, based on the following
                            performance: (i) toward improved urban mobility, urban infrastructure in San Pedro and Bouake was both
                            rehabilitated and newly constructed, sometimes beyond the target levels and leading to a reduction
                            in the travel time on the upgraded infrastructure, although at a lower than the targeted level, (ii)
                            toward improved revenues of MSMEs in the two cities, several MSMEs were supported, and a PPCG
                            provided loan guarantees to some of them, thereby contributing to an increase in annual sales revenue for a
                            number of supported firms, and (iii) toward improved administrative services of the municipalities of San
                            Pedro and Bouake, the cadastral plans and detailed urban masterplans for the two cities were updated
                            through a participatory process, and the Land Directorate is continuing to be strengthened in both cities to
                            ensure that the land usage and ownership rights are appropriate.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating



                                                                                                                               Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and financial efficiency

Applying the methodology used at project appraisal, the ex-post economic analysis assessed the benefits from
the transport investments and those arising from the entrepreneurship program, while excluding interventions
under the urban management component due to the intangible nature of the associated benefits. The ex-post
analysis of the transport investments resulted in a net present value (NPV) of 47.15 CFA billion and an
economic internal rate of return (EIRR)of 35.1 percent, reflecting the benefits of reduced vehicle operating costs,
travel time savings, and improved road safety.

The ICR economic analysis for the MSME support component calculated an NPV of 2,033.9 CFA billion and an
EIRR of 29 percent, reflecting the program’s impact on MSME growth and job creation, as opposed to an ex-
ante EIRR of 18 percent.

The financial sustainability assessment of the Partial Portfolio Credit Guarantee (PPCG) relied on projections
of key variables such as approved guarantees, loan volumes, equity, and provisions. A simulation of the fund’s
financial sustainability was conducted for the next ten years based on key relevant assumptions. The analysis
projected that, by Year 5, the fund will have achieved an outstanding guarantee portfolio of CFAF 45.1 billion,
and by Year 10, it is expected to achieve CFAF 80 billion, with the leverage ratio achieving a robust level of 5
while roughly preserving the fund’s original equity.

Overall, the updated analyses confirm that the project represented substantial return and value-for-money,
although below the level calculated at appraisal, because of an unweighted average ex-post EIRR of 32 percent
against an ex-ante of 75 percent.

Operational efficiency

While disbursement was maximal, the project suffered from severe delays and its scope was significantly scaled
down. Delays were largely due to procurement challenges but also because of the need for additional feasibility
studies. The entrepreneurship program had to be scaled down, and the support to cooperatives under
component 2 was ultimately canceled due to limited capacity. Furthermore, the redesign of the A3 Road in
Bouaké had to be modified to ensure road safety and better flow in high-density urban areas ( ICR, para 53).
Low technical capacity of certain contractors led to incomplete works at project closing. These factors (ICR, para
54) delayed disbursements and affected the timely achievement of outcomes. Nevertheless, the project almost
disbursed all resources despite early implementation delays. The project was extended twice for a total
additional implementation time of 21 months and this allowed for the successful completion of several critical
activities that would not have been achieved within the original timeframe. While the extensions reflect the
project team’s ability to adapt to changing conditions and to overcome design weaknesses, both the design
challenges and implementation delays were a source of operational inefficiency.

Overall, the project’s efficiency is rated Modest. While economic and financial analysis suggest significant value
for money, the achievement levels were lower than estimates at appraisal, worsened by the reduced scope of
the MSME program and late operationalization of the project, leaving resources idle for extended periods.


                                                                                                     Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



The procurement challenges, contract cancellations, ineffective monitoring, and multiple project extensions are
further evidence of these inefficiencies.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                 75.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                              32.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project relevance was high, based on PDO alignment with the Government priorities and the World Bank
strategy and interventions at closure. The project efficacy was substantial with moderate shortcomings, because
of substantial achievements toward improved urban mobility, and a reduction in the travel times on
the upgraded infrastructure, some increase in annual sales revenue for a number of supported firms, and some
improvement in administrative services of the municipalities of San Pedro and Bouake. Efficiency was modest,
resulting in a Moderately Satisfactory rating of the project outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Technical risk: The primary risk to sustaining development outcomes is related to the maintenance of
physical infrastructure, particularly the roads and urban amenities delivered by the project. Additionally,
urban facilities such as the Hotel de Ville and landscaped areas rely heavily on municipalities' financial and
logistical ability to maintain them. There are concerns as regards to the effectiveness of public administration
in maintaining and managing the constructed facilities.

Governance and institutional risks: As there is a significant turnover in local government personnel
and shifts in political priorities, the sustainability of achievements hinges on sustained capacity-building
efforts and knowledge management systems. The World Bank’s ongoing engagement through follow-up


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



projects, such as the Competitive Value Chains for Jobs and Economic Transformation Project (CVJET,
P172425) and potential urban development initiatives, provides some mitigation against these risks.

Measures were identified to mitigate technical capacity risk: The sustainability of private sector
development outcomes is subject to the typical challenges faced by MSMEs, such as market fluctuations and
firm survival. However, the project’s focus on building local capacity and strengthening the entrepreneurship
ecosystem mitigates many of these risks. The project ensured that SGPME developed key systems and
procedures, including its Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), reporting protocols,
and contractual agreements with FIs. Ongoing technical assistance under the CVJET program further
enhances SGPME's capacity.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank helped in the design of a project addressing critical gaps in urban infrastructure, institutional
  capacity, and support to MSMEs in the secondary cities of Bouake and San Pedro. The project’s design
  faced challenges, mainly because of multiple sectors covered by the project and the over ambitious
  objectives. Project implementation readiness at entry was an issue, as activities under the private sector
  development component were not adequately prepared. The Results Framework was unrealistic as the
  PDO indicators like travel time reductions proved difficult to measure and hard to achieve in the
  urban environment. Similarly, MSME revenue growth targets also faced challenges, notably when
  attributing results to project interventions.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Through regular supervision missions, the Bank team worked with the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and
 local stakeholders, and provided critical oversight on technical, fiduciary, environmental, and social
 safeguards. The Bank team was effective in addressing implementation challenges and adjusted the
 project scope during the midterm restructuring. This adjustment allowed the repurposing of project
 resources to better performing activities, but the Results Framework was not revised to account for the
 changed project scope.

 While the Bank team demonstrated flexibility in addressing external shocks like COVID-19, a more
 proactive approach in solving early procurement and contract management issues could have reduced
 implementation delays. Notwithstanding, the Bank’s proactive supervision, especially during critical
 junctures, was pivotal to the project’s eventual achievement of its development outcomes.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change and the results framework was well aligned. The TOC discussed the linkage
 between infrastructure improvements, private sector support, and urban governance to better economic
 outcomes in Bouaké and San Pedro. The Project RF targeted lower-level outcomes such as better urban
 mobility, MSME revenue growth, and improvement in urban services, and the causal chain from project
 activities to targeted outcomes was generally clear and robust.

 However, the RF had weaknesses. The definition of some targeted outcomes was vague and difficult to
 achieve in the short term. To monitor PDO-1, the RF prioritized travel time reduction as a key outcome, but
 the target was unrealistic. In respect of PDO-2, the MSME revenue indicator was adequate to capture
 performance of project-supported firms, including key dimensions of private sector development, such as
 firm creation, survival, and capacity-building efforts. Regarding PDO-3, indicators focused primarily on land
 cadaster coverage and website usage, but missed the broader impact on municipal services, public
 spaces, and urban governance. Moreover, the project restructuring was a missed opportunity to align the
 RF with the revised project activities, particularly at the PDO level.

 The M&E arrangements were sound with clear roles and responsibilities assigned to capable entities. The
 Project Coordinating Unit was well staffed, and the M&E specialist was tasked to systematically record the
 data needed for the Results Framework. Collaboration with municipalities was key for collecting data on
 civil works progress, traffic surveys, and urban masterplans. Overall, while the design ensured a well-
 coordinated monitoring plan, some data collection challenges were identified and eventually addressed
 through project restructuring.



b. M&E Implementation
  There were some delays and challenges in the collection and analysis of M&E data. Delays in the
  implementation of key project activities hindered the quality of M&E implementation. For instance,
  there was limited time to assess the firm performance in response to grants’ execution, and the ability of
  the PPCG fund to ramp-up operations. This limitation in the implementation stage reduced the
  robustness of the MSME outcome data. Data related to SGPME were sourced from the fund’s
  administrators via monthly reports, ensuring consistency and quality control. For the urban component,
  municipalities provided data through the PCU, with website and land cadaster data being automatically
  generated and reliably collected.




                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used to inform key decisions, particularly the midterm restructuring, where lack of
  progress in PDO-level and intermediate indicators flagged underperformance across all components.
  This led to the introduction of the PPCG fund, addressing some gaps in MSME finance, and a
  reallocation of resources to focus on achievable outcomes. The project team’s use of M&E data allowed
  for course corrections, notably as regards to urban service delivery. Regular progress reporting ensured
  that the project remained flexible and responsive to the challenges encountered during implementation.

  Overall, the M&E quality was modest. Key strengths of the M&E assessment included (i)
  the consistency between the theory of change, and the results framework, (ii) the appropriateness of the
  M&E arrangements, and (iii) the good utilization of the M&E. However, the M&E quality had
  weaknesses, including (i) the inadequacy of some of the PDO and intermediate indicators, and (ii)
  delays and gaps in the discussion of the MTR and the role of restructuring operations during project
  implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category B operation and safeguard policies were triggered as follows: (i)
   OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and (ii) OP 4.09 (Pest Management), (iii) OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural
   Resources), and (iv) OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). An Environmental and Social Management
   Framework (ESMF) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) were prepared and
   disclosed for key infrastructure sites in Bouaké and San Pedro.

   Throughout implementation, environmental compliance was generally satisfactory, with mitigation measures
   effectively applied, despite some minor issues related to construction waste management. Contractors
   followed the ESMP guidelines, including dust control, noise management, and safe materials handling.
   Regular environmental audits ensured compliance, and the project contributed to building local capacity for
   environmental oversight, though post-construction site restoration remains an area for improvement.

   A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared for
   investments such as the A3 road in Bouaké and the Rue des Grumiers in San Pedro. The GRM (Grievance
   Redress Mechanism) was fully operational, collecting and processing 59 complaints across various project
   sites, including complaints from roadwork beneficiaries and business plan competition participants. Overall,
   the project managed social impacts effectively but faced challenges in ensuring long-term resettlement
   outcomes in the area of the Rue des Grumiers.

   Overall safeguard compliance was rated as Moderately Satisfactory at project closure.




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) had strong FM capacity, benefiting from
   previous experience with urban projects, and utilized the Syscohada accounting system, which met project
   requirements. Interim financial reports (IFRs) were all submitted in a timely manner, with no significant
   financial management issues raised. Additionally, 6 annual audit reports were submitted, all acceptable to
   the World Bank, delivered on time and receiving unmodified opinions from external auditors. The final audit
   report is due by June 30, 2025.

   Procurement. Procurement performance fell short of expectations throughout the project, especially when
   it came to contract management. While procurement procedures mostly adhered to World Bank guidelines,
   with no major complaints or appeals, the project faced significant delays due to lengthy procurement
   processes, performance issues with certain contractors, and a reluctance to initiate contract cancellation
   procedures when contractors underperformed. Additionally, the procurement process for the
   entrepreneurship program faced challenges such as understaffing, difficulties with technical specifications,
   and beneficiaries’ limited understanding of procurement rules. Despite these setbacks, procurement risks
   were mitigated, and the project ultimately complied with World Bank procurement standards.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   The ICR did not identify any other impacts.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR identified thoughtful lessons and recommendations arising from the implementation of this
project, and this review highlights three lessons, which are summarized below:

When a project covers multiple sectors, achieving the best desired outcome requires
enhanced preparation and supervision, notably through a larger program approach. The

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



Project was multisectoral and aimed at regional competitiveness. This multisectoral approach was a
key strength, aimed at boosting economic activity outside the capital. However, the complexity of
coordinating interventions across multiple domains, such as infrastructure and private sector
support, highlighted the importance of aligning ambitions with local implementation capacity and
strengthening inter-agency coordination. The adequacy of a multisectoral design under a single IPF
operation needs to be carefully considered with respect to whether implementation synergies are
sufficiently strong. A series of sequenced interventions planned as an integrated urban development
and economic growth program could be considered.

The importance of continued local and national buy-in, including citizen engagement is key
to implementing multisector projects. Project implementation relied on both national authorities
and local stakeholders, which were essential for overcoming project complexity. Close collaboration
with local governments in Bouaké and San Pedro and the participatory approach to infrastructure
planning fostered client ownership, although the Project had difficulties sustaining local ownership
over time. The strong focus on citizen engagement in the development of urban masterplans
contributed to community buy-in, which partly mitigated implementation challenges.

New financing instruments supporting MSMEs require expertise and time to achieve the
desired outcome. The matching grant scheme faced difficulties, as many MSMEs were unable to
provide their financial contribution, resulting in dropped sub-projects. Future interventions should
better screen firms for financial capacity during selection and tailor matching requirements to the
firm's capabilities. Furthermore, the introduction of the Partial Credit Guarantee Fund (PPCG) was
an important innovation in creating sustainable access to finance for MSMEs in Côte d’Ivoire. By
redirecting IDA resources into capitalizing a mechanism that was designed following international
best practices and coupled with strong capacity-building, the Project was able to revert stalled
implementation of some activities while promoting sustainability and scaling that is expected to
endure long after project closing. These two financing instruments generated results, but achieving
the desired outcome still required expertise to ensure oversight and achieve results.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is a candid account of the project design, implementation and achieved results, and is generally
consistent with OPCS guidelines. The quality of analysis is broadly evidence-based, and the results orientation
of the project was a key feature of the document. The ICR is internally consistent, and its assessment of
efficacy provides contextual information about the project's outputs and outcomes. Photographic records
showing selected roads before and after project implementation provide a glimpse of the achieved results on
the ground. The ICR identified several thoughtful lessons learned from the project, which mostly reflect the
experience of project design and implementation. There were moderate deficiencies in the ICR namely: (i)


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI-Infrastruc for Urb Dev and Compet-SUF (P151324)



insufficient analysis of the quality-at-entry, and (ii) the overall safeguards compliance was not adequately
assessed.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 17
