     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024222

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P160295                                   SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Sierra Leone                              Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-62990                                 31-Dec-2023                                           9,226,743.26

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Jul-2018                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           10,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             9,468,069.02                                              0.00

 Actual                                         9,226,743.26                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin          Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Sierra Leone's Agro-Processing Competitiveness Project as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) was identical to the one in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 26) and aimed to:

   "Improve the business environment in the agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted
   agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone."


                                                                                                 Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two Objectives:

   1.To improve the business environment in the agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra
   Leone.

   2. To increase productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following three components:

   1. Promote enabling environment for expansion, and growth of agribusiness firms (appraisal cost:
   US$2.00 million, actual cost: US$1.70 million). This component aimed to reduce burdensome
   agribusiness sector regulations that constrain productivity and weaken incentives of existing agribusiness
   firms and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) to reinvest earnings or make new investments for sector
   growth and competitiveness. Project interventions also aimed to improve the quantity and quality of existing
   agro‐processing investments through enhanced focus on agribusiness investment retention and expansion
   and strengthening institutional capabilities that facilitated investment and trade by agro‐processing firms and
   SMEs. It included the following four sub-components:

   1.1. Enabling business regulations for competitive agro‐processing. This sub-component aimed to
   improve the business environment for agribusiness investors by addressing policy inconsistencies,
   burdensome regulations, and weaknesses in institutional capabilities and coordination including support to
   the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and effective public-private-dialogue (PPD). Specific support
   included: TA to inform the business and regulatory reform agenda as well as funding research and
   advocacy to set priorities for policy reform and to strengthen engagement among public and private sector
   stakeholders in selected agribusiness value chains.

   1.2. Targeted retention and expansion of agribusiness investors by Sierra Leone's Investment and
   Export Promotion Agency (SLIEPA). This sub-component was designed to support SLIEPA to develop
   and implement an aftercare program for the retention and expansion for agribusiness investors. Support for
   capacity building focused on study tours and experience‐sharing visits to learn from and benchmark
   achievements from other investment promotion agencies.

   1.3. Building institutional capabilities in the Sierra Leone Standards Bureau (SLSB) to improve
   market access for SMEs. This sub-component aimed to strengthen institutional capacity at the SLSB to
   improve capabilities for enhanced compliance with standards and conformity. TA focused on: (a) assessing
   quality infrastructure and training needs and demand for quality infrastructure services; (b) identifying
   compliance challenges for agro-processors and SMEs in specific value chains. (c) implementing initiatives
   to meet regional and international market standards, (d) enhancing institutional capacity at the SLSB to



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



address compliance challenges, (e) disseminating information through the SLSB website, and (f) facilitating
stakeholder engagement and coordination through roundtable events.

1.4. Support to Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI); Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Food
Security (MAF); and SME Development Agency (SMEDA) for stronger SME coordination. The project
supported specific functional capacity-building efforts through this sub-component to the MTI, MAF, and
SMEDA. The project supported the MTI in enhancing its capacity to undertake PPDs to identify policy
priorities for agro-processors and improve the functioning of the ministry to perform its functions to provide
defined services for agro-processing, coordinate with other institutions, and undertake strategic planning. It
also strengthened communication activities and provided targeted training for the Agribusiness Unit at the
MAF. Support was provided for digitizing the application and issuance of phytosanitary certificates,
facilitating business links among agricultural stakeholders, and offering timely information on commodity
availability and demand. Logistics for communication, information dissemination, and capacity building for
field and technical staff were also provided. Additionally, SMEDA received assistance in institutional
development; including reviewing laws and policies; proposing reforms for a conducive business
environment, and implementing market-driven Business Development Services (BDS) provision for micro,
small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs). This included establishing guidelines for environmentally
sustainable business models to support entrepreneurs, particularly in fragile settings.

2. Firm level support to increase productivity and strengthen competitiveness (appraisal cost:
US$6.00 million, actual cost: US$5.43 million). This component aimed to increase the productivity and
competitiveness of agro-processing SMEs and their suppliers in selected value chains. It included two sub-
components:

2.1. Firm‐level TA and capacity building of ecosystem players. This sub-component aimed to upgrade
SME productivity and competitiveness through the establishment of an SME TA Facility. The TA Facility
was envisioned as an innovative instrument for providing hands‐on business advisory and TA to SMEs,
facilitating upstream and downstream market linkages for SMEs, and investing in business innovations for
companies at different stages of development within the agro-processing sub-sector and those providing
goods and services to the agro‐processing sub-sector.

2.2. Provision of matching grants to SMEs. This sub-component provided matching grants for capital
investment and TA and expert advice to SMEs. The TA Facility managed a fund, providing matching grants
of up to US$100,000 to 65 SMEs. These grants were aimed at addressing specific business or operational
needs identified in action plans developed during a deep dive into sub-component 2.1. SMEs were eligible
to apply for grants covering up to 70% of costs, with the remaining 30% to be matched by the firm in cash,
in-kind contributions, and/or external finance. SMEs engaged in agro-processing, food processing, and
value addition were eligible for matching grants, with detailed eligibility conditions and selection criteria
outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM). Also, matching grants amounting to US$500,000
equivalent were designated for TA and expert advice. These grants were used to support SMEs to finance
advice from external experts, consultants, or BDS providers selected from a roster trained and credentialed
by the facility.

3. Project implementation, coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (appraisal cost: US$2.00 million,
actual cost: US$2.08 million). This component supported the operational aspects of the project, including
governance arrangements.




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost. The estimated total cost for the project was US$10.00 million. The actual cost according to
   the ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$9.23 million.

   Financing. The project was financed through US$10.00 million IDA Credit to the government of Sierra
   Leone. The actual amount disbursed was US$9.23 million (ICR Data Sheet, page 2). The project had
   US$0.5 million cancelled.

   Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through IDA and no borrower contribution was
   expected.

   Dates. The project was approved on July 9, 2018 and became effective three months later on October 24,
   2018. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was conducted on October 19, 2020, which was about two years after
   effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify a date for the MTR, the MTR for this project was conducted
   earlier when compared to other World Bank operations. The project closed on its expected original closing
   date on December 31, 2023.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Agriculture, including agribusiness, is a key sector of Sierra Leone’s economy,
contributing more than half of GDP and employing a significant portion of the labor force. Agro-processing
SMEs faced multiple impediments to their growth at various levels: (i) at the firm level – access to finance,
technology and skills, supply chain management, and managerial practices, (ii) at the sector level – weak
institutions responsible for developing sector policies (Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Trade and Industry,
the SME Development Agency), cumbersome processes that lacked transparency to obtain critical
certificates, licenses and permits to operate (i.e. EPA license and Phyto-sanitary certificates), weak national
quality infrastructure hindering market access for agro-processed products and market information, and (iii)
at the business environment level – these include issues related to access to finance, land, electricity,
corruption and taxes. This project aimed to improve the competitiveness of the agriculture sector by largely
focusing on addressing challenges predominantly at the sector and firm levels.

Previous Bank Experience. The project leveraged existing World Bank Group projects in Sierra Leone.
Specifically, it aimed to foster complementarities with Bank–financed Smallholder Commercialization and
Agribusiness Development Project (SCADeP – P153437), approved in January 2016. SCADeP addressed
market failures that agribusiness firms encounter upstream and production levels (low farm productivity,
poor quality, and inconsistent supply of raw materials), while this project targets the market failures that
agro‐processing firms and SMEs face in downstream segments of value chains. It was expected that the
increased farm productivity and reduced postharvest losses from SCADeP‐supported interventions would
increase the volume of agricultural commodities that were used as inputs for agro‐processing firms. This
project aimed to sustain and increase the demand for agricultural outputs delivered
under SCADeP. Also, similar design and implementation arrangements were developed with the Sierra
Leone Skills Development Project (P163723), which responded to private sector demands for skills through
the proposed Skills Development Fund (SDF). In addition, the project activities would build on the

                                                                                                      Page 4 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



International Finance Corporation (IFC)–World Bank SME Business Linkages Program, which has helped
agricultural SMEs connect with large foreign and local agribusiness firms.

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the Bank's Country Partnership
Framework for Sierra Leone (CPF, FY2019‐ FY2023). The CPF reflected the priorities of the 2017 Sierra
Leone Systematic Country Diagnostics (SCD), which identified promotion of vertical integration as a key
area for diversifying the economy and creating poverty‐alleviating jobs. The SCD highlighted the potential of
agro-processing in key value chains, such as rice, oil palm, and fisheries, in promoting inclusive and
sustainable growth. The project was expected to provide practical insights into the enabling
business environment and incentives that were critical to transform the SCD policy priorities into
sustainable and inclusive growth options in the CPF. The project also contributed to the Bank's twin goals of
ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity, given the role that agriculture and agribusiness
play in the economy.

At completion, the PDO continued to be line with the Bank's CPF for Sierra Leone (FY2021-FY2026)
which identified several development challenges, including the need to improve economic diversification to
reduce growth volatility and vulnerability to external shocks. The project specifically contributed to the third
focus area of the CPF: Economic diversification and competitiveness with resilience, for which the second
objective was to: boost productivity in key sectors for a diversified economy. The CPF also identified the
need to improve SME competitiveness in three priority sectors: agribusiness, fisheries, and tourism.


Consistency with government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with
the Government of Sierra Leone's Agenda for Prosperity. Specifically, Pillar 1 on economic diversification
and Pillar 4 on improving Sierra Leone’s international competitiveness, which aimed to develop a
supportive business environment, improve private sector coordination within government, and address
binding constraints to competitiveness. The PDO was also in line with the agricultural sector strategic goals
and objectives articulated in the National Sustainable Agriculture Development Plan (2010–2030) and the
Smallholder Commercialization Program (2010–2015). These documents focused on commodity
commercialization, promotion of the private sector, establishment of farmer‐based organizations, and
agribusiness centers.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Government's program: Feed Salone, which aimed to
boost agriculture productivity to fuel inclusive growth, increase local food production and reduce
dependence of food import, reduce hunger, increase export earnings, create jobs, and build resilient food
systems. Specifically with the project would contribute to the third pillar of the program: Aggregation,
processing, and marketing.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was clear and focused. It was
also pitched an adequate level of ambition relative to the Bank's experience and the envisioned targets. At
completion, the PDO continued to be in line with Bank's CPF and with the Government priorities for the
agriculture sector as discussed above. Finally, the relevance of the PDO and the sector is further evidenced
by the sector’s contribution to GDP where agriculture, forestry, and fisheries value added accounted for
60.4% of GDP in 2022.

Therefore, Relevance of Objectives is rated High.




                                                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve the business environment in the agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra
                             Leone.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following
                             activities: promoting enabling environment for agro‐processing sector competitiveness and growth of
                             agribusiness firms through enabling business regulations for competitive agro‐processing, supporting SLIEPA
                             to develop and implement an aftercare program for the retention and expansion for agribusiness
                             investors, building institutional capabilities in the Sierra Leone Standards Bureau (SLSB) to improve market
                             access for SMEs, and support the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI); Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and
                             Food Security (MAF); and SME Development Agency (SMEDA) for stronger SME coordination. These
                             activities aimed to reduce burdensome agribusiness sector regulations that constrain productivity and weaken
                             incentives of existing agribusiness firms and SMEs to reinvest earnings or make new investments for sector
                             growth and competitiveness.

                             The expected outputs included: developing an agriculture sector Environmental and Social Impact
                             Assessment (ESIA) Regulations, launching the automated Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) licensing
                             process, passing the new EPA regulation, strengthening testing capabilities of the Standards Bureau, and
                             training of staff to improve quality of services to private sector.

                             The intermediate outcomes included: an increase in the number of agribusiness firms implementing revised
                             EIA procedures, and establishing an agribusiness relationship management system.

                             The implementation of the afore mentioned activities were expected to contribute the following two outcomes:
                             increase the number of new investments in agribusiness sector, and reduce the average cost to comply with
                             EPA regulations. All this would contribute to achieving an improvement in the business environment in the
                             agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms. Anticipated long-term impacts included: job creation,
                             poverty reduction, and economic diversification.

                             Important critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective included (based on
                             direct communication with the project team):

                                        Firm and sector level challenges adequately addressed including the key market failures affecting
                                         agro-processing SMEs. These were identified during project design as: policy and coordination
                                         failures, lack of access to finance, information asymmetries, and weak supply chain.
                                        Firm survival was enhanced through project interventions.

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)




      Firms’ revenues increased.
      Access to finance and BDS services and capacity building facilitated productivity enhancing
         investment by supported SMEs leading to their expansion, investment readiness.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were linked to outputs, intermediate outcomes and to the PDO
through plausible and logical causal chains. The PDO was also aligned with the higher level objective of
Sierra Leone’s international competitiveness and economic diversification. The ToC was used as a basis for
developing the operation’s results framework and it reflected a good balance between the complexity and
clarity of the causal links. However, some indicators could have benefited from more clarity (see Section 9 a
for details). Finally, the critical assumptions shared by the project team were logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      By project completion an agriculture sector Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
         Regulations was developed (achieved). The project supported the development and adoption of new
         tailored guidelines and regulations relating to the EPA Act to help assess and cost risks specific to the
         agriculture sector. This allowed for a more accurate assessment of risk posed by agribusiness
         investors and the development of a more varied set of EPA compliance licenses for investors (ICR,
         paragraph 37).
        The automated EIA licensing process was launched (achieved). The project financed a digital platform
         that allows investors to apply for EPA licenses and permits online, lifting the burden of a paper-based
         application and submission.
        The new EPA regulation was passed (achieved). According the ICR (paragraph 70) "EPA guidelines
         were adopted in 2023 with a slow rollout."
        Testing capabilities of the Standards Bureau (SLSB) was strengthened and training of staff to improve
         quality of services to private sector (achieved). Through the project’s support, the SLSB was able to
         increase the average number of food and beverage samples it analyzes every month from 68 in 2021
         to 76 in 2022 and 81 in 2023.The project upgraded the SLSB’s capacity to run conformity tests on
         agricultural products, a key factor in access to markets for agro-processing SMEs, and prepared the
         SLSB to start issuing product certification. The project trained the SLSB staff, upgrading their capacity
         to conduct tests and use new equipment and developed a website to provide information to private
         sector investors on services available and standards to support compliance and market access (ICR,
         paragraph 38).
        47 agribusiness firms implemented the revised EIA procedures exceeding the target of 40 (target
         exceeded).
        58 agribusinesses used the Investor Relationship Management System exceeding the target of 50
         (target exceeded).

Outcomes

      By project completion the number of new investments in agribusiness sector reached 33 which
       exceeded the target of 26 (PDO outcome indicator #1). Females were co-owners of 8 new
       investments achieving the target of 8.
      By project completion the average cost to apply to EPA regulations decreased from a baseline of
       US$25,000 to US$1,875, which exceeded the target of US$5,000.



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To achieve the stated objective, the project sought to foster a supportive
business environment with strong institutional support. The project addressed the costly licensing process at
the EPA which was a key challenge facing agribusiness firms in Sierra Leone. The project also upgraded the
SLSB’s capacity to run conformity tests on agricultural products, a key factor in access to markets for agro-
processing SMEs. The project succeeded in significantly reducing the cost of EPA application by 92.5% (PDO
outcome indicator #1) and attracted 33 new investments in the agribusiness sector exceeding the target of 26
(PDO outcome indicator #2). The project also achieved all of its outputs and exceeded both targets for its
intermediate results as noted above. In a further communication, the project team explained that beyond the
M&E results framework, the project achieved important results in line with its PDO: "in terms of the business
environment for agribusinesses, the EPA regulatory reform and introduction of a risk-based fee system is a
huge relief for small agribusinesses (which make up the bulk of agribusinesses in Sierra Leone) and an
incentive to comply with EPA regulations. The ability of SMEs to access product testing services and
ultimately production certification is a huge factor in accessing markets, especially export markets mention
the institutional strengthening aspects of the project which also have a bearing on the overall business
environment."

Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the following activities:
provided firm level support to increase productivity and strengthen competitiveness through the provision of
firm‐level TA and capacity building of ecosystem players, and the provision of matching grants to SMEs.
These activities aimed to increase the productivity and competitiveness of agro-processing SMEs and their
suppliers in selected value chains. The SMEs grants aimed at addressing specific business or operational
needs identified in action plans developed under the project.

The expected outputs of the above-mentioned activities included: launching and on-boarding SMEs to benefit
from the training and coaching provided under the SME TA Facility, completing a SME diagnostics to provide
tailored capacity building and systems upgrades to the SMEs, supporting 25 SMEs through a second tranche
emergency grant in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to execute required adaptation and growth plans.

The expected intermediate outcomes included: the number of SMEs compliant with private/international
market standards, and the number of SME action plans receiving funding for business expansion.

All this would result in increased volume of processed products by SMEs (outcome) which would contribute to
achieving the PDO of increasing productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone. Anticipated
long-term impacts included: job creation, poverty reduction, and economic diversification.


                                                                                                 Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



Important critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the stated objective included (direct
communication with the project team):

      Firm and sector level challenges adequately addressed including the key market failures affecting
       agro-processing SMEs. These were identified during project design as: policy and coordination
       failures, lack of access to finance, information asymmetries, and weak supply chain.
      Firm survival was enhanced through project interventions.
      Firms’ revenues increased.
      Access to finance and BDS services and capacity building facilitated productivity enhancing
       investment by supported SMEs leading to their expansion, investment readiness.

Overall, the stated activities in the ToC were linked to outputs, intermediate outcomes and to the PDO
through plausible and logical causal chains. The PDO was also aligned with the higher level objective of
Sierra Leone’s international competitiveness and economic diversification. The ToC was used as a basis for
developing the operation’s results framework and it reflected a good balance between the complexity and
clarity of the causal links. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic. While the ToC included relevant
activities, it could have benefited from a dedicated marketing activity to support the anticipated increase
in productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms. Poor marketing links can result in depressed prices which
can discourage agro‐processing firms and reverse productivity gains.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      A second cohort of 40 SMEs benefited from the training and coaching provided under the SME TA
         Facility (target achieved).
        Completed a SME diagnostics to provide tailored capacity building and systems upgrades to the
         SMEs (target achieved).
        25 SMEs from Cohort 1 received second tranche emergency grant in response to the COVID-
         19 pandemic, to execute required adaptation and growth plans (target achieved).
        35 SMEs were compliant with private/international market standards exceeding the target of 30 (target
         exceeded).
        65 SME action plans received funding for business expansion exceeding the target of 60 (target
         exceeded).
        Notable achievements not captured directly by the RF included: training and certification of 25 service
         providers in agribusiness-specific BDS training of trainers, establishing collaboration between one of
         the leading business schools (Institute of Public Administration and Management) and the JFC
         Training college in London, and the project provided direct support to beneficiary SMEs to apply for
         the environmental license in coordination with the EPA and run product analyses at the SLSB.

Outcomes

      By project completion the volume of processed products by SMEs increased by 33% exceeding the
         end target of 30% (PDO outcome indicator #3). The project team explained that this indicator was
         measured through "an end-of-project survey that was conducted among all 65 SME beneficiaries from
         Cohorts 1 and 2. The survey asked SMEs about their volume of processed product at the beginning of
         2022 vs. at the end of 2023, in KG. The percentage increase is based on the overall variance in the
         production volume end of 2023 vs. beginning of 2022 among all SMEs." Among female-owned SMEs,


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



                                    which made up 40% of beneficiary SMEs, the average increase in the volume of processed products
                                    was 22% (ICR, paragraph 42). The ICR (paragraph 42) reported that 80% of 55 TA facility
                                    beneficiaries signed new contracts with buyers while one-third were exporting their products by project
                                    closing. The survey also found that the beneficiaries expanded their workforce by an average of one
                                    additional worker for male-owned businesses and two additional workers for female-owned
                                    businesses.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. To achieve the stated objective, the project established a TA Facility to
                            provide training and BDS for agribusinesses
                            and allocate matching grants to qualified SMEs. The TA Facility benefited a total of 65 SMEs. The project
                            exceeded its target for its outcome indicator measuring the volume of processed products by SMEs (33%
                            achieved compared to a target of 30%). The project also met all of its output and intermediate results targets.
                            The ICR also provided anecdotal evidence that the activities of the supported SMEs were sustainable and
                            some businesses were already received external funds outside the TA facility to expand (ICR, paragraph 43).
                            In a further communication, the project team explained that beyond the M&E results framework, the project
                            achieved important results in line with its PDO: "in terms of improving the productivity of targeted firms, all
                            beneficiaries were able to make productivity-enhancing investments thanks to project grant funding (e.g.,
                            purchase of equipment and machinery) and benefit from BDS relating to improved management practices.
                            The impact of these interventions is evident in terms of production and business expansion, young firms’
                            survival rate, investment readiness of most beneficiaries, and access to export markets by a third of
                            beneficiaries (knowing that exporting firms generally tend to be more productive than the average firm)."

                            Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project succeeded in improving the business environment in the
                            agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms (Objective 1). This was evidenced by achieving more
                            than 80% reduction in EPA licensing fees for certain low impact business categories, which most
                            agribusinesses fall under. The project also improved the SLSB’s capacity to undertake testing and analysis of
                            agriculture products as evidenced by the steady increase in the average number of analyses undertaken per
                            month from 2021 to 2023. The project also contributed to increasing the productivity of targeted
                            agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone (Objective 2) through supporting 65 SMEs through the TA facility. The
                            supported SMEs increased their production volume by 33% exceeding the end target of 30%.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

Ex-ante

      The PAD estimated an Internal Rates of Return (EIRR) at 12% based on a model that used a rice-
       producing SMEs in Sierra Leone as a base case, with sales of 600 tons per year, generating about
       US$350,000 annually in sales and about US$50,000 annually in profit. Other assumptions included a 10-
       year time horizon, 12% discount rate, and an overall spend for the SME TA Facility of US$3 million
       broken down equally over the first five years of the project.
      To generate a 12% economic internal rate of return (IRR), the model would require that the SMEs’
       production volume increase by 3% year-on-year and that the TA Facility work with 30 companies of this
       size.
      The economic and financial analysis (EFA) was based on two principles: (i) whether the expected
       benefits that flow from the project justify the expected costs; and (ii) a comparison of scenarios with and
       without the project.

Ex-post

      The analysis at completion followed the same methodology at appraisal to ensure consistency and
       comparability. Th analysis used updated assumptions and estimated the IRR at 15%. The average
       turnover of 50 beneficiary SMEs that responded to a satisfaction survey
       was the equivalent of US$44,000. The TA Facility spend was updated to the actual US$5.4 million, and
       the number of beneficiaries was updated to the actual 65 SMEs. It was assumed that SMEs will continue
       to increase production by 20% per year over the next 10 years.
      However, a sensitivity analysis revealed that the IRR would be negative if the growth rate is cut in half.
       The ICR (paragraph 47) emphasized that this was "a likely assumption given the current difficult
       macroeconomic context."
      The ICR cited other metrics to demonstrate efficiency including: 1. The cost per job
       created: at US$30,000 per job created, the cost per job created through the TA Facility compares
       favorably to international benchmarks (ICR, paragraph 48), 2. The cost of the TA per beneficiary SME
       was around US$40,000, which also compares favorably with international benchmarks (ICR, paragraph
       49).
      Implementation efficiency. The project closed on its expected closing date with no extensions. However,
       efficiency was negatively impacted by implementation delays that stemmed from an initial delay in
       initiating project activities, lengthy procurement processes, and delays associated with the COVID-19
       restrictions. As a result of implementation delays, some activities were only completed a few months
       before project closing. Consequently, the project did not fully utilize its funds, with US$500,000 canceled
       just before project closing.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The IRR at closing was estimated at 15% which exceeded the 12%
estimated at appraisal. While the project experienced implementation delays, it managed to exceed its original
PDO indicator end targets by project closing. It is worth noting that COVID-19 related delays were outside of the

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



project control. The evidence provided also indicated that the cost per job created compared favorably with
international benchmarks. Overall, the analysis at completion provided an adequate justification of the project
investments. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 12.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              15.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project succeeded
in improving the business environment in the agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms (Objective
1). This was evidenced by achieving more than 80% reduction in EPA licensing fees for certain low impact
business categories, which most agribusinesses fall under. The project also contributed to increasing the
productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms in Sierra Leone (Objective 2) through supporting 65 SMEs
through the TA facility. The supported SMEs increased their production volume by 33% exceeding the end
target of 30%. Efficiency was rated Substantial. The IRR at closing was estimated at 15% which exceeded
the 12% estimated at appraisal.

Based on the assigned ratings for the three Outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial risk. This was the main risk identified by the ICR which could impact several project achievements
as follows:

       The ability of the Government to continue to finance and sustain some key project interventions is
        unclear given the limited fiscal space to support the Ministries, Departments, and Agencies (MDAs).

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



       The project financed interventions to automate the application process for phytosanitary certificates at
       the MAF and the Agribusiness Data Management System at the MTI. The maintenance costs of
       these activities need to be covered by the Government and MDAs budget allocations. Similarly,
       MDAs will need financial resources to continue offering trainings to intended beneficiaries. Beyond
       financing, the implementation of reforms required changing management practices and backing of the
       Government’s political leadership to sustain and ensure their full implementation beyond project
       closure. However, the limited fiscal space means MDAs are frequently without adequate resources to
       finance their operations posing a risk for the sustenance of project interventions.
      The continuation of the Business Development Services (BDS) provision for SMEs is uncertain after
       the project completion. The World Bank team agreed with the PCU to explore the potential of handing
       over of the TA Facility knowledge and infrastructure to the Small and Medium Enterprises
       Development Agency (SMEDA). The ICR (paragraph 82) reported that "this process is still ongoing."
      The sustainability of some of the SME beneficiaries is contingent on their ability to tap into additional
       sources of funding. The project fell short of allocating grant funding for more significant capital
       investments for Cohort 2 SMEs, which may represent a threat to the sustainability of some of the
       newer SMEs that were supported. While the project had envisioned a closer link between
       beneficiaries and financial institutions, this was not done in a systematic way. Despite that the project
       improved the overall business environment, there are still challenges beyond the scope of the project.
       Most notable, there are significant financial sector vulnerabilities that will make access to finance
       even more challenging for SMEs in the sector and those supported by the project.
      The ability of the SLSB to ensure that SMEs comply with quality standards is contingent on its
       accreditation and adoption of a sustainable operating/funding model. The SLSB is not yet positioned
       to certify products according to local quality standards before they go on the market. The SLSB is
       putting in place its product certification scheme and seeking ISO accreditation. However, its long-term
       sustainability and ability to keep operating and offering services to businesses will depend on its
       ability to agree a sustainable operating and funding model with the Ministry of Finance (MOF).
       Revenues generated by the SLSB go into a general budget, limiting the institution’s ability to
       internally generate funds. According to the ICR (paragraph 84) discussions with the MOF to revise
       this model are under way.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
         Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
         details). The project was expected to help Sierra Leone improve the business environment in the
         agribusiness sector and increase productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms. This was in line
         with Government's commitment to strengthen the agriculture sector by leveraging private sector
         investment.
        Technical, Financial and Economic Aspects. The project was designed to build on the
         Smallholder Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project (SCADeP) by facilitating
         links between farmers and agribusiness firms, aimed to address business environment barriers
         that agribusiness investors identified as major challenges to competitiveness and growth. The
         project design featured a clear and focused PDO that was supported by relevant components that

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 21
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



         reflected clear activities. The project design clearly addressed identified market failures and
         integrated lessons learned from previous operations, namely, the importance of TA as a key part
         of direct firm-level support, as well as combining both sector reforms and firm-level support. The
         project also aimed to strengthen links between SMEs and agricultural processors to improve
         efficiencies in downstream supply linkages such as packaging, distribution services, and others
         and focus on downstream market information systems that better connect SMEs, local firms, and
         foreign investors. In addition, and given the FCV nature of the country, the project design focused
         on strengthening key government ministries and agencies through supporting technical capacity
         building. Finally, the economic and financial analysis in the PAD was detailed enough and
         provided adequate justification for the project investments.
        Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. Supporting and improving the
         competitiveness of agribusiness firms was expected to create market opportunities for agricultural
         products. This was expected to create jobs for smallholder farmers. The project
         prepared a gender analysis report that emphasized the importance of establishing a strong and
         flexible financing system to provide accessible and affordable finance for women-owned SMEs.
         Design also emphasized gender in most supported activities.
        Environmental and Fiduciary Aspects. The project design reflected adequate environmental
         aspects. However, financial management and procurement proved more challenging due to the
         FCV nature of the country. Fiduciary challenges were exacerbated by the frequent changes in the
         Project Fiduciary Management Unit (PFMU) staff assigned to the project during implementation.
        Implementation Arrangements. The PAD (Annex 2) included a detailed description of the
         implementation arrangements. The project had a project coordination unit (PCU) established
         under the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI), and a project steering committee (PSC) that
         included MTI, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), and Ministry of Finance (MoF).
         Implementation of activities involved several government departments and agencies and nonstate
         institutions including: the Environmental Protection Agency, Sierra Leone Investment and Export
         Promotion Agency Sierra, Sierra Leone Standards Bureau, Small and Medium Enterprises
         Development Agency, and Sierra Leone Chamber for Agribusiness Development. The project
         relied on public institutions to serve as the primary vehicle of SME support and ecosystem-
         building initiatives. Despite the detailed implementation arrangements, the project implementation
         readiness was poor due to "capacity
         gaps at the implementing agency, which was new to managing projects and unfamiliar with World
         Bank policies and procedures (ICR, paragraph 61)."
        Risk Assessment. The overall risk was rated Substantial due to ratings of Substantial or High of
         the following risks: political and governance, macroeconomic, technical design and institutional
         capacity for implementation and sustainability. The PAD reflected relevant mitigation measures
         against the identified risks. However, capacity constraints during the first year of
         implementation proved more challenging than anticipated.
        M&E Arrangements. The PCU had the primary responsibility for project level M&E.
         However, M&E arrangements did not capture implementation progress or achievement of results
         adequately. The Results Framework (RF) included some indicators that were not adequately
         defined and lacked clear attribution to project activities or links with the PDO. Also, the baselines
         for the PDO indicators were not adequately captured (see Section 9a for details).

Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. Design
included a clear PDO that was supported by relevant activities. Environmental aspects were adequate,
but fiduciary experienced challenges. Implementation arrangements were complex and involved multiple


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



  institutions which proved challenging in an environment of weak institutional capacity. Risk identification
  was thorough and reflected relevant mitigation measures. M&E arrangements had shortcomings in the
  design of the M&E Results Framework. Overall, Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
  moderate shortcomings pertaining to implementation arrangements and the design of the M&E Results
  Framework.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The World Bank task team updated the Implementation Support and Results Report every six
          months and conducted regular implementation
          support missions, including virtual missions during the COVID-19 pandemic. In total, the Bank
          conducted 11 implementation support missions over the implementation duration. The final Task
          Team Leader was part of the project task team from the inception stage, which ensured continuity
          and institutional memory.
         The project was co-led by the private sector and agriculture specialists given the focus of the
          project. The task team also included additional technical expertise and adequate fiduciary and
          safeguards supervisory roles. The Bank provided intense supervision to ensure the application of
          fiduciary rules and procedures.
         The project supported training of trainers and the development of manuals for the Small and
          Medium Enterprises Development Agency and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to allow
          them to sustain their support to agribusinesses and SMEs beyond project closing.
         While the need to restructure the project was identified toward the end of 2022 to reallocate funds
          toward better-performing activities and revise the Results Framework, the project was not
          restructured.
         Despite that World Bank supported the Government in ensuring adequate transition arrangements,
          the Government could not finalize all arrangements by project closing. For example, the SLSB’s
          funding/operating model still needed to be agreed with the MOF to ensure that the institution can
          sustain its activities and obtain the needed accreditation to certify products as meeting national
          quality standards before they access the market. The project also financed the development of an
          agribusiness data management system and an e-phytosanitary certificate application platform,
          but they were still not operational by project closing due to lack of Government funding.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank task team successfully guided the
 implementation of the project against a fragile context with limited implementation capacity. Th Bank team
 also demonstrated resilience and innovation in navigating challenges including guiding the project
 implementation during the COVID-19 restrictions. However, the Bank could have pushed further to
 restructure the project, and could have better coordinated with the Government a clear closing strategy to
 ensure the full disbursement of the project funds. Overall, the Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory due to moderate shortcomings pertaining to QAE as discussed above.


                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PDO included two elements (see Section 2a ). The first element of the PDO (to improve the
        business environment in the agribusiness sector of targeted agro‐processing firms) was measured
        through two PDO outcome indicators as follows: 1. The number of new investments in agribusiness
        sector; and 2. Average cost to comply with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations.
        The second element of the PDO (to increase productivity of targeted agro‐processing firms) was
        measured through one PDO outcome indicator: 3. Increased volume of processed products by
        SMEs.
       There were notable concerns pertaining to the three outcome indicators. First, while the EPA
        compliance cost indicator (outcome indicator #2) adequately captured the main business
        environment reform supported by the project, it lacked a clear definition for the baseline. Since the
        EIA license fee was dependent on the firm’s risk category, it was difficult to calculate a blanket
        reduction in compliance cost. Second, while the indicator measuring the increase in production
        volume of beneficiary SMEs (outcome indicator #3) was clear, it only captured the increase in
        output as one aspect of increased productivity. Third, the indicator on new investments in the
        agribusiness sector (outcome indicator #1) lacked a clear definition and methodology for calculating
        the results. Also, it involved other factors that impacted the business environment beyond the
        project interventions, which questions the attribution to the project activities alone.
       The Results Framework (RF) included five intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the
        progress of the different project activities. While the IRIs were measurable, reflected reasonable
        targets, and were connected to the project activities, they were not comprehensive enough to
        capture the full impact of the project.
       Overall, M&E design suffered from notable shortcomings that negatively impact the ability of the
        system to track activities and comprehensively measure outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
       While M&E data were reported every six months, many of the indicator values could only be
         calculated at project closing due to implementation delays and lack of clarity on some of the
         definitions (ICR, paragraph 70).
        For example, data on the EPA compliance cost reduction (and number of firms implementing
         revised EIA procedures), and the number of SMEs compliant with standards were all reported
         toward the end of the project.



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



        A beneficiary satisfaction survey was conducted among the TA Facility SMEs before project
         closing which served to fill data gaps and ensure adequate reporting. However, the survey did
         not fully address the intent of the intermediate results indicator on industry association feedback
         on effectiveness of project activities.
        Overall, M&E implementation was challenging, and data was collected late in the implementation
         cycle.



c. M&E Utilization
       According to the ICR (paragraph 71) M&E data did not sufficiently inform project management
         and decision-making, and the M&E
         results framework could have benefited from a revision.
        In a sign of limited utilization, the ICR (paragraph 70) reported that "members of the Sierra Leone
         Chamber for Agribusiness Development who did not directly benefit from the project were not
         sufficiently aware of interventions relating to business environment improvements nor of the
         results achieved by the TA Facility."

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design suffered from notable shortcomings pertaining
  to the outcome indicators and their definitions. Implementation was challenging and data was only
  collected prior to completion. Utilization was poor as the lack of M&E data meant that project
  management and implementation decisions could not be informed by the M&E framework. In a further
  communication the project team explained that despite M&E design shortcomings, "the PCU and Bank
  team remedied these issues by (i) clarifying definitions and methodologies, (ii) conducting a beneficiary
  survey and collecting SME data, and (iii) reporting actual values achieved." Therefore, despite the
  Quality of M&E being Modest, the project was able to provide sufficient evidence to justify the
  achievement of the outcomes.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as environmental category B
          - Partial Assessment, given that no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts
          were anticipated. The project only triggered the Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and the
          Government prepared the requisite Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
          which provided guidelines on how to mitigate likely environmental risks and impacts.
         Compliance with Environmental Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 73) "the project
          did not encounter any significant environmental and social issues during implementation." The
          project established a functioning grievance redress mechanism (GRM) which resolved complaints. A
          safeguards specialist was hired to work with the EPA on the new regulations and guidelines for



                                                                                                   Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



           agricultural companies. The ICR did not provide an explicit statement on the compliance with the
           World Bank Safeguard policies.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). FM experienced delays in financial reporting and auditing. At the
          MTR a financial management review showed that project management expenditures were running
          high relative to expenditures related to the technical project components. However, the review
          found no cases of ineligible expenditures. FM performance improved when a new financial
          management specialist was hired at the PFMU. FM performance was rated Satisfactory in the final
          ISR.
         Procurement. Procurement experienced long delays. This was partly due to difficulty in
          constituting evaluation committees and frequent changes in the PFMU staff assigned to the project.
          This resulted in inconsistent use of the World Bank’s e-procurement system and appropriate filing
          of procurement documents. Procurement performance improved toward the end of the
          implementation period with the stability in the PFMU staff assigned to the project. Also,
          close implementation support from the World Bank team helped resolve the issues the project
          experienced. According to the ICR (paragraph 74) "there were no cases of misprocurement during
          the lifetime of the project." Procurement performance was rated Satisfactory in the final ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   "The results achieved by the project have boosted confidence in the future prospects of the agriculture
   sector. The impact of this project and SCADeP have facilitated an even more ambitious government agenda
   in the form of the ‘Feed Salone (Sierra Leone)’ flagship initiative. It has also resulted in leveraging of US$75
   million in IDA finance, the largest single operation in the portfolio, to support the scale-up of successful
   interventions in the agriculture portfolio (ICR, paragraph 58)."



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                      IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory


                                                                                                    Page 18 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included seven lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To sustain the impact of projects implemented in countries with fragility and significant
fiscal constraints, it is crucial to embed the sustainability of project activities in the design.
The experience of this project demonstrated that with more proactive planning for sustainability was
needed, as some key MDAs had limited capacity in core areas. For example, SMEDA staff could
have been embedded at the TA Facility to ensure transfer of knowledge on the SME development
program. Similarly, the MTI technical staff could have had stronger collaboration with the PCU to
build practical project management and coordination expertise. This would have been particularly
beneficial given the high turnover of ministers affected by cabinet reshuffles and a change in the
Government due to a general election.

2. Projects involving a multitude of government institutions need stronger coordination
mechanisms and structures to be built into implementation arrangements, especially in FCV
countries. The project involved many MDAs with some kind of role to play in promoting SMEs and
agribusiness: MTI; the newly formed SMEDA; and agribusiness units at the MAF, SLIEPA, and
SLSB. In addition, around the time of project preparation, the Sierra Leone Local Content Agency
and National Investment Board (to subsume SLIEPA) were established by Acts of Parliament, with
at times overlapping mandates relative to other institutions. A well-functioning Project Steering
Committee (PSC) can ensure effective coordination in the context of project specific activities.
Building capacity and ownership within government, including by recruiting additional expertise on
the project, is also crucial.

3. The provision of TA to SMEs can be beneficial and help optimize the impact of business
grants. The project experience and feedback from beneficiary SMEs point to the positive impact of
TA as it contributed to more effective use of grant funding by SMEs. In designing TA, it is important
to ensure the group of recipient SMEs is relatively homogeneous, so the TA is tailored to their
specific needs. Early-stage businesses will need different TA than more established SMEs, who
have probably already gone through basic training, for instance, on bookkeeping. Related to this,
building the market for BDS providers is important, so that SMEs can access required TA outside a
given project. The combination of firm-level and sector-level support through the project was also
complementary and enabled SME beneficiaries to access services outside the TA Facility (for
example, at the EPA, SLSB).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  Yes


                                                                                                   Page 19 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)



  ASSESSMENT_TABLE
  Please Explain
   A project assessment is warranted to verify results and achievements on the ground. Since this project was
  built on the Smallholder Commercialization and Agribusiness Development project (SCADeP), the
  predecessor project, the assessment could include both projects. This would better inform the Bank on the
  performance of the two operations and whether the activities of this project successfully
  complemented SCADeP.



14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was adequate to assess the project
         outcomes despite M&E design weaknesses.
      Results Orientation. The ICR used the available M&E data to the extent possible to justify the
         achievement of the PDO.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes reflected a good balance between achievements
         on the ground and achieving outcome targets.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings. However, the section on environmental and social
         compliance lacked an explicit statement on the compliance of the project with World Bank Safeguard
         policies.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a concise coverage of project activities to the extent possible,
         and candidly reported on most shortcomings.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR adequately used the evidence base to the extent
possible to assess the achievement of the PDO. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections
were concise and reflected relevant evidence despite M&E weaknesses. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated
Substantial with minor shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
SL-Agro-Processing Competitiveness Proj (P160295)




                                                                                 Page 21 of 21
