     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024183

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P160418                                   CI: E-Agriculture Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                             Digital Development


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-62440                                 30-Jun-2023                                          56,788,067.58

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 25-May-2018                               31-Oct-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           70,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            65,069,652.10                                                0.00

 Actual                                        56,900,757.13                                                0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Hassan Maher Amin            Samjhana Thapa             Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Cote D'Ivoire's E-Agriculture project as articulated in the
   Financing Agreement (FA, page 4) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal Document
   (PAD, page 18) and aimed to:

   "Increase access to digital services in rural communities and leverage digital platforms to improve
   farm productivity and access to markets."


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



   The PDO was revised as part of the May 2021 restructuring to:

   “Increase access to digital services and farmers’ access to markets through digital platforms and
   rural roads and mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the agriculture sector”

   Parsing the original PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following three objectives:

   1. To increase access to digital services in rural communities.

   2. To leverage digital platforms to improve farm productivity.

   3. To leverage digital platforms to improve access to markets.

   Parsing the revised PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following four objectives:

   1. To increase farmers' access to digital services.

   2. To increase farmers’ access to markets through digital platforms and rural roads

   3. To mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the agriculture sector.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following six components:

   1. Extending digital connectivity in rural and remote areas (appraisal cost US$31.50 million, actual
   cost: US$15.10 million). This component supported the improvement of the digital environment through
   technical assistance and capacity-building and financed the extension of digital infrastructure in rural areas
   through catalytic public subsidies to unlock private capital investment. It included the following two sub-
   components:

   1.1 Review and improvement of the digital services enabling environment legal and institutional
   framework. This sub-component aimed to provide technical assistance to strengthen key stakeholders,
   including the Ministry of Communication and Digital Economy and Post (MICENUP), the
   Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Côte d'Ivoire (ARTCI), and the Telecommunications Service
   National Agency (ANSUT) in defining, enhancing, and enforcing an enabling environment conducive to
   providing Information and Communication Technology (ICT) coverage in rural areas. Additionally, this sub-



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



component aimed to fund a legal review of the current enabling environment and identify bottlenecks that
hinder private investment.

1.2. Supporting the extension of digital infrastructure in targeted rural areas. In areas where public
funding was not immediately required, International Finance Corporation (IFC) may envisage to partner with
potential investors, using the new Private Sector Window (PSW) IDA Facility to go beyond its standard
market and risk framework. The project aimed to implement competitive awards of “least‐cost” capital
subsidies through a “least‐cost subsidy auction” tender process to private operators, thereby supporting
‘Open Access’ broadband infrastructure in targeted areas that were not commercially viable. Open Access
digital infrastructure promotes best practices ensuring wholesale, transparent, non‐discriminatory, fair, and
effective access for all market players. IDA funds would be managed by MICENUP in accordance with a
Manual of Operations specifically developed for expanding coverage in white zones. In designing the
Public‐private Partnership (PPP), the guiding principle is to minimize public intervention that could crowd
out or replace private investments, alter commercial investment incentives, and ultimately of distort
competition.

2. Digital services for sustainable agricultural development (appraisal cost US$12.50 million, actual
cost: US$7.40 million). This component strengthened the capacity of farmers in climate-smart production
management and marketing, while facilitating the formation or consolidation of farmer groups into more
formal structures. It also strengthened the capacities of related agricultural agencies, funded the digital
platform for the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MeMINADER) and the development of local
content, e‐Agriculture applications, and services, and supported the digital ecosystem. This component
included the following four sub-components:

2.1. Smart agriculture and producer organizations. This sub-component aimed to support farmers
organized around a commodity of common interest and builds their capacity in climate smart production
management and marketing, etc. The project will identify farmers who were engaged in the production of
selected commodities within the targeted project areas and provide the necessary training. This approach
was utilized extensively as the initial step in on‐farm productivity improvements, and provides an effective
means to deliver training, inputs and marketing support to smallholder farmers. This activity involves
targeting, enrolling, and digitally registering producers and producer organizations digitally. The project
would facilitate the formation or consolidation of farmer groups into more formal structures, if desired by
group members. With a focus on targeting women, it would provide basic digital literacy skills as well as
business development skills training using digital platforms to help project beneficiaries with financial
literacy, business planning, negotiation, and marketing, etc. A targeted public education campaign, and
behavioral change communication would help the small farmers and producer organizations recognize the
benefits, and effectively utilize digital tools and platforms.

2.2. Capacity building in digital solutions in agriculture. This sub-component aimed to strengthen the
capacity of the MINADER and relevant agricultural agencies at all stages of data collection and
management to improve the design, implementation and evaluation of policies and programs for sustainable
agricultural development at the national and local levels. Specifically, the sub‐component aimed to provide
technical assistance to: (i) identify the various institutions within the public, private, non‐governmental sector
at the national and targeted districts level who are involved in the agricultural data-to- decision making value
chain; (ii) capacity strengthening of MINADER staff and relevant agencies in utilizing digital tools and
applications for data collection and management; (iii) improve the enabling environment for agricultural
data, including a review of current status of policies, laws and regulations making recommendations for their



                                                                                                    Page 3 of 28
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



revisions; and (iv) review and upgrade as needed the current strategy and action plan for the development,
dissemination and use of agricultural data.

2.3. Digital platform for the MINADER. This sub-component aimed to strengthen the communication
system of MINADER. The existing communication system was lacking modern technology and adequate
services coverage. The project would leverage Big Data technologies and enable the free flow of data,
information and knowledge among all project stakeholders, including sourcing data from universities and
research labs outside Côte d’Ivoire . The sub‐component would also help establish reliable data flows
between the MINADER in Abidjan and all its decentralized offices, enabling the consolidation and validation
of agriculture‐related data.

2.4. Digital ecosystem and e‐agricultural services. This sub-component aimed to provide real time
agricultural advisory services to small‐scale farmers in the project areas enhancing productivity. It would
tackle the challenges faced by small‐scale farmers in the targeted project areas, including: (i) a lack of
easily accessible, affordable and reliable and relevant data, information and knowledge services on
agriculture and climate, which are crucial for timely advice to improve crop and livestock productivity and
income generation; (ii) lack of digital skills and low levels of literacy, little or no access to learning
opportunities for relevant information and knowledge to access local, national, regional and international
markets; and (iii) very low levels of internet connectivity at affordable prices to enable access to various
information and knowledge materials which are freely available on the world wide web.

3. Rehabilitation and maintenance of rural access roads (appraisal cost US$19.50 million, actual
cost: US$8.10 million). This component aimed to fund technical feasibility studies, environmental and
social assessments, rehabilitation works of about 560km rural roads, along with the maintenance of
2,240km of rural roads over four years. The total distance of rural roads maintained would be about 2,800
km (560 km/year).

4. Program implementation and monitoring (appraisal cost US$6.50 million, actual cost: US$6.60
million). This component aimed to establish a dedicated Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and would
provide support for training, office equipment, operating costs, audits and communications. Additionally,
this component would support the establishment of an M&E system, grievance redress mechanisms (GRM)
and conduct environmental and social studies.

5. Support for the COVID-19 Emergency Program in the Agriculture Sector (appraisal cost US$0.00
million, actual cost: US$18.90 million). This component was added as part of the May 2021
restructuring for COVID-19 related support to farmers. This was an emergency measure requested by the
Government as the country was facing serious effects due to the COVID-19 crisis. It included the following
three sub-components:

5.1. Support to poultry sector. To provide: (a) Non-Cash Subsidies for cold storage facilities for excess
poultry production, assist affected poultry farmers and poultry breeding farms, and poultry slaughtering
operations; (b) farm disinfection; (c) sero-monitoring in the context of vaccination against low pathogenic
avian influenza/H9N2; (d) supervision of poultry producers; (e) acquisition of disinfection equipment for
processing infrastructures; and (f) Cash Subsidies for consumer price support for frozen and preserved
poultry.
5.2. Support to rice/paddy. To: (a) acquire and distribute inputs (urea and NPK6 fertilizers); (b) enhance
paddy processing; and (c) improve the distribution of milled rice.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 28
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



  5.3. Support to staple food sector. To enhance: (i) the collection and grouping centers for food products;
  and (ii) the information and data collection system for the marketing chain.

  5.3. Support to staple food sector. To enhance: (i) the collection and grouping centers for food products;
  and (ii) the system for collecting information and data on the marketing chain for food products.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$70.00 million. According to the final restructuring
  paper (paragraph 3) the IDA Credit was equivalent to US$ 60.8 million at project closure. The actual cost
  according to the ICR (Annex 3) was US$56.90 million or about 93.5% of the appraisal estimate.

  Financing. The project was financed through an IDA credit of US$70.00 million equivalent. The actual
  amount disbursed was US$56.90 million (ICR Data sheet, page 2). The difference was due to the
  cancellation of about US$5.00 million as a result of savings from economic gains realized from activities
  where actual costs were below the forecasted values (ICR, paragraph 8).

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through IDA credit and no borrower contribution
  was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on May 25, 2018 and became effective six months later on November 14,
  2018. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was expected to be conducted 30 months after effectiveness as stated
  in the PAD (Annex 2, paragraph 37). The MTR was conducted on July 12, 2021, about 38 months after
  effectiveness or eight months later than the expected date. The project closed on October 31, 2023 which
  was four months beyond the original closing date on June 30, 2023.

  The project was restructured three times as follows:

  1. On April 26, 2021, Level-2 with RVP Decision due to change in PDO was undertaken, when the amount
  disbursed was US$16.72 million, in order to: (i) add a new “Component 5” (US$20.00 million) reallocated
  from existing components for COVID-19 related support to farmers. This was an emergency measure
  requested by the Government as the country was facing serious effects due to the COVID-19 crisis; (ii)
  revise the PDO; (iii) adjust and streamline the existing components; (iv) revise and update the Results
  Framework (RF); (v) modify implementation arrangements; and (vi) adjust the social and environmental
  analysis.

  2. On June 23, 2023, with US$45.92 million disbursed, the closing date was extended by 4 months from
  June 30, 2023, to October 31, 2023. The extension was needed to allow additional time for the completion
  of the key activity, specifically extending digital connectivity in rural and remote areas under Component 1
  (Restructuring Paper, paragraph 2).

  3. On October 5, 2023, when US$47.76 million had been disbursed, a partial cancellation of EUR4.629
  million (equivalent of about US$5.0 million) was processed, reducing the total Credit amount from
  EUR56.800 million to EUR52.171 million. The savings were mainly from economic gains realized from
  activities where actual costs were below the forecasted values.




                                                                                                   Page 5 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



   This Review applied a split rating methodology to assess the overall outcome of the project because the
   PDO and the associated outcome targets were both revised downwards. The ICR did not apply a split rating
   to assess the overall outcome of the project. In a further communication, the project team explained that the
   ICR opted not to apply a split rating because "the project scope significantly expanded with a whole new
   Component 5 dedicated to the agriculture sector for a total of US$20 million, representing more than a third
   of the total financing for Project components dedicated to investments." However, irrespective of the
   expansion of scope of other components, a split evaluation is applicable given the reduction in some of the
   original targets for other components.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. Cote d’Ivoire faced significant infrastructure challenges with urban-rural gaps,
including for internet access. Poor road networks hindered the transport of goods. Agricultural productivity
was low due to high input costs, post-harvest losses, and limited modern farming techniques. Given the
strong role agriculture plays in the economy, and with the ambition to also enhance digital usage, the e-
Agriculture project sought to improve internet coverage and adoption in the country, and foster the use of
large-scale digital platforms and adoption of sustainable digital services for agriculture. The project was
expected to improve access to digital services and digital platforms in rural communities, ultimately boosting
farm productivity and improving access to markets.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank financed the West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program
(WAAPP, P129565), which, contributed to the first phase of digitalizing the agricultural sector in Cote
d’Ivoire. This project was expected to benefit from the WAAPP's experience and lessons, in particular
related to the e-extension system. Additionally, the World Bank has extensive global experience learned
from previous similar projects in Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia, including the: Nicaragua Rural
Telecom (P089989), Madagascar Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (P094103), Tanzania
Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (P111432), Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation
Project (P069996), and Papua New Guinea 3G Network Upgrade (P107782).

Consistency with Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was aligned with the World Bank Group’s
Country Partnership Framework for Cote d’Ivoire (CPF, FY2016‐FY2019) particularly with Focus Area One:
“Accelerating sustainable private sector led growth” which comprised of four objectives that the
project directly or indirectly supported. The project also directly contributed to two objectives of the CPF:
Objective 1: Improve Productivity in Agriculture/Agribusiness Value Chains by improving
productivity through digital solutions; and Objective 2:Strengthen Economic Infrastructure by extending ICT
connectivity in rural areas. Additionally, the project indirectly contributed to two objectives of the CPF (i)
Enhancing business environment and (ii) Improving access to land. For Objective 3“Improve Business
Regulatory Framework and Access to Finance,” the project extended ICT connectivity and facilitated the
digitization of economic transactions. While Objective 4“Formalize and Enhance Regulatory Access to Land
for Business and Agriculture” was supported through the development of ICT platforms which were
expected to provide affordable and reliable tools to register land and issue land certificates. Ultimately, the
project would also contribute to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 28
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



               shared prosperity through enhancing climate resilience of the agriculture sector and promoting agricultural
               growth, inclusive of smallholder farmers.

               At completion, the ICR did not discuss the relevance of the PDO in relation to the current CPF (FY2023-
               FY2027). However, this Review found that the PDO remained aligned with current CPF, specifically,
               objective 8 “Support development of sustainable and competitive agricultural and manufacturing value
               chain” and to a lesser extent objective 9 “Improve business environment and access to finance”. The
               project enhanced productivity by promoting digital solutions, and contributed to improving the business
               regulatory framework and access to finance by extending the reach of ICT connectivity and facilitating the
               digitization of economic transactions. The project also contributed to one of the CPF's cross cutting themes,
               namely, climate change where better digital connectivity was expected to make farmers better informed
               about climate events. Further communication with the project team confirmed that the PDO was aligned
               with the new CPF, which strongly reiterated the role of the digital sector in the structural transformation of
               the economy. Specifically, the PDO was aligned with CPF's Objective 4 “Expand connectivity through
               quality climate-resilient infrastructure”; and Objective 8 “Support the Development of Sustainable and
               Competitive Agricultural Manufacturing Value Chains”.

               Consistency with the Government strategies and priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line
               with the National Development Plan of Cote d’Ivoire (PND 2016-2020), particularly with its pillars focused
               on agricultural development, infrastructure and digital development.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Government’s development priorities, such as the
               Emergency Program to Support Agricultural Sectors Impacted by Covid-19 (PURGA) and the new National
               Development Plan (PND 2021-2025).

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. While the original PDO statement was clear, the
               revised PDO statement was more specific and better reflected the project’s activities. The revised PDO was
               also pitched at an appropriate level of ambition. The project was built on the Bank’s prior experience with an
               earlier project that focused in supporting initial activities in digitizing agriculture. At completion, the PDO
               continued to be relevant and aligned with both Bank’s strategy and the Government priorities as noted
               above. Therefore, Relevance of Objectives was rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to digital services in rural communities.

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported expanding digital access
and inclusion by reviewing the legal and institutional environment of digital services in order to improve the
enabling environment. The project also supported the extension of Information and Communication
technologies (ICT) coverage in targeted rural areas through Public Private Partnerships (PPP) and open
access arrangements to improve internet coverage and usage.

Key Outputs/Intermediate outcomes included: adoption of an open access and PPP strategy, and
strengthened policy, technical and regulatory capacity of the Ministry of Communication, Digital Economy,
and Post (MINECUP) and the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Côte d'Ivoire (ARTCI), and
improved strategic and regulatory framework for digital development.

Outcomes: increased access to the internet by the population, and increased agricultural access to services
by farmers.

This would ultimately contribute to increasing access to digital services in rural communities.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1. A stable economic
and fiscal environment with no economic or fiscal shocks, 2. The Government is committed and ready to
support policy and legal reforms related to digital services, and 3. the private sector is willing to expand
investments in expanding infrastructure and will direct investments in the project target areas.

The ToC mostly reflected adequate connections between inputs, outputs/Intermediate outcomes and
outcomes in plausible causal chains. The stated assumptions were both logical and realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

The following achievements were reported by the ICR but not captured by the RF:

      The project deployed 160 mobile sites in 175 localities (ICR, paragraph 18)(no target was set).
      43,000 mobile money accounts were created in the covered areas, 187 vendors (selling SIM cards,
       broadband connectivity and mobile money services) established, and more than 53,000 SIM cards
       were bought by targeted beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 18) (no targets provided in the PAD).
      The project helped elaborate a set of critical digital strategies (covering the period 2021-2025)
       including: the National Digital Development Strategy 2025, the National Cybersecurity Strategy 2025,
       and the National Innovation Strategy 2025 (ICR, paragraph 19).
      The project supported preliminary legal and regulatory work, which included a legal and regulatory
       assessment to identify bottlenecks hindering the growth of private investment in ICT as well as
       stakeholders' consultations to update the 2012 Telecom Laws. This helped to draft the current Bill of
       Electronic Telecommunications (PA #1) adopted by the Government in November 2023 and the
       Parliament in April 2024 (ICR, paragraph 19).

Outcomes

      By project completion 5,221,267 people were provided with access to the Internet (PDO outcome
       indictor #1) compared to baseline of 5,000,000 and below the original target of 6,000,000. This
       represented 221,267 people who benefitted from new access to Internet service (PDO outcome
       indictor #2) under the project, which was significantly below the original target of 1,000,000.


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to increase access to digital services in rural
communities. However, the project fell short of achieving its PDO outcome targets on peoples’ access to the
Internet. Additionally, the assessment of project’s achievements was hindered by a inadequately
designed Results Framework (RF). Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated as
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase farmers' access to digital services.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The same ToC under the original Objective 1 applies as only the targets for the
PDO outcome indicator #1 were revised down.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      91% of beneficiaries felt the project investments reflected their needs exceeding the original target of
       80% (target exceeded).

The following achievements were reported by the ICR but not captured by the RF:

      The project deployed 160 mobile sites in 175 localities (ICR, paragraph 18)(no target was set).
      43,000 mobile money accounts were created in the covered areas, 187 vendors (selling SIM cards,
       broadband connectivity and mobile money services) established, and more than 53,000 SIM cards
       were bought by targeted beneficiaries (ICR, paragraph 18) (no targets provided in the PAD).
      The project helped elaborate a set of critical digital strategies (covering the period 2021-2025)
       including: the National Digital Development Strategy 2025, the National Cybersecurity Strategy 2025,
       and the National Innovation Strategy 2025 (ICR, paragraph 19).
      The project supported preliminary legal and regulatory work, which included a legal and regulatory
       assessment to identify bottlenecks hindering the growth of private investment in ICT as well as
       stakeholders' consultations to update the 2012 Telecom Laws. This helped to draft the current Bill of
       Electronic Telecommunications (PA #1) adopted by the Government in November 2023 and the
       Parliament in April 2024 (ICR, paragraph 19).

Outcomes

      By project completion 5,221,267 people were provided with access to the Internet (PDO outcome
       indictor #1) compared to baseline of 5,000,000 and exceeded the revised target of 5,200,000. This
       represented 221,267 people who benefitted from new access to Internet service (PDO outcome
       indictor #2) under the project, which exceeded the revised target of 200,000.


                                                                                                   Page 9 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to increase access to digital services in rural
communities through expanding digital access and inclusion. The project slightly exceeded its revised PDO
outcome targets.

Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To leverage digital platforms to improve farm productivity.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported digital services for
sustainable agriculture development. This included supporting climate smart agriculture in key commodities
and building capacity of producers' organizations; strengthening capacity of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development (MINADER) and relevant agricultural agencies on digital tools and applications for data
collection and management in agriculture; supporting digital platforms for the MINADER allowing reliable flow
of data and information among key stakeholders; and supporting digital ecosystems and e-agricultural
services.

Outputs/Intermediate outcomes were: Development of an e-service platform or market place, establishment
of e-agriculture extension service and e-content development, and improve connectivity and information
sharing between national and district level agencies.

Outcome: Increased access to digital agricultural services by farmers.

This would ultimately contribute to improving farm productivity.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1. A stable economic
and fiscal environment with no economic or fiscal shocks, 2. The Government is committed and ready to
support policy and legal reforms related to digital services, and 3. The private sector is willing to expand
investments in expanding infrastructure and will direct investments in the project target areas.

Overall, the ToC lacked a clear connection between increasing access to digital services and improving farm
productivity. While, the stated assumptions were logical and realistic, there was a disconnect between the
ToC and the operation’s results framework with several activities not tracked by any indicators (see more
details in Section 9a).

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      401,931 farmers (of which 236,902 were females) were reached with agricultural assets or services
       which was significantly below the overall original target of one million farmer and the female target of
       700,000 females (both targets not achieved).

                                                                                                  Page 10 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)




      91% of beneficiaries felt the project investments reflected their needs exceeding the original target of
       80% (target exceeded).
      Beneficiaries of job-focused interventions including females were none compared to an overall target
       of 10,000 and 7,000 females (both targets not achieved).
      Share of women within the newly established cooperatives/producers organizations (led by women)
       was none compared to a target of 90%.
      Increase in share of women in leadership roles (among the targeted beneficiaries) was none
       compared to an original target of 20%.

Notable achievements not directly captured by the RF included:

      The project supported the National Rural Development Agency (ANADER) to provide comprehensive
       e-Extension services to the beneficiary population. This included the delivery digital of agricultural
       advisory services and agro-meteorological advice to farmers through digital channels such as SMS,
       mobile applications, web service and telephone call center. The project also supported the
       establishment of an agricultural observatory in ANADER and the establishment of a toll-free number
       for farmers.

Outcomes

      Assessing the impact of the project on improving farm productivity was hindered by shortcomings in
       the M&E design. There were no indicators to capture the impact of the project on farm productivity.
       While the project established a digital agricultural advisory service and provided agro-meteorological
       advice to farmers, the impact of those activity on fam productivity was not measured.In a further
       communication, the project team explained that the RF did not set any quantitative impact indicators
       to measure productivity. The team also reported that while a 10% increase in productivity for the rice
       sector was reported by the Director General of the National Rice Development Agency (ADERIZ), no
       data was available for the staple food and poultry sectors.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to leverage digital platforms to improve farm
productivity by supporting digital services for sustainable agriculture development. However, the project fell
short of achieving all its intermediate results targets as noted above. Additionally, shortcomings in the M&E
design hindered the assessment the project’s impact on improving farm productivity.

Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Negligible.



Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
Dropped.

Revised Rationale

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



---

Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To leverage digital platforms to improve access to markets.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). This objective was interdependent on the activities under Objective 1 and 2. To
improve access to markets, the project supported the following activities:

1. Support digital services for sustainable agriculture development. This included supporting climate smart
agriculture and producers' organizations; providing capacity building in digital solutions in agriculture;
supporting digital platforms for MINADER; and supporting digital ecosystems and e-agricultural services.

2. Rehabilitation and maintenance of rural access roads. This was expected to improve access to markets for
small scale farmers and reduce vulnerability of the affected population during flooding and landslide seasons.
To enhance resilience to impacts of climate change and natural disasters, the rehabilitation and maintenance
of roads would include improvements to drainage structures, ensuring all‐weather/season
accessibility through spot improvements and an adequate level of service for the project area. The high level
of service was expected to attract more means of transport, thus improving person and goods movement
while reducing transport cost on these roads.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes: 560 km of rural roads rehabilitated and 2,200 km of rural roads
maintained, development of an e-service platform or market place, rural beneficiaries capacity improved in
digital tools and applications, establishment of e-agriculture extension service and e-content development,
and improve connectivity and information sharing between national and district level agencies.

Outcomes: increased revenues for the beneficiaries.

All of the above would contribute to leveraging digital platforms to improve access to markets.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions: 1. A stable economic
and fiscal environment with no economic or fiscal shocks, 2. The Government was committed and ready to
support policy and legal reforms related to digital services, and 3. The private sector was willing to expand
investments in expanding infrastructure and direct investments in the project target areas.

The ToC lacked a clear connection between leveraging digital platforms and improving access to markets.
While the stated assumptions were logical and realistic, there was a disconnect between the ToC and the
operation’s results framework with several activities not tracked by any indicators.

Outputs/intermediate Results




                                                                                                  Page 12 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)




      218.15 km of rural roads were maintained which was significantly below the original target of 2,800
       km (target not achieved).

Outcomes

      The RF lacked PDO outcome indicator(s) to assess the achievement of this objective. As noted above
       the project fell short of achieving its original targets for rural road rehabilitation.
      The project also fell short of its outcome targets under Objective 1. So the envisioned increase in
       access to digital services did not happen and consequently leveraging digital platforms to improve
       access to markets was expected to be limited than originally envisioned.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to increase access to markets through two
approaches: improving rural roads and increasing access to digital services. The project, however, fell
significantly short of achieving its targets for rural roads rehabilitation as well as the envisioned increase in
access to digital services (Objective 1). Consequently leveraging digital platforms to improve access to
markets was expected to be limited. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated as
Modest.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase farmers’ access to markets through digital platforms and rural roads

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). While the PDO wording was slightly revised, the same ToC under the original
objective 3 applies with additional activities that relate to rural roads. This included: Rehabilitation and
maintenance of rural access roads. This was expected to improve access to markets for small scale
farmers and reduce vulnerability of the affected population during flooding and landslides season. To
enhance resilience to impacts of climate change and natural disasters, the rehabilitation and maintenance of
roads would include improvements of drainage structures, ensuring all‐weather/season accessibility through
spot improvements and an adequate level of service for the project area. The high level of service provided
by the roads was expected to attract more means of transport, thus improving person and goods movement
while reducing transport cost on these roads.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes: 256.40 km of rural roads rehabilitated and 256.40 km of rural roads
maintained (project scope decreased).

Outcomes: increased agricultural access to services by farmers, and increased revenues for the
beneficiaries.

All of the above would contribute to improving access to markets.



                                                                                                  Page 13 of 28
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following two critical assumptions: 1. A stable
economic and fiscal environment with no economic or fiscal shocks, and 2. The private sector was willing to
expand investments in expanding infrastructure and direct investments in the project target areas.

The ToC reflected a clear connection between inputs, outputs/Intermediate outcomes and outcomes in
plausible causal chain. The stated assumptions were logical and realistic. However, there was a disconnect
between the ToC and the operation’s results framework with as the increase in marketing (a core element of
the PDO) was not tracked.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      401,931 farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services (baseline was none) exceeding the
       revised target of 200,000 (target exceeded).
      236,902 female farmers were reached with agricultural assets or services (baseline was none)
       exceeding the revised target of 120,000 (end target as reported in the restructuring paper).
      91% of beneficiaries felt the project investments reflected their needs which exceeded the target of
       80% (target exceeded).
      218.50 km of rural access roads were maintained under the project substantially achieving the revised
       target of 256.40 km.
      228.52 km of rural access roads were rehabilitated under the project substantially achieving the
       revised target of 256.40 km.

The following were notable achievements not directly captured by the RF:

      The project provided capacity-building support to over 400 cooperatives and NGOs, benefiting a total
       of 1,692 beneficiaries.
      The project developed and deployed the “Agristore.Ci” platform (both website and mobile app) to
       facilitate the marketing of agricultural products and boost trade by connecting suppliers and buyers of
       products through the services offered by the platform. According to the ICR (paragraph 21) 401,931
       beneficiaries were enrolled in the platform from the target regions, of which 236,902 were female. By
       project completion, the platform recorded 160,000 visits with 36,000 publications indicating a high
       usage level by targeted beneficiaries. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) estimated through online
       surveys that the total cumulated transactions facilitated by the platform in 2023 amounted to more
       than $220,000.
      The project created an e-Library for the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MeMINADER)
       and established an intranet for digital archiving and information exchange between the national and
       regional offices of MeMINADER.
      The project supported ANADER to deliver comprehensive e-Extension services to the beneficiary
       population. This included the delivery of digital agricultural advisory services and agro-meteorological
       advice to farmers through digital channels such as SMS, mobile applications, web service and
       telephone call center. The project helped establish of an agricultural observatory at ANADER and set
       up a toll-free number for farmers.

Outcomes

      5,221,267 people were provided with access to the Internet compared to a baseline of 5,000,000 and
       slightly exceeding the revised target of 5,200,000.

                                                                                                 Page 14 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)




        The net number of people who benefitted from new access to Internet service was 221,267 slightly
          exceeding the revised target of 200,000.

Summary of Efficacy assessment. The project aimed to increase farmers’ access to markets through digital
platforms and the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads. This was to be achieved by expanding digital
service coverage in the project area and establishing digital platforms. Although the project exceeded its
revised target for internet access as noted above, the Results Framework (RF) did not indicate relevant
indicator to measure the impact of digital platforms on improving market access. That said, the ICR provided
evidence that the project supported digital platform (Agristore) was functional and was used by farmers to
access markets, as mentioned above. While the project substantially achieved its targets on rural road
rehabilitation and maintenance, the impact of this on increasing farmers' access to markets was not captured
by the project's RF. The ICR (footnote #19) stated that "the PIU estimated there was a 52% increase in the
number of travels and a 77%time reduction during travel after the rehabilitations." It is therefore, plausible to
assume that some of the increased traffic may have involved farmers traveling to markets in the project area.

Therefore, the Efficacy with which this Objective was achieved is rated as Substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
There was no original objective 4 related to mitigating COVID-19.

Rationale
---

Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the agriculture sector (new objective).

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project aimed to support the poultry industry,
which was heavily impacted by the Covid-19 crisis, the project supplied agricultural and livestock inputs that
enabled breeders to renew their assets and recover economically. The project also supported 80 local
cooperative factories to increase their rice production and supported 10,576 farmers with a total of 8,855
hectares of paddy rice production.

Outputs/Intermediate Results


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 28
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



                            1. Support to the poultry industry:

                                    1,875 metric tons of poultry were stored in cold rooms exceeding the target of 1,400 metric tons.
                                    5,190,617 one-day old chicks were distributed by the project exceeding the target of 4,700,000.
                                    No poultry farms were disinfected compared to a target of 1,068 farms.
                                    The project distributed the following under emergency procedures for the poultry sector: (i) 3 tons of
                                     animal feed and veterinary products to 793 poultry farmers’ households; (ii) subsidization of 798,000
                                     one day-old chicks and 1,578 tons of animal feed to 2 industrial poultry producers; (ii) subsidization of
                                     1,638,107 tons of feed to 6 industrial animal feed producers; (iv) the subsidization of slaughter costs
                                     for industrial producers for about 790,000 units; and (v) the subsidization of conservation costs for
                                     industrial producers for about 875,000 units (ICR, paragraph 23).

                            2. Support to the rice sector:

                                  900 metric tons of urea were distributed which was below the target of 2,000 metric tons (target not
                                     achieved).
                                  45,000 tons of paddy rice were collected from farmers which was below the target of 100,000 tons
                                     (target not achieved).
                                  1,350 tons of NPK fertilizer was distributed which was below the target of 3,000 tons (target not
                                   achieved).
                                  The project supported 80 local cooperative factories to increase their rice production and supported
                                   10,576 farmers with a total of 8,855 hectares of paddy rice production. This led to over 10% increase
                                   in the productivity of the cooperative factories and generated hundreds of direct and indirect jobs-with
                                   an increased average of above 4 jobs per cooperative, and the production of 31,200 tons of paddy
                                   rice per cycle (ICR, paragraph 24).

                            Outcomes

                                  The ICR reported that the project support positively impacted the entire poultry value chain and
                                     sustained the national rice production.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project sought to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the
                            agriculture sector by providing support to both the poultry sector and rice sectors. However, the RF lacked
                            PDO outcome indicators to assess the achievement of this objective. The project surpassed its intermediate
                            results targets for two indicators out of three related to poultry support, but it fell short of achieving its targets
                            for the three indicators measuring support to the rice sector. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective
                            was achieved is rated as Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                   Page 16 of 28
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)




         OVERALL EFFICACY
         Rationale
         Overall Efficacy is rated Modest. The project aimed to increase access to digital services in rural communities
         and leverage digital platforms to improve farm productivity through expanding digital access and inclusion and
         supporting digital services for sustainable agriculture development. However, the project fell short of
         achieving all its PDO outcome targets pertaining to this objective. The project also aimed to increase access
         to markets through two approaches: improving rural roads (primary approach) and to a lesser extent
         increasing access to digital services. The project fell significantly short of achieving its targets on rural roads
         maintenance and rehabilitation, and also fell short of achieving the envisioned increase in access to digital
         services. Consequently, leveraging digital platforms to improve access to markets was expected to be limited.
         Furthermore, assessing the achievements of the project was undermined by a poorly designed results
         framework (RF).



         Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
         Modest                                                     Low achievement
 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project aimed to increase farmers'
         access to digital services through expanding digital access and inclusion It slightly exceeded its PDO
         outcome targets pertaining to this objective. Additionally, the project aimed to increase access to markets
         through two approaches: improving rural roads and increasing access to digital services. The
         project substantially achieved its targets on rural roads maintenance and rehabilitation and slightly exceeded
         its target on access to digital services. The project developed and deployed the “Agristore.Ci” platform (both
         website and mobile app) to facilitate the marketing of agricultural products and boost trade by connecting
         suppliers and buyers of products through the services offered by the platform. The project also sought to
         mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the agriculture sector by supporting the poultry and rice sectors.
         The project achieved mixed results; it surpassed its intermediate results targets for two out of three indicators
         for the poultry support, but fell short on all the three intermediate indicators measuring support for the rice
         sector. Therefore, the overall Efficacy with which the project achieved its revised objectives was rated as
         Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial (EFA)

Ex-ante



                                                                                                             Page 17 of 28
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



     The EFA of the project was based on a relevant cost approach (incremental approach), which focused
        only on the extra costs and revenues generated by the project and disregards any other non‐relevant
        sunk cost that would be incurred whether the project takes place or not.
       The PAD did not report an overall economic or financial rate of return for the project investments. The
        EFA at appraisal featured three separate analysis for: (i) extending connectivity to targeted rural areas;
        (ii) digital services for sustainable agricultural development; and (iii) rehabilitation of feeder roads in the
        targeted production zones.
       For extending connectivity to targeted rural areas with public capital support, the financial rate of return
        (FRR) was estimated at 13%; with a break‐even point after 12 years; and the NPV of US$17.7 million
        (with a discount rate of 8%). Identified economic benefits included: saving on time and travel cost by
        performing administrative and business activities online, increasing mobile banking and micropayment
        usage, reducing the opportunity cost of providing goods and services via Internet, equity, ubiquity,
        improved competition, and cost savings for the public sector. However, due to the lack of socio‐economic
        data at the local level, the economic analysis was limited to two direct measurable effects, namely: the
        extra fiscal revenue earned by the Government and the local salaries paid to local staff to ensure the
        maintenance and security of staff.
       For digital services to promote sustainable agricultural development, the PAD cited several case
        examples from developing countries including Bangladesh and Ghana to demonstrate the financial and
        economic benefits of e‐Agriculture.
       For rehabilitation of feeder roads, a cost efficiency analysis was performed in the targeted production
        zones. The analysis showed that rehabilitation and maintenance increased the level of service of rural
        roads and with services promote connectivity and social cohesion. Economic benefits included: reduction
        of transport costs, freight rates, vehicle operating costs, and travel times, and enabling more expansion
        in agriculture, trade, access to markets. No ERR or FRR were provided because at appraisal, the rural
        access (feeder) roads to be rehabilitated were not identified yet.

Ex-post

     At completion, the same incremental approach was applied in a similar model to measure the project’s
      NPV, break-even point and ERR and compare the actual economic impacts of the project with those
      measured at appraisal and reflected in the PAD. As per the ICR, the analysis showed that the economic
      rate of return for extending connectivity to targeted rural areas was estimated at 16.7% with a break‐even
      point after 9 years; and the NPV was US$11.7 million (with a discount rate of 10%). However, the
      appraisal analysis used a financial rate of return (estimated at 13%) while the analysis at completion
      used an economic rate of return (estimated at 16.7%).
     The ex-post efficiency analysis also incorporated a standard Cost-Benefit Analysis (CBA) methodology to
      measure the impact of other project activities not included in the original analysis. This included; the
      economic impact in yearly GDP growth due to broadband penetration increase; economic impact from
      savings due to farmers being reached with agricultural assets or services; economic impact from people
      reached with Digital Financial Services (DFS) and the DFS agent network developed; and, savings and
      productivity gains due to the rehabilitation of rural roads. These estimations were limited to economic
      benefits, and did not consider potential additional social benefits. The ad-hoc CBA NPV reached US$
      1.77 million and yielded a 13% ERR over a span of six years.
     An accurate estimation of the expected economic and financial returns associated with the project's
      support for the COVID-19 Emergency program in the agriculture sector related activities supported by
      the project was not possible due to the limited data availability.


                                                                                                        Page 18 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



      Implementation efficiency. The project closed four months beyond its original closing date. The project
       experienced some implementation delays due to factors outside of the control of the project. The
       COVID-19 crisis and Russia's invasion of Ukraine slowed down implementation and the Government
       requested a restructuring to reallocate funds to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 crisis. Additionally,
       the Russian invasion of Ukraine disrupted the fertilizers supply chains, leading to steep increase in spot
       price of fertilizers. During the initial two years of implementation, changes in leadership within the
       Ministry of Digital Economy further slowed the decision-making process and contributed to
       implementation delays. Finally, the rehabilitation of rural roads was negatively impacted by poor
       management of contracts.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis Assessment. There are concerns on the robustness of the ex-post analysis
which lacked sufficient details. The efficiency section in the ICR discussed the various variables used for the
analysis, but did not provide adequate supporting evidence with data.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 13.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              16.70
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Pre-Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. The project fell short of achieving
all its PDO outcome targets pertaining to digital access. Consequently leveraging digital platforms to improve
access to markets was expected to be limited. The project also fell significantly short of achieving its targets on
both the rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads. Efficiency was rated Modest. The ex-post analysis lacked
sufficient details and there were concerns on its robustness.

Based on the assigned ratings to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Post Restructuring

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
The project slightly exceeded its revised PDO outcome targets pertaining to increasing access to digital

                                                                                                    Page 19 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



services. The project also substantially achieved its targets pertaining to the maintenance and rehabilitation
of rural roads. However, the project achieved mixed results with respect to mitigating the impact of the COVID-
19 crisis on the agriculture sector. The project exceeded its intermediate results targets for two indicators out of
three for the poultry support, but fell short of achieving its targets for the three intermediate indicators measuring
support to the rice sector. Efficiency was rated Modest. There ex-post analysis lacked sufficient details and
there were concerns on its robustness.

Based on the assigned ratings to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

Split Rating

                                        Pre-Restructuring               Post Restructuring
Relevance of Objectives               High                           High
Overall Efficacy                      Modest                         Substantial
Efficiency                            Modest                         Modest
Outcome Rating                        Moderately Unsatisfactory      Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical value of the outcome
                                      3                              4
rating*
Disbursement (US$ million)            16.72                          40.18
Share of disbursement                 0.30                           0.70
Weighted Value of Outcome             0.9                            2.8
                                                                     0.9 +2.8 = 3.7 rounds to 4
Final Outcome
                                                                     Moderately Satisfactory

The overall weighted outcome rating is Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Institutional risk. This project supported building the capacity of the client to implement a cross-sectoral
digital project. The Bank is preparing a new digital project (Cote d’Ivoire Digital Acceleration Project
P180059) with the support of an interim PIU. This calls for building on the experience gained through this
project and further developing the required capacities to implement the second generation of digital projects
in Cote d'Ivoire (ICR, paragraph 62).

2. Technical risk. The sustainability of the deployed digital infrastructure is ensured as the operator owns
the infrastructure and is obliged to guarantee an adequate delivery of the service for the next 10 years (this is




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 28
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



a contractual obligation enforced by the regulator the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Côte
d'Ivoire) (ICR, paragraph 63).

3. Financial risk. The sustainability plan for the digital agriculture platform (Agristore) is supported by the
Cashew Value Chain Sustainable Development projects (P158810 and P180040), currently active in the
Northern region, as well as the Cote d'Ivoire Agri-Food Sector Development Project (P171613), active in the
South and Center regions. Both projects were expected to sustain Agristore enrollment and training efforts in
the targeted areas. The maintenance of rural roads is added to the national road registry and are now
scheduled for routine maintenance (ICR, paragraph 63).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
            Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
            details). The project aimed to help Cote d’Ivoire improve access to digital services and digital
            platforms in rural communities, with the objective to improve farm productivity and access to
            markets.
           Technical, financial and economic aspects. While the project design featured a clear and
            focused PDO, the "improvement in farm productivity" and "access to markets" elements of the
            PDO were both not adequately monitored in the absence of relevant indicators, along with a weak
            RF. The project design was complex with three different components implemented under three
            different government institutions against a challenging implementation environment. Furthermore,
            Components 1 and 2 had clear synergies since both supported digital activities. On the other
            hand, Component 3 (rural roads) had limited synergies with components 1 and 2. The PAD
            featured an economic and financial analysis that relied mainly on citing similar projects and the
            analysis lacked an overall estimation the economic validity of the project.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project contributed to poverty reduction
            and shared prosperity through the provision of broadband services in the rural areas. Also, the
            digital Agristore platform and the rehabilitated rural roads contributed to facilitating economic
            transactions for farmers and food producers. The project was gender-tagged with specific gender
            disaggregated indicators, and the project was screened for gender representation, labor, and
            capacity (ICR, paragraph 34). The project also provided subsidies to 10,000 farmers affected by
            the COVID-19 crisis, allowing them to continue their agricultural activities, which potentially saved
            thousands of direct and indirect jobs.
           Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design adequately addressed environmental
            aspects. However, financial management proved more challenging due to the inexperience of the
            Directorate of Financial Affairs (DAF) within the Ministry of Communication, Digital Economy, and
            Post with Bank‐FM procedures; and the complex design of the project which featured several
            sub-components with multiple actors and beneficiaries mainly in rural areas. The project also
            experienced procurement challenges since the reversed auction approach was employed for the
            first time in the country, which required capacity building for the government and the PIU.
           Implementation arrangements. The project had complex institutional arrangements with a PIU
            under the MICENUP, a Technical committee and a Steering Committee at the strategic level both

                                                                                                      Page 21 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



         chaired by MICENUP, and Departmental committees to be created on ad hoc basis. However, the
         PAD lacked details on key members of the technical and strategic committee and their roles. This
         was later determined by a Ministerial decree (ICR, paragraph 40). Also, the structure of the
         institutional arrangements, relationship and reporting lines were not always adequately
         identified. While the technical specialists supporting the project implementation were government
         civil servants, fiduciary and environmental and social framework specialists were recruited
         competitively.
        Risk assessment. The overall risk to achieving the PDO was rated Substantial. Eight risks were
         identified at appraisal including: political and governance (substantial), macroeconomic
         (substantial), sector strategies and policies (moderate), technical design of project (substantial)
         institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability (substantial), fiduciary (moderate),
         environmental and social (substantial), stakeholders (moderate). The Bank used the Systematic
         Operations Risk Rating Tool (SORT) to propose adequate mitigation measures drawing lessons
         from similar digital and agricultural World Bank projects implemented in Africa and the rest of the
         world. However, the risk related to fiduciary aspects and the capacity of national Road Agency
         (AGEROUTE) to manage contracts was under estimated. Also, the risk related to the capacities
         of service providers with respect to Bank procedures was unanticipated.
        M&E arrangements. The PIU was responsible for developing a detailed M&E plan, specifying
         standard protocols and guidelines for data collection and use for the duration of the project. M&E
         had design shortcomings pertaining to the results framework (RF). The RF lacked relevant
         indicators to comprehensively capture key project achievements (see Section 9a for details).

  Summary of Quality-at-Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant, although the
  design was complex with limited synergies between some components. Poverty, gender, and social
  development as well as environmental aspects were adequate. However, fiduciary challenges were
  experienced. The complex implementation arrangements were not adequate in an environment of weak
  institutional capacity. The risk related capacities of service providers with respect to Bank procedures
  was unanticipated, and the risk related to fiduciary aspects and the capacity of national Road Agency
  (AGEROUTE) to manage contracts was under estimated. M&E arrangements had notable shortcomings
  in the design of results framework. Overall, the Quality at Entry is rated Moderately Satisfactory due to
  moderate shortcomings pertaining to technical aspects, implementation arrangements, and risk
  identification, along with significant shortcomings in M&E arrangements.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project faced challenging implementation conditions with the outbreak of the COVID-19
        pandemic in early 2020. Also, the project experienced a disruption in the fertilizer supply
        chain following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in early 2022.
       The World Bank task team provided continuous support to the PIU by conducting
        regular supervision missions, both in-person and virtual during the COVID-19 restrictions. In total
        the Bank conducted 10 implementation support missions over the duration of implementation


                                                                                                  Page 22 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



        period. While the project experienced two TTL changes, the co-TTL remained the same from
        project preparation to closure.
       The project implementation benefited from a competent extended Bank team with experience in
        Sub-Saharan Africa (ICR, paragraph 60). The Bank team provided support on technical aspects,
        the Environmental and Social Framework and fiduciary matters.
       The Bank team discussed strategic and technical matters with the government openly and
        effectively. The team also ensured exposure to other good practices beyond Cote d’Ivoire, for
        example, the Ministry of Digital Economy of Benin visited the project to inform the WB-supported
        Benin e-Agriculture IPF (P162599) that had similar activities.
       However, the Bank team could have used the project restructurings to revise the RF to rectify
        shortcomings and comprehensively capture the project achievements.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The Bank task team guided the project through
 challenging implementation conditions. The team provided support to the PIU on technical aspects,
 Environmental and Social Framework and fiduciary matters. While M&E shortcomings were identified after
 the first restructuring, the Bank team could have used the first restructuring to rectify the RF weaknesses.
 Over, the Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to Quality At Entry and Quality of Supervision, overall Bank performance is
 rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The achievement of the PDO was measured by four PDO outcome level indicators. While increased
        access to digital services was adequately measured by one PDO outcome indicator, there were no
        PDO level indicators to measure improvement in farm productivity and access to markets (two core
        elements of the original PDO). The RF lacked an intermediate results indicator (IRI) to capture the
        uptake of mobile money services in the covered areas. Also, while the PDO - level indicator
        mentioned the number of “farmers reached with agricultural assets or service”, the volume of
        transactions was not specified.
       Overall, M&E design had significant shortcomings that did not allow the M&E system to
        comprehensively capture the project achievements.




                                                                                                  Page 23 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 50) "reporting was adequate throughout the project." The project
         relied on several sources to collect data including the PIU, government agencies, and service
         providers. The ICR (paragraph 50) noted that field missions helped triangulate and ensure the
         quality of the data provided by the PIU for effective oversight of the project implementation.
        The World Bank team conducted weekly meetings and regular implementation supervision
         missions to monitor project progress on the ground (ICR, paragraph 50). The PIU updated
         indicators to measure progress against baselines, and worked collaboratively with the Bank
         team to address any issues.
        Finally, the first restructuring did not include a PDO-level indicator for component 5 and kept some
         IRIs for component 2 in place even though those were no longer relevant as the activities were
         dropped due to the reallocation of funds



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E data was used to monitor performance throughout the implementation phase and to
           refine the project scope during the first restructuring. M&E findings were disseminated by the PIU
           to all stakeholders.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. M&E design had notable shortcomings, as discussed above.
  Despite restructuring the project, M&E design shortcomings were not addressed. However,
  implementation and utilization of M&E were both deemed adequate.

  Overall, the Quality of M&E is rated Modest due to significant design shortcomings that did not allow for
  a comprehensive assessment of the project achievements and outcomes. The project could have used
  the restructurings to improve and enhance the clarity of the RF to better capture the impacts of the
  project activities.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as environmental category B
          - Partial Assessment, given that no significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental impacts
          were anticipated. Two environmental and one social safeguards policies were triggered:
          Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and Social
          Management Framework (ESMF) were prepared and disclosed in Côte d'Ivoire and on the World
          Bank website on March 13, 2018.
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 53)
          "the project was compliant with the applicable safeguards during implementation." The ICR

                                                                                                   Page 24 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



           (paragraph 54) noted that the average performance of the environmental and social ratings during
           implementation was Moderately Satisfactory. The ICR also flagged a couple of weaknesses that
           impacted safeguard compliance including the late establishment of the Grievance Redress
           Mechanism (GRM) which became fully operationalized in December 2022, and the poor
           performance of the social safeguard specialist in the PIU.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). Financial reports were submitted by the PIU on time. However,
          validating payments were delayed due to the frequent unavailability of the financial controller from
          the Ministry of Finance. This caused slowdowns in financial payments to service providers. The
          external audits did not flag any inconsistencies. The overall performance of financial management
          was rated Satisfactory in the ISR (October 2023).
         Procurement. The annual procurement work plans and budget were prepared following Bank
          procedures (ICR, paragraph 56). However, procurement faced two key challenges: (i) the
          procurement method used for component 1 (reversed auction) was employed for the first time in
          the country, and required capacity building for the government and the PIU; and (ii) challenges due
          to the Russia’s invasion of Ukraine disrupted global supply chains for some Component 5
          activities. The ICR (paragraph 56) noted that the PIU staff managed the afore-
          mentioned challenges efficiently and innovatively. The overall performance of procurement was
          rated Moderately Satisfactory in the last ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   "The project built trust and collaborative relationships between MeMINADER and the Ministry of Digital
   Economy, which have henceforth collaborated on digital agricultural initiatives, strengthened
   information sharing between the central MeMINADER and its regional agencies and improved the
   development and use of digital registries (databases) in the different interprofessional associations through
   component 5 (ICR, paragraph 39)."



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                 Satisfactory


                                                                                                   Page 25 of 28
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



                                                                                Quality at Entry had moderate
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                shortcomings.
Quality of M&E                   Modest               Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following four are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. To enable projects to adequately respond to external crises, project design needs to reflect
enough flexibility and adaptability. The project experienced two external crisis: the COVID-19
pandemic and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine which resulted in major disruptions during the project
period, required to reorient funds and activities to address emerging needs. Both the Client and the
World Bank showed proactivity and flexibility in adapting to the new constraints and managed to
restructure the project to expand the scope and include emergency activities to mitigate the impact
of the Covid-19 crisis on farmers. In anticipation of such shocks, Task Teams should be ready to
implement major restructuring to respond to the new urgent needs of the Client. Collaboration
(between the CMU, the Task Team, the PIU and the MICENUP and MeMINADER) facilitated the
project’s ability to adapt and achieve the desired results

2. A project scope that is overly ambitious and with limited synergies between activities can
cause delays in implementation. Following the first restructuring, the PIU was responsible for
multiple activities covering digital infrastructure, digital agriculture platform, rural roads, and
agriculture support. This had the effect of having “4 projects in 1”, with added challenge of
maximizing synergies between the components. The PIU and Task Team faced with various issues
for each component with limited economies of scope (e.g., experience learned in managing
safeguards for rural roads had limited transferability for the other activities), often under competing
deadlines. In hindsight, the first Restructuring could have been more drastic by removing the entire
Component 3 (rural roads)to free up even more resources (in terms of both financial resources and
staff time), enhancing impact of the remaining components.

3. It is essential to strengthen the design and implementation of the M&E systems in projects
to effectively monitor activities and assess outcomes. A well-designed M&E system enhances
project monitoring and helps capture impacts. The M&E framework needs to be well designed at the
approval stage, with clear identification and definition of indicators, potential outputs, and
outcomes. The experience of this project suggests that the RF could have been adjusted during
second restructuring.

4. Adopting financing gap mechanisms can provide an alternative to countries facing acute
budget constraints in deploying digital infrastructures. However, remain regarding their
familiarity with, understanding of, and willingness to adopt these mechanisms. Specifically,
Governments are reluctant to provide catalytic subsidies to private operators, as they would like to
retain the ownership of the digital infrastructure deployed, even though this may undermine the
sustainability of the assets. To address these challenges, the World Bank should continue providing
resources to improve the skills and knowledge necessary for countries to effectively implement and

                                                                                                   Page 26 of 28
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)



manage financing gap mechanisms, and encourage exchange visits between countries to share
knowledge and lessons learned.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was marginally adequate to assess the
         project outcomes.
        Results Orientation. The ICR included a limited discussion (in the main text) on the achievement of the
         PDO as the discussion mostly focused on the PDO outcome indicators. It would have been useful to
         reflect a balanced discussion in the main text of the ICR.
        Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes was somewhat limited due to M&E design
         shortcomings. The ICR also included a limited analysis of the EFA.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and utilized
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings. However, the discussion on the achievement of the
         PDO was brief and not assessed against the current CPF. Also, the ICR should have used a split rating
         to assess outcomes, as both the PDO and the targets for the outcome indicators were revised.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a concise coverage of project activities to the extent possible,
         and candidly reported most shortcomings. However, the triggered safeguards were not accurately
         reported under section B of the ICR. Additionally, there were some discrepancies between the numbers
         reported in the ICR (Annex 1) and the main text.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. Most sections were concise and reflected descriptive
information and some evidence. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. The relevance of objectives were
not assessed against the current CPF. The ICR reflected a limited analysis of the EFA, and did not include a
split rating for the overall project outcome. Finally, the ICR had discrepancies between the numbers reported in
the ICR (Annex 1) and the main text. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Modest




                                                                                                   Page 27 of 28
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
CI: E-Agriculture Project (P160418)




                                                                   Page 28 of 28
