     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024152

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P160224                                      Greater Beirut Public Transport Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Lebanon                                      Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                             Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88380,TF-A7880                          31-Dec-2023                                         11,327,653.40

 Bank Approval Date                           Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2018                                  31-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            295,000,000.00                                    69,800,000.00

 Revised Commitment                               11,327,653.40                                    2,583,516.81

 Actual                                           11,327,653.40                                    2,583,516.81




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                  Avjeet Singh                  Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 8) is:

   " To improve the speed, quality and accessibility of public transport services in Greater Beirut and at
   the city of Beirut's northern entrance ".



                                                                                                    Page 1 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Results Review, the PDOs are:

   " To improve: (1) the speed; (2) the quality; and (3) the accessibility of public transport services in Greater
   Beirut and at the city of Beirut's northern entrance".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were three components. (PAD, pages 10 -12).

   1. Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) infrastructure, fleet and systems. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$230.00 million. US$173.40 million of the financing for this component was cancelled on July 2022. The
   actual cost was US$6.58 million. Activities in this component: (i) financing for goods, works and consulting
   services for design, construction and management of BRT infrastructure on the Northern Highway and outer
   ring road Beirut (including stations, terminals, depots, park-and-ride facilities, intersections, pedestrian
   crossings and bridges and a corridor management system); (ii) Widening key sections of the highway,
   establishing park-and ride facilities and constructing a terminal in Tabarja and acquiring land for such
   purposes; (iii) operationalizing the BRT bus fleet and maintaining the infrastructure through Public-Private-
   Partnership (PPP); and (iv) installing Intelligent Transport (ITS) and fare collection systems with Smart-card
   and Global Positioning Systems (GPS).

   2. Feeder and regular bus services and integration in urban environment. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$104.40 million. US$100.59 million of financing for this component was cancelled in July
   2022. The actual cost was US$3.81 million. Activities in this component: (i) financing for goods, works and
   consulting services for design, construction and management of bus stops and shelter, a control center, bus
   depots, and street facilities (drainage and signage); (ii) operationalizing a feeder and regular road bus fleet
   incorporating Smart-card and GPS technologies and appropriate telematic systems through PPP and/or
   other arrangements. (Telematic systems refer to an intelligent transportation system that enables real time
   communication between vehicle control center and stops/stations); and (iii) integrating BRT into the urban
   environment (developing non-motorized and road safety plans, and carrying out fare integration, park
   management, public transport network restructuring, professionalization of local operators and simplifying
   license-issuance procedures).

   3. Capacity building and project management. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$10.00 million.
   US$9.63 million of financing for this component was cancelled in July 2022. The actual cost was
   US$0.37 million. Activities in this component: (i) strengthening the capacity of the Project Implementation
   Unit (PIU); (ii) strengthening the capacity of the Railways and Public Transport Authority (RPTA) for
   supervising BRT and feeder operations; (iii) implementing information, education and communication
   campaigns for promoting public transport and integrating existing operators into the new system and
   improving regulation and permit and licensing management, alternative enforcement measures and better




                                                                                                       Page 2 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



   user information systems; and (iv) improving planning and determining the feasibility of private-sector
   investment in the sector.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$345.00 million (inclusive of price contingencies). The
   actual cost was US$11.32 million.

   Financing. The total financing for the project was US$295.00 million (US$225.20 million from the
   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan and US$69.80 from the Global
   Concessional Financing Facility (GCCF) Trust Fund). With this, the total financing was US$295.00 million.
   US$283.68 million of the IBRD and GCCF financing was cancelled in July 2022, in view of the limited
   progress achieved thus far. US$11.32 million was disbursed (US$8.74 million of the IBRD loan and
   US$2.58 million from the GCCF facility).

   Borrower contribution. Private sector contribution of US$50.00 was expected at appraisal. There was no
   private sector contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 15, 2018, became effective on July 31, 2019 and closed as
   scheduled on December 31, 2023.

   Changes. With the exception of the significant cancelling of financing for the project in July 2022, there
   were no changes during implementation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context at appraisal. The Syrian refugee crisis before appraisal resulted in social and economic
challenges for Lebanon. With a population of 4.5 million in 2015, Lebanon was hosting about 1.5 million
Syrian and 450,000 Palestinian refugees. This influx of refugees added further strain on Lebanon's
transport infrastructure.

Sector context. The lack of a proper public transport system limited the ability of Lebanon's transport
network to meet the increased demand for transport services. Traffic increased in the Greater Beirut Area
for factors such as, an influx of refugees and growing motorization. The concomitant traffic congestion and
high transport costs exacerbated connectivity between Beirut and hinterland regions. This hindered access
to jobs and services outside Beirut to the vulnerable segments of the population. Investments in public
transport were hence needed for reducing traffic congestion in Beirut to accommodate the demand for
transport services (traffic congestions was a serious development challenge and the economic cost of traffic
congestion was estimated to be in the range of 15% to 20% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)).

Public transport services in the Greater Beirut Area were either unreliable or unsafe and inaccessible due to
factors such as: (i) lack of a framework due to the weak institutional setup, poor planning and inadequate


                                                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



enforcement of regulations; (ii) fragmented and largely informal public transport system; and (iii) major
traffic congestions due to inadequate facilities.

Government strategy. The Capital Investment Plan (CIP) approved in March 2018, aimed at stimulating
the economy through creating jobs in the short term, while meeting Lebanon's longer-term development
needs in the transport sector. The CIP aimed to unlock the potential for private finance in transport
projects. The plan highlighted the need for investments in strategic assets such as public transport
networks and BRT lines in the Greater Beirut Area. The Government also enacted the PPP law in 2017.

World Bank (WB) strategy. The WB's Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) of 2016 identified Lebanon's
inadequacies in transport infrastructure as a main constraint to sustainable development. The PDO was
well-aligned with the WB's current Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017-2022. The CPF
underscored the need for building resilience and fostering opportunities for all through a holistic approach
aimed at addressing the impact of the Syrian refugee crisis while meeting long-term development needs.
The PDOs were relevant to two focus areas of the CPF: (i) expanding access to quality public services in
the transport sector; and (ii) expanding opportunities to the vulnerable segments of the population. The
Country Climate and Development Report published in May 2024 identified the importance to enhance
public transport to provide more affordable and greener transport.

WB regional strategy. The PDO was relevant to the WB Group's Middle East and North Africa strategy.
The project activities contributed directly to the pillar on resilience to the Syrian refugee crisis and creating
short-term jobs for the Lebanese host communities and the Syrian refugees. The project also contributed to
the pillar on renewing the social contract through improving services to vulnerable groups and development
of Lebanon's lagging regions.

Previous Bank WB experience. The Bank had previously financed the Urban Transport Project in
Lebanon. An output of this project "Transport Plan for Greater Beirut" identified introducing a BRT network
to complement the feeder/regular bus lines to achieve the desired service quality. This was the second
Bank-financed project in the urban transport sector in Lebanon and the first mass transit transport system in
Lebanon in over 50 years. The Bank's CPF of 2017 - 2022 did not specifically mention BRT but rather
public transport, which could be met through other options. A study of alternatives, conducted by the Bank
in 2017, Reducing traffic congestion in Beirut: An empirical analysis of selected policy options" indicated
BRT with feeder buses to be the most cost-effective option for reducing traffic congestions.

This project was conceived as the first phase of a mass transit and regular transport system in Lebanon.
The project activities aimed to tackle traffic congestion in Greater Beirut Area (GBA) and ensure
connectivity between Lebanese regions. The intended outcomes of this project were expected to lead to the
intended outcomes of creating short term jobs (the construction sector has historically been a major
employer for the low-skilled Lebanese and Syrian refugees and Lebanese regulations allowed Syrian
refugees to work in the construction sector), address traffic congestion and enable modal shift from private
cars to public transport in the long run. Overall relevance of objective is High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High




                                                                                                         Page 4 of 12
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               " To improve: (1) the speed: (2) the quality; and (3) the accessibility of public transport services in Greater
               Beirut and at the city of Beirut's northern entrance".

               Rationale
               Theory of change. The causal links between inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical. The outcomes were
               monitorable. The outputs such as providing BRT and related facilities, feeder lines, buses, private sector
               participation for operating and maintaining the BRT system and buses, professionalizing local operators, were
               likely to help in setting public transport for passengers in Greater Beirut and at the city of Beirut's northern
               entrance. This together with the restructuring of Railways and Public Transport Authority (RPTA) were likely
               to help in improving the speed, quality and accessibility of public transport in the short term and the long-term
               development objective of modal shift towards public transport.

               The outcomes were predicated on the following assumptions: (i) concession agreement is signed with a
               private BRT operator; (ii) feeder lines are operational; and (iii) RPTA is restructured and empowered to
               supervise private operators.

               Outputs.

               The financing was substantially cancelled in July 2022 and at that stage there was no progress.

                     There were no operational BRT infrastructure and buses when the project closed: No contract
                      agreement was signed with a private company to operate BRT operations and there were no
                      operational bus lines. The mirror system to monitor the fare collection system at RPTA was not
                      operational.
                     No short-term jobs were created when the project closed.

               Outcomes.

                     None of the outcomes (increase in the number of passengers using public buses, increase in the
                      percentage of population residing in the Greater Beirut Area (GBA) using public transport and the
                      share of population satisfied with the quality of the public transport system), were realized.

               Efficacy is rated as negligible.



               Rating
               Negligible




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is negligible due to the low achievement.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Negligible                                               Low achievement


    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis for public transport services was conducted at appraisal. The
   activities accounted for 97% of the appraisal estimate. The benefits were assumed to come from travel time
   savings and vehicle operating cost reductions. Economic benefits coming from improved air quality, safety, real
   estate value and increased productivity were not factored in the economic analysis. The Net Present Value
   (NPV) at a 8% discount rate was US$919.00. The ex ante Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was
   39%. Economic analysis was not conducted when the project closed.

   Administrative and Operational issues during implementation. The project only became effective on July
   31, 2019, 16 months after approval, as it had yet to be ratified by the Parliament. From 2019 to 2020, Lebanon
   was impacted by a series of crises including an economic and financial crisis (sudden stop in capital inflows,
   which precipitated systematic failures across the country), physical restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19
   pandemic) and a massive explosion in the Port of Beirut destroying much of the port. From October, the
   possibility to attract private sector investors became unrealistic. The adverse developments led to changes in
   the development priorities of the Government and these factors led to the significant cancellation of the Bank
   loan.

   Only about 3.8% of the loan was disbursed (including the advanced payment of US$10.00 million). At closure,
   the undisbursed amount was yet to be refunded to the Bank.

   Efficiency is rated as negligible.


   Efficiency Rating
          Negligible


          a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
            and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                                          Rate Available?           Point value (%)        *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                                           97.00
                   Appraisal                                                        39.00
                                                                                                            Not Applicable



                                                                                                                           Page 6 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



                                                                                    0
ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the Bank strategy is High. Both efficacy and efficiency
are Negligible. Taking these ratings into account, overall outcome is Highly Unsatisfactory, reflecting major
shortcomings in efficacy and efficiency.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Since the project was for the most part not implemented, risk to development outcome cannot be assessed.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project was the first mass transit and regular transport systems in Lebanon in over fifty years. The
  analytical underpinnings of the project were sound (discussed in section 3). The project design
  responded to a real need to improve urban mobility in Greater Beirut and connect the northern area. The
  project design, which aimed to develop a comprehensive public transport system with the BRT as its
  backbone and complemented by a large regular and feeder network, reflected best international practices
  from the most successful BRT projects implemented by the Bank in the world.

  The implementation arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. The Council of Development and
  Reconstruction (CDR) was overall in charge of project implementation. The CDR had executed several
  large donor-funded projects, particularly in the infrastructure sector (including the Bank-financed Urban
  Transport Development Project).

  The Bank identified several risks at appraisal, including High political and governance risks and
  substantial risks with the macroeconomic fundamentals, technical design, institutional capacity, fiduciary
  and environmental and social risk. The Bank incorporated several mitigation measures. With mitigation
  measures, overall project risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 18). The arrangements
  made at appraisal for monitoring and evaluation, safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate
  (discussed in sections 9 and 10).



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



  There were significant shortcomings at Quality-at-Entry: (i) The project became effective 16 months (on
  August 2019) after approval, only few months before the crisis started in Lebanon (discussed in section
  five). Few project activities had started by the time the Bank loan significantly cancelled; (ii) The project
  was complex in the country context. The designed activities (one of the first PPP, alignment of the BRT,
  informal operators and institutional changes) were overly ambitious, given the political economy. Since
  the PPP legislation was only enacted in 2017, neither the government nor the Railways and Transport
  Authority (RPTA) had experience in managing such contracts; (iii) There was not enough engagement
  with the stakeholders' and with municipalities to better understand their interests and feedback on project
  design; (iv) Although the risk associated with weakness of RPTA to managing contracts with the private
  sector was identified at appraisal, the mitigation measures were not adequate; and (v) A livelihood
  assessment that was to have been conducted at an early stage of implementation was never
  conducted.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Of the four Task Team Leaders (TTLs) during the project, three were involved in the project from the
 preparation stage. The Bank recruited a qualified local transport specialist to specifically work on the
 project and follow up with the counterparts. The team conducted eight supervision missions from project
 approval to February 2022, in addition to regular and virtual meetings by the team based in Lebanon. The
 missions were conducted virtually in the wake of the COVID-19 mission. In the face of adverse
 developments on the ground, the Bank effectively communicated the decision to cancel the significant part
 of the loan to the Government, the Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and the civil society.
 Following the significant canceling of the loan, the Bank continued the dialogue in the transport sector.

 The ICR (para 44) acknowledges that while Council of Development and Reconstruction (CDR) was
 working to procure activities and recruit staff for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the initial
 years, the Bank was not providing the necessary no objections in a timely manner to allow CDR to move
 forward on some activities.

 In sum, overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory due to the shortcomings at Quality-
 at-Entry.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

                                                                                                      Page 8 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)




a. M&E Design
 The Council of Development and Reconstruction (CDR), was responsible for data collection, including
 compiling data from other entities (bus operators, the RPTA and other contractors. The results framework
 was logical and the original outcome indicators (the number of passengers per weekday using the formal
 public bus (BRT and the regular buses), the percentage of population residing in the Greater Beirut Area
 with access to Beirut city by public transport, average public transport time from Tabarja station to Charles
 Helou terminal at morning peak hours and the share of passengers (including female passengers) satisfied
 with the quality of the public bus system), were appropriate for monitoring project performance. The
 intended outcomes were measurable.

 One shortcoming with the indicator was the limited ability to distinguish whether RPTA was successfully
 playing its new role. The project design aimed at changing RPTA's mandate from its traditional role in
 operating railways and buses to the new role of managing private operators' contracts. The indicator for
 monitoring this aspect of the project was "a mirror system to monitor the fare collection system is in use at
 the RPTA". Given the importance of RPTA in successfully achieving results for the project, the M&E design
 could have benefitted from a more relevant indicator for this activity.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 48) noted that M&E was conducted well for the limited scope that had been implemented.
  However, considering the limited scope implemented, no results nor intermediate indicators were
  measurable at implementation, before the cancellation of part financing for the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The project did not advance to the point where performance could be measured by the indicators.

   Although the M&E framework, was for most part, well designed. However, the M&E system was not
  truly put to the test from implementation to completion as intended, as the financing was partly cancelled
  before any of the indicators could be measured. Thus, M&E is rated as Negligible.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Negligible

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
   Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Physical
   Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, Data Sheet).



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 12
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



   Environmental Assessment and Physical Cultural Resources. The negative environmental impacts
   were anticipated to be minor and of a temporary nature during construction (noise and dust during
   construction and construction waste and debris) and in case earth works might encounter any significant
   archeological finds (PAD, para 64). An Environmental and Social Impact (ESIA) was prepared and publicly-
   disclosed at appraisal to address these issues. The ICR (para 50) noted that during implementation stage,
   updates to the ESIA were pending based on the finalization of design, with was stopped in May 2022.There
   were no environmental issues during implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at
   appraisal. A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) which was developed, became operational in March
   2020. The expropriation process had not begun when a significant portion of Bank financing was cancelled.
   There were no issues with Involuntary Resettlement issues during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The Bank conducted a financial management assessment of the Council of
   Development and Reconstruction (CDR) at appraisal. CDR had executed Bank-financed transport projects.
   The FM risk was rated as moderate at appraisal (PAD, para 63).

   The ICR (para 51) noted that from 2018 to the end of 2019, when the crisis hit, FM was satisfactory. Loan
   disbursements at project closure was 3.8%, including the advanced payment of US$10.00 million. In
   October 2022, the CDR requested the Central Bank to reimburse the undisbursed amount of US$9.38
   million to the Bank. The undisbursed amount was not yet returned to the Bank when the project closed.

   Procurement management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the CDR and the
   Railways and Public Transport Authority (RPTA) at appraisal. RPTA's ability to manage PPP contracts was
   unproven. The mitigation measures included intensive technical support during implementation. The ICR
   does not report of any mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   Not applicable.



11. Ratings
                                                                              Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                              Disagreements/Comment

                                                                                                Page 10 of 12
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



                                   Highly
Outcome                                                    Highly Unsatisfactory
                                   Unsatisfactory
                                   Moderately              Moderately
Bank Performance
                                   Unsatisfactory          Unsatisfactory
                                                                                       No M&E implementation and
Quality of M&E                     Modest                  Negligible                  utilization since the activities
                                                                                       were cancelled
Quality of ICR                     ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Project design needs to be adapted to the Government capacity and local environment,
especially in low-capacity and fragile environments. The lesson from this project is that, it is
necessary to adapt the project to the capacity on the ground at appraisal and that implementation, it
is important on the part of the Government and the Bank to shift and change the project design in
the face of external shocks and changes of the local context.

2. Stakeholder commitment at preparation can help in reducing delays during
implementation. In this project, there was not enough engagement with stakeholders or
municipalities at preparation. This contributed to the delays during implementation.

3. Timely restructuring and cancelling of the loan might be warranted in the face of realities
on the ground. The lesson from this project is that even when the government and the Bank ensure
project quality at appraisal, circumstances could change during implementation due to unanticipated
factors. Under these circumstances, restructuring and cancelling the loan would facilitate the work of
all involved parties.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written, clear, and, for the most part, adheres to the recommended page length. The theory of
change articulated in the text clearly shows the causal links between inputs (project activities), outputs, and
desired outcomes. The analysis provided in the text clearly shows the context in which the Bank restructured
and cancelled part of the loan. The Bank draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing
this project.




                                                                                                           Page 11 of 12
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Greater Beirut Public Transport Project (P160224)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                                   Page 12 of 12
