     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0023705

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157858                                    Secondary Education Improvement Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cambodia                                   Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-59780                                 29-Jul-2022                                           40,501,828.55

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 14-Apr-2017                               29-Jul-2022

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           40,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            39,566,924.28                                                0.00

 Actual                                        40,501,828.55                                                0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Sengphet Lattanavong        Judyth L. Twigg             Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objective of the project was “to expand lower-secondary education to achieve minimum standards in
   target areas, and to provide immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.” This
   objective was consistent with the statement as outlined in the Financing Agreement (dated June 5, 2017).

   This ICR review will assess the project based on the following two objectives:

          i. Expand lower-secondary education to achieve minimum standards in target areas; and

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



        ii. Provide immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis or emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project contained three components as listed below:

   Component 1: Improving lower-secondary education to meet minimum standards (planned costs:
   US$38.1 million; actual: Not reported). This component was to directly support the Education Strategic
   Plan (ESP) and Teacher Policy Action Plan (TPAP) to establish 130 “effective” lower secondary schools
   (i.e., schools that meet Lower-secondary School Effectiveness Standards, LSSES). This covered about 8
   percent of lower secondary schools nationwide. The selection criteria of the schools included 100 existing
   and 30 new schools that were based on needs and located in rural and remote areas. The “effective”
   schools were to be considered as model schools to provide lessons to the Ministry of Education, Youth and
   Sports (MOEYS) as the ministry increased expenditure in this sub-sector. The establishment of effective
   schools was to be achieved through three sub-components supported under the project.

   Sub-component 1.1 (strengthening school-based management) aimed to strengthen school-based
   management (SBM) through providing capacity building activities to education officials at the province and
   district levels and teachers at the targeted 130 lower-secondary schools to strengthen service delivery. The
   project was to provide technical support to the implementation of School Improvement Funds (SIFs), which
   were fully funded by the government, and finance capacity building-related activities aimed to improve
   school development planning, community participation, and teaching and classroom management. This
   included MOEYS staff and teacher salaries.

   Sub-component 1.2 (upgrading of teachers and school leaders) aimed to upgrade the qualifications of
   at least 2,000 lower-secondary school teachers to bachelor’s degrees (through the Teacher Upgrading
   Program, TUP) and upgrade 310 school management staff of lower-secondary schools (through the
   Leadership Upgrading Program, LUP). TUP is a dual focus program on content and pedagogy
   knowledge (PAD, p. 12), and LUP is a short-term training to strengthen leadership and school management
   systems. This sub-component was structured on the existing national structure of TPAP. The priority
   selection of teachers was from the 130 targeted schools, then to be expanded to teachers nationwide. The
   government was to fund scholarships to TUP and LUP, and the project was to finance the salary, tuition,
   and stipends (for transportation and accommodation costs) associated with upgrading teachers and school
   directors and deputy directors.

   Sub-component 1.3 (improving school facilities) aimed to improve school facilities of 130 targeted lower
   secondary schools in all 25 provinces in 99 districts. The activities were to include the rehabilitation of 100
   existing lower secondary schools and construction of 30 new schools in communes that lacked a lower
   secondary school. The rehabilitation and construction was also to cover approximately 650 classrooms with
   new furniture and water and sanitation facilities.


                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



   Component 2: Strengthening project management and monitoring and evaluation (planned: US$2.8
   million; actual: Not reported). This component aimed to provide technical and operational support for the
   day-to-day coordination, administration, monitoring, evaluation, and audits of the project. In addition to
   these activities, it sought to provide support for the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) for
   Development to strengthen the assessment capacity of MOEYS in preparation for PISA 2021 (PAD, p. 13).
   The project aimed to provide necessary vehicles, training/workshops, logistics, and operations costs related
   to MOEYS departments. Through the project, the technical support aimed to strengthen existing monitoring
   and data collection platforms.

   Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response (planned: US$ 0 million; actual: US$0 million)
   aimed to provide an immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency, as needed (PAD, p. 14). The
   project was to develop an Emergency Response Manual detailing financial management, procurement,
   safeguard, and other necessary implementation arrangements.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost: The ICR reported the actual costs of the project as US$41.4 million against the planned
   US$40.9 million. The difference was due to the fluctuation of exchange rates that occurred throughout the
   implementation period.

   Financing: The PAD (p. 14) noted that the Bank’s financing instrument was through Investment Project
   Financing (IPF) and partially followed the results-based approach. The IPF, financed by an International
   Development Association credit of US$40 million spanning over five years, covered goods, services, grants,
   training, workshops, and incremental operation costs. The results-based financing approach applied to
   subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2, where disbursements were linked to a total of 21 disbursement-linked
   indicators (DLIs). The government financed parts of the activities in subcomponents 1.1 (i.e., the SIF) and
   1.2 (i.e., scholarships) out of its own funds. The use of DLIs sought to facilitate and promote greater country
   ownership of the program. The DLI arrangement followed the country system in the financing of the SIF,
   while targeting the Bank’s implementation support to their outputs and outcomes through the DLI’s results-
   based financing mechanism and streamlined fiduciary design (PAD, p. 15).

   Project activities were monitored through the Bank’s supervision and complemented by field missions to
   supervise the validation process of DLIs. There were two schedules for reporting of the achievement of
   DLIs, by June 30 or December 31 of each calendar year.

   Borrower contribution: The PAD (p. 15) and ICR (p. 23) stated that the borrower provided US$0.9 million,
   mainly for staff costs, office space, and utilities, and fully financed subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 on the SIFs
   and scholarships.

   Dates: The project was approved on April 14, 2017, and closed on July 29, 2022. No dates were amended
   during project implementation.




3. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



               Rationale
               At project appraisal in 2017, Cambodia’s education sector was undergoing a major reform focusing on
               improving teacher quality and the design of school standards. In 2014, MOEYS developed the ESP 2014-
               18 to address ongoing challenges impeding lower-secondary school education, including low enrollment,
               low completion rates, and poor education outcomes. The ESP called for improvement in access to and
               quality of lower secondary education that aimed to increase lower secondary gross enrollment from 53
               percent in 2012 to 87 percent in 2017 and increase completion rates from 40.6 percent to 76.4 percent
               during the same period. To improve the quality of lower secondary education, the MOEYS prioritized the
               improvement of teacher quality under the guidance of the MOEYS 2013 TPAP. The TPAP was a road map
               for improving teacher quality through four key areas: i) teacher training and development; ii) establishment
               of teacher training centers; iii) upgrading of teachers’ qualification; and iv) improvement of career paths for
               teachers. Of these, only the third aspect was addressed under the project. For the design of school
               standards, the government established the LSSES, which was a holistic road map for creating effective
               schools (the LSSES is discussed in the efficacy section below). At the time of project appraisal, only school
               directors had received training in LSSES, and it had not yet been implemented at the school level. Thus,
               the government’s call for attention in this subsector drove the objectives of this particular project.

               The project contributed to ESP’s objectives of improving learning outcomes and increasing the lower
               secondary completion rate. The objectives of the project specifically responded to the government’s
               priorities outlined in the ESP 2014-18 and 2019-23, which called for expanding access and quality of
               education services at the lower secondary level. These priorities contributed to the national Rectangular
               Strategy Phase IV (2019-23) that emphasized development of human resources as one of its four priorities.

               The objectives of the project were well aligned with the Bank’s 2016-17 Country Engagement Note (CEN)
               and remained highly relevant under the 2019-23 Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the Kingdom of
               Cambodia. Under the CEN, the government requested IDA funding to improve outcomes in lower
               secondary education (CEN, p. 13) to complement other ongoing Global Partnership for Education-funded
               basic education projects at the time. The project was one of seven projects that aimed to improve service
               delivery and reducing vulnerability. Under the CPF, the project contributed to focus area 2: Foster Human
               Development, particularly the fourth objective: “enhance quality and alignment of education with labor
               demands.” The objective focused on “building the pipeline for higher education, by expanding access to
               secondary education through newly built schools (especially in rural areas) and improving quality through
               lower secondary teacher upgrading, strengthening school-based management, and improving school
               facilities” (CPF, p. 29). The project also contributed directly to two of the CPF indicators: i) number of
               enrolled students in newly built lower secondary schools, and ii) the number of secondary school teachers
               who graduate from teacher upgrading programs.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
Expand lower-secondary education to achieve minimum standards in target areas

Rationale
Rationale: According to the results chain (RC) presented in the PAD (p. 9), the project’s contribution to
improving school-based management, including upgrading of teachers and education management staff and
improving school facilities, was expected to raise the standards of lower secondary schools in target areas to
achieve the government’s minimum lower-secondary school effectiveness standard (LSSES). Ultimately,
these achievements are expected to contribute to long-term outcomes in improving learning outcomes and
higher completion rate at lower secondary school level in the project target areas. If the data and evidence
collected during the operation indicated that this was an effective model, and subsequently scaled up by the
government, could contribute to improving lower secondary school education outcomes at the national level.
To achieve and maintain LSSES, the support and resources from the government must be adequate to
provide continuous support to schools to attain standards. This critical aspect was not featured in the RC nor
monitored.

The ICR’s Annex 6 (p. 56) discussed the definition of “minimum standards” of LSSES developed by MOEYS
under the Bank’s former Global Partnership for Education (GPE) Second Education Sector Support Project
(US$38.5 million, 2014-2017). The LSSES contains 9 standards with a total of 71 indicators. The standards
include: i) school policy; ii) teaching and teaching schedules; iii) parent and community support for student
learning; iv) student support services; v) school leadership and management; vi) human resources; vii)
textbooks and teaching and learning materials; viii) school infrastructure and environment; and viii) financing
and financial management. All indicators are quantitative in a rubric form to assess the performance of each
indicator under each standard. The scores achieved are classified as low, minimum, and maximum. The
scores, achievements, and challenges are recorded in the SBM database.

The current project used SBM standards as a tool to measure and improve the quality of service delivery.
Targeted schools under the project used the standards to regularly monitor their performance against those
indicators and address areas of weakness to attain minimum standards (ICR, p. 56).



Outputs:

Listed below are four key aspects that received support from the project that contributed to increasing
number/proportion of lower secondary schools meeting minimum scores. Only activities under SBM and
teacher upgrading and leadership upgrading programs were linked to all 21 DLIs.

I. School-based management (SBM) (linked to DLIs 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, 13, 16, 19, and 20):

      School Improvement Fund (SIF) Manual was revised for SBM activity and adopted by the MOEYS as
       planned (DLI 1, achieved).
      Training plans for Provincial Offices of Education (POE), District Offices of Education (DOE) and
       school levels for SBM activity were revised as planned (DLI 2, achieved).



                                                                                                   Page 5 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)




      100 targeted schools conducted teacher assessment based on Teacher Professional Standards,
         meeting the target.
        25 POE improvement plans based on the revised SIF manual were submitted to MOEYS, achieving
         the target.
        99 DOE improvement plans based on the revised SIF manual were submitted, achieving the target.
        100 schools publicly displayed their development plans, achieving the target (DLIs 4 and 8 achieved).
        100 school support committees, which are comprised of parents, participated in decision making
         processes for school activities and development, achieving the target.
        Results of an independent SIF program impact evaluation were discussed in a policy meeting with
         MOEYS, Ministry of Economic and Finance, Ministry of Public Works and Transport, and relevant
         development partners, such as the Asian Development Bank and Japan International Cooperation
         Agency, as planned (DLI 20, achieved).
        The MOEYS published SIF status reports annually with updates on SIF progress indicators, meeting
         the target (DLIs 5, 9, and 13, achieved).

II. Teacher upgrading and leadership upgrading programs (TUP and LUP) (linked to DLIs 3, 6, 7, 10,
11, 14, 15, 17, 18, and 21):

      MOEYS adopted the Teacher Upgrading Strategy and its implementation plan and operational manual
       (DLI 3, achieved).
      MOEYS adopted a Leadership Upgrading Training Manual (DLI 7, achieved).

III. Construction and rehabilitation of schools:

        150 classrooms were constructed in new locations, meeting the target.
        100 schools were rehabilitated, meeting the target.
        30 new school buildings were completed.
        395 out of the planned 500 new classrooms were built in targeted renovated schools. The ICR (pp. 19
         and 46) noted that implementation experienced some minor delays which resulted in fewer
         classrooms built in renovated schools than originally planned.

IV. Student assessment:

      Large-scale primary/secondary learning assessments were completed as planned.
      A PISA for Development Report was completed as planned.

Outcomes:

Though the project achieved, and in many cases, exceeded the target of both the PDO and intermediate level
indicators, some shortcomings were observed in the assessment of the outcomes. They are as discussed
below.

School-based management (SBM): As a result of the improvement in and MOEYS adoption of the SIF
manual, 94 of the 100 targeted lower secondary schools achieved the minimum standards of school
effectiveness, exceeding the target of 70 lower secondary schools (DLIs 12, 16, and 19, achieved). The
project’s impact evaluation (IE) also revealed greater participation of the community and parents with school

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



management processes and activities, which in turn led to improving students’ learning outcomes and
reducing dropout rates (to be discussed below). The ICR (para. 37, p. 15) noted that the six schools that did
not achieve minimum standards faced the greatest challenges in meeting the following standards:

      Standard 1: Student learning outcomes;
      Standard 2: Teaching and learning; and
      Standard 3: Parent and Community Support for Student Learning.

Teacher upgrading and leadership upgrading programs: The ICR (p. 17) highlighted that the revised
teacher upgrading strategy increased the number of in-service teacher training credits from 30 to 60, plus
another three credits for strengthening technology skills. There was also an increase in demand for
enrollment in the programs. Overall, a total of 2,348 teachers, of these 987 female, enrolled in the TUP,
exceeding the target of 2,200 (DLIs 6 and 10, achieved). Of those enrolled, 91 percent, or 2,140 teachers, of
whom 925 were female, graduated (DLIs 14, 17, and 21, achieved). The ICR (p. 31) noted that the upgrading
of training programs generated a large pool of newly qualified trainers or mentors. The ICR did not report the
extent to which the training resulted in improved teaching practices. The RF did not monitor the effectiveness
of the training. The IE provided evidence of improvement in the average grades of grade 12 students (to be
discussed below), but the methodological details were not provided in the ICR nor discussion of
improvements in lower secondary students.

For the LUP, a total of 636 directors and deputy directors, of whom 86 were female, were enrolled, exceeding
the target of 310 (DLIs 11 and 15, achieved). Of those enrolled, 94 percent, or 599 directors and deputy
directors, of whom 84 were female, graduated (DLI 18, achieved).

Enrollment rate in lower secondary education: A total of 6,175 students, of these 3,039 females, were
enrolled in newly constructed schools under the project, exceeding the target of 5,250 students (2,625
female). The expectation was that student transfer to the new schools would alleviate crowded conditions in
existing schools. The PAD (para. 84, p. 27) highlighted gender inequality for boys, but the indicator was
disaggregated by female in the results framework.

A total of 136,871 students (i.e., an accumulation of 66,671 lower secondary and 70,200 upper secondary
students), of which 73,230 are female, benefited from 100 schools that were rehabilitated under the project,
surpassing the target. The ICR did not explain how and why upper secondary students benefitted from the
operation when the PDO addresses lower secondary.

Drop-out rates in lower secondary education: According to the ICR (p. 14), the project helped reduce the
dropout rate in targeted schools from 16.6 percent in 2017-18 to 5.3 percent in 2020-21. This was compared
favorably to the overall national average dropout rates (of non-targeted schools), which increased from 14
percent to 18.7 percent during the same period.

Students learning assessment: As a result of the revised strategies for the upgrading programs discussed
above, the IE concluded that there was significant evidence of improvements seen in (i) an estimated
increase in the average school grade 12 percentile ranking by 1.778 percentage points; (ii) an increase in
schools’ passing rate by 2.4 percentage points; and (iii) an estimated impact of 1.02 points on the imputed
overall test score of Grade 12. Furthermore, the IE revealed that there was an increase in the proportion of
students with improved grades (grades A, B, and C) in math from 14 to 35 percent between 2018-2021, and



                                                                                                 Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



in Khmer language from 25 to 48 percent during the same period. The ICR did not report improvements for
lower secondary students- the focus of the PDO and highlighted in the PAD and RC.

The project supported technical assistance to the MOEYS, specifically to the Education Quality Assurance
Department (EQAD), to strengthen the capacity to collect data on nationally set targets for improving the
country’s education system and analysis of factors influencing student learning outcomes. Through various
trainings, the EQAD was able to complete the PISA for Development (PISA-D) in 2018 and will participate in
PISA 2023 with its own funds. The EQAD disseminated the results of PISA-D to many schools and the results
were used to develop classroom assessments and guidebooks for teachers. The ICR did not provide
information of use and impact from the development of classroom assessments and guidebooks for teachers.
The project provided support to teachers and parents to help at-risk students (i.e., students who fell behind on
their grades) through remedial programs. This was not monitored in the results chain.

Overall, though some of the evidence provided in the ICR was not directly relevant to achievement of the
objective, the project exceeded expectations for expanding lower-secondary education and achieving
minimum standards in targeted areas.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Provide immediate and effective response in case of an eligible crisis and emergency

Rationale
Rationale: The objective was designed to be activated in case of an eligible crisis or emergency that arose
during project implementation. Although component 3 (i.e., Contingent Emergency Response Component,
CERC) of the project was not triggered, the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 interrupted the project, pausing the
TUP and LUP for several weeks, but activity resumed after the Royal University of Phnom Penh began
delivering distance learning courses for trainers. To ensure continuous learning, the project used the cost
savings from the weekly stipends that the teachers and directors would have received (when attending class
in-person) to purchase laptops for teachers and school directors/deputy directors to ensure continuous
learning and maintenance of operations at target schools. The project financed the purchase of 780 laptops in
130 target schools participating in TUP/LUP and provided US$10 monthly fees to schools to cover internet
access. The ICR (p. 18) noted that no formal restructuring or revision of the results framework was conducted
as a result of diverting project funding to purchasing of laptops. The ICR (p. 18) noted that teachers and
directors were required to show evidence of improved distance learning and teaching status in their schools
and classrooms to meet graduation requirements. No further discussion was provided in the ICR on the type
of evidence provided. However, despite a brief pause in the programs, a total of 2,140 teachers, against the
target of 2,000, were able to graduate from the program.

Since the CERC was not activated, this objective is not rated.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 19
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)




                            Rating
                            Not Rated/Not Applicable


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project highly achieved its first objective, while the other objective was not activated during the course of
                            the project. Achievements were realized in relation to strengthening school-based management, the
                            rehabilitation and construction of existing and new schools, and upgrading of teachers and school leaders.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal, a cost benefit analysis (CBA) was conducted for two key activities supported under the project: (i)
   improving school facilities; and (ii) upgrading of lower-secondary school teacher qualification. A CBA for the
   SBM activities was conducted for the ICR, but not at appraisal. No reason was provided.

   Cost-benefit analysis of improving school facilities (US$ 10.6 million): At appraisal (PAD, p. 22, and Annex 5, p.
   80), the CBA suggested that children who are already in lower-secondary schools, in over-crowded classrooms,
   but who will likely transfer to newly constructed classrooms supported under the project (to off-load
   crowdedness) will have greater benefit in lifetime earnings over their assumed 45-year working life (assuming
   they enter labor at age 16 and retire at the age of 60). To derive this conclusion, the project team performed a
   rigorous calculation of the “human capital externalities” (i.e., an individual’s standard effect of increasing
   productivity) and used the Cambodian Household Socio-economic Surveys 2014 to calculate the economic rate
   of return for an additional year of secondary education. For the externalities, it was found that the magnitudes of
   externalities from an additional year of secondary education per worker range between 8.98 to 12.5 percent to
   private benefit (i.e., earnings) (PAD, p. 90). The household survey concluded that a student with an additional
   year of schooling at the secondary level could expect to earn a 127 percent higher wage rate than a student
   without formal schooling. It was assumed that the life span of the project was 20 years. The total cost of the
   associated activities under the project was US$10.6 million. The team noted that the schedule of each group of
   new and rehabilitated schools to become operational is important for calculating CBA, since the timing affects
   the present values of monetary benefits accruing to the cohorts of beneficiary students attending these
   schools. These parameters were administered to conduct the CBA for the following two groups of student
   beneficiaries:

                              i. Group 1: Students who would complete primary education in the absence of the 30 new schools to be
                                   built under the project. It was assumed that these children will still go on to complete three more years of
                                   schooling at lower-secondary school.

                                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



    ii. Group 2: Students who would complete lower secondary education in overcrowded schools with or
       without the project. It was assumed that this group of students will transfer to new classroom
       environments, receiving an increase in teacher contact hours, thus improving learning outcomes by
       about 0.5 year of secondary schooling and receiving more private benefit than those in group 1.

The project team used a real discount rate of 10 percent and human capital externalities from each additional
year of secondary education per worker of 8.98 percent to the private benefit calculation. Private and public
recurrent costs were also accounted for. For private costs, it was assumed that household per-student education
spending is US$170.52 per student per year. This was only applied to group 1, since it was assumed that
students in group 2 would incur the costs with or without the project. For public recurrent costs, it was assumed
that the average teacher salaries would remain the same at US$170 per month in real terms as in 2014 for a
22.5 student-teacher ratio. Therefore, the total recurrent public spending per student was assumed to be
US$150.85 per year.

Using the parameters discussed above, for the baseline scenario, the net present value (NPV) was estimated at
US$17.61 million, and the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated at 12.73 percent. Given these parameters,
the associated activities for improving school facilities under the project were deemed viable.

At project closing in 2021, the team performed a rigorous CBA using slightly different parameters from those
used at the appraisal stage. These included an actual average pupil-to-teacher ratio of 23.5 for the beneficiary
schools, which is higher than the 22.5 assumed at appraisal. The ICR also noted that the project experienced
some delays with school construction (ICR, p. 48). Hence, there were fewer classrooms built in renovated
schools than originally planned. The total cost of the project is US$10.6 million, and the project team used a
real discount rate of 5 percent. Under these parameters, for the baseline scenario, based on the fact that fewer
classrooms were built in renovated schools and experienced delays, the NPV was estimated at US$179.74
million, and the IRR was estimated at 11.31 percent. In the pessimistic scenario, it was assumed that there will
be no impact on students learning outcomes as a result of more contact hours and reduction in class sizes. . In
this scenario, the NPV was estimated at US$81.88 million and IRR at 8.05 percent. In both cases, these
calculations confirmed the expected positive returns to the project’s interventions.

Note: The ICR noted that at appraisal the NPV was US$213.72 million and IRR was 12.83 percent, but these
numbers were inconsistent with the actual numbers stated in the PAD (table 19, p. 93).

Cost-benefit analysis of upgrading of lower-secondary school teacher qualification: At appraisal, it was
suggested that student beneficiaries who have a teacher with an International Standard Classification of
Education (ISCED 5A) qualification will experience improved learning outcomes and ultimately increased lifetime
earnings. Similar to the discussion above, these student beneficiaries will have an increase in private benefits
over their 45-year working life. The team used the non-Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD) sample of students from the PISA 2012 dataset to measure the enhancement in student
learning outcomes resulting from improved instructional quality for the 20 successive cohorts of student
beneficiaries. The grand total cost for these activities was estimated at US$7.99 million.

To perform the CBA, it was assumed that the quality of instruction provided by a teacher enrolled in the
upgrading program would improve only after the teacher has completed the two years training. It was also
assumed that lower secondary students would benefit from higher quality instructions from these teachers. The
private rate of return of a year of secondary education was estimated at 3.86 percent, and the strength of
externalities was estimated at 8.98 percent. This yielded a social benefit estimate of 5.1 percent increase in net
earnings. It was assumed that the public cost would increase from training fees and stipends, an increase in the


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



salary of “upgraded teachers,” and other operational costs totaling US$15.03 million. With these parameters, for
the baseline scenario, using a real discount rate of 10 percent, the NPV of social benefit was estimated to be
US$74.36 million with an IRR of 25.61 percent. Thus, this activity supported under the project was deemed
viable.

At project completion, the project team used a slightly different set of parameters. These included a private rate
of return to a year of secondary schooling of 4.03 percent and the actual student-teacher ratio of 23.5. For
private costs under a baseline scenario, using a real discount rate of 5 percent, the net present value of the
aggregate social benefit was estimated at US$271.41 million. For the public costs, training fees, stipends, the
expected wage bill of upgraded teachers, and other operational costs totaled U$23.60 million higher than the
estimated costs at appraisal. For the baseline scenario, using a real discount rate of 5 percent, the NPV was
estimated at US$247.81 million with an IRR of 26.06 percent. Thus, this activity was deemed economically
feasible.

Cost-benefit analysis of strengthening school-based management: A CBA for strengthening school-based
management was not conducted at the appraisal stage.

The total cost of activities to strengthen school-based management was US$14.70 million. It was assumed that
only students that enrolled into Grade 7 in 100 targeted lower-secondary schools from 2018 onwards would
benefit from the better education quality (ICR, p. 52). To calculate the CBA, the project team used the same
parameters as those used to calculate the CBA for upgrading lower-secondary school teachers above, which
yielded a social benefit of 1.73 percent (assuming a working life of 45 years where the students enter the labor
market right after completing lower secondary education). For public recurrent costs, it was assumed that
all lower secondary school teachers in the targeted schools met the performance standards, and thus received
additional monthly allowances. The assumed average teacher salary increased from US$170 to US$229 per
month, or a total of US$30.33 per student. Applying a real discount rate of 5 percent to the estimated social
benefit yielded an NPV of US$70.60 million. For public recurrent costs, the NPV totaled US$8.97 million. For the
base case scenario, the NPV was estimated at US$49.93 million with an IRR of 11.58 percent. Thus, this activity
was deemed economically viable.

Implementation efficiencies/inefficiencies.

The virtual training during the pandemic saved money (ICR, pp. 20-21), leading to a reduction of unit cost per
trainee. The number of school principals doubled against the target of 300.

There was good collaboration and division of labor with other development partners (DPs) (ICR, p. 23). The
project complemented other ongoing interventions by other DPs, particularly in school-level financing and the
implementation of TPAP. The MOEYS through the Education Sector Working Group provided a platform for the
project and other DPs to exchange knowledge and information. Moreover, the Russia Education Aid for
Development Trust Fund also supported two of the project’s activities: (i) capacity development for the
Education Quality Assurance Department team in using national assessment results to improve the education
system; and (ii) baseline data collection for the Systems Approach for Better Education Results Student
Assessment.

The ICR (p. 19 and 45) noted that implementation experienced some minor delays in new classroom
construction, where fewer classrooms (i.e., total 395) were built in renovated schools than originally planned
(i.e., 500). The construction delay was mainly due to site selection for new schools. Despite these minor delays,
the CBA shows positive returns to the project’s investments.


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)




Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      26.50
 Appraisal                                                  12.73
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      26.00
 ICR Estimate                                               11.31
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the project was rated high as it responded to the government’s priority of expanding access
and quality of education services at the lower-secondary level as outlined ESP 2014-18 and 2019-23 and the
national Rectangular Strategy Phase IV (2019-23) that emphasized development of human resources. The
objectives were well aligned with the Bank’s CEN FY16-17 and CPF FY19-23, which aimed to improve
outcomes in lower secondary education. High progress was made in expanding lower-secondary education and
achieving minimum standards in target areas. Efficiency is rated substantial based on sizeable estimated
economic rate of returns and implementation efficiency. The aggregation of these findings is indicative of a
highly satisfactory rating for the overall outcome, indicating essentially no shortcomings in the project's
preparation, implementation, and achievement.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Although the ICR was optimistic and highlighted that the risk to development outcome was deemed minimal,
it should be noted that the main risk associated with the project is the government’s availability and ability to
sustain funding for the improvement of schools. Under the project, the school improvement funds were fully
funded by the government out of its own budget. As noted in the PAD (p. 10), the targeting of 130 lower
secondary schools represented approximately 8 percent of the total number of lower secondary schools
nationwide. Thus, a relatively small share of lower secondary schools was covered by the government.
Moreover, the ICR (p. 58) reported that the achievements under the project led the MOEYS to modify the
SBM Standards to “School Community Strategies (SCS)," which will be scaled up to cover primary and all
grades of secondary schools. This SCS, and together with the large pool of TUP and LUP, are to be

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



implemented so that its beneficiary teachers and school leaders can be used as core trainers and mentors to
new MOEYS staff in the subsequent Bank’s General Education Improvement Project (FY22-24).

Against this background, it is evident that the need for greater coverage of lower secondary schools will
demand a larger funding envelope from the government. The ICR did not provide evidence to substantiate
that the government will be able to meet this demand. Rather, the ICR (p. 31) acknowledged that continued
support from development partners, including the World Bank, to Cambodia’s education sector can mitigate
this risk. However, reliance on external funding can be volatile.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  At entry, the project was the first Bank engagement in Cambodia’s education sector to focus on
  expanding and improving lower secondary education. Prior to the project, the Bank’s engagement in the
  education sector in Cambodia had been focused on school readiness, strengthening cognitive and
  behavioral foundations, and supporting employability. The project design was informed by the Bank’s
  previous experience in the country, including global experience in lower secondary education and the use
  of DLIs in operations in the region, various analytical and advisory work, and ongoing projects including
  those of other donor partners that called for the need to expand and improve lower secondary education.

  At design, the project carefully selected DLIs to ensure that all relevant indicators were closely aligned
  with the government’s priorities and were realistic, achievable, and measurable (ICR, p. 24). The targets
  for each indicator were set to levels that were realistic and attainable during the project’s planned
  implementation period. The project’s risk at entry was assessed as substantial mainly due to the use of
  the DLIs, a new financing arrangement where the implementation agency, MOEYS, had no prior
  experience, even though DLIs represented about 57 percent of project financing. To mitigate this risk, the
  MOEYS appointed a team within the Department of Finance to be responsible for the project’s financial
  management function and assigned its director to oversee operations, and a consultant was hired with
  project reporting (ICR, p. 29).

  The PAD discussed the risks, and they were adequately identified and accompanied by reasonable
  mitigation measures.

  Despite these efforts, some shortcomings with the project design were observed. The project could have
  benefitted more had it adequately address key challenges impeding the lower secondary education and a
  more focused results on the project’s beneficiary group (i.e., lower secondary school education and
  students). For example, the PAD highlighted that the lower secondary education sub-sector is
  characterized by gender inequality for boys and each component activity will pay more attention to
  gender dimensions to improve participation and completion for boys. However, this key aspect was no
  featured in the RF; gender indicators were only disaggregated by girls. For teachers training, besides the
  absolute number of teachers enrolled and received training, the RF did not track whether the training was
  effective and whether the newly trained teachers helped address teacher shortage issue in target areas.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank’s project team was proactive and worked closely with the government throughout
 implementation. The ICR highlighted that the Bank, together with the project management team (PMT),
 carried out joint school visits twice a year. The field visits were to provinces where high percentages of
 targeted schools were lagging in meeting school effectiveness standards.

 The ICR commended the PMT for its effective and proactive implementation support and supervision
 throughout project implementation. In areas where needs were identified, the project team was proactive in
 addressing the issues and followed up on recommendations to improve implementation as needed. By the
 time of the mid-term review in 2019, the disbursement rate was already above 50 percent of the financing
 amount. In addition, the MOEYS was able to achieve the DLIs as planned, which enabled on-schedule
 disbursements from the Bank. The Bank, together with the government, closely monitored the achievement
 of DLIs and supervised the validation process. The World Bank project team and the government
 convened twice a year to review achievement and disbursements.

 During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank team worked closely with the government’s project team to
 ensure that project activities moved forward despite constraints. For example, the Bank team used project
 savings to finance eligible expenses, such as laptops for teachers and school directors, to contribute to the
 pandemic response.

 Overall, despite the slowdown during the pandemic, the project was on schedule and did not require
 restructuring. The planned activities were implemented as a result of close cooperation between the Bank
 team and the government.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The project’s results framework (RF) missed opportunity to adequately measure the objective and
 interventions of the project. The RF could have benefitted more had it included key measures related to the
 improvements in the targeted lower secondary schools in target areas (i.e., completion rate of grade 9; and
 improvement in grades of students in lower secondary school) and assessed improvement of school-based


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



 management, teacher performance, and school environments—that would collectively help improve lower-
 secondary education.

 Some indicators did not address the development challenges impeding lower secondary education
 subsector noted in the PAD. For example, the PAD (para. 84, p. 27) highlighted that lower secondary
 education is characterized by a degree of gender inequality for boys, but existing indicators were only
 disaggregated by girls. Moreover, the ICR did not provide information on how the SBM address issues for
 boys. Teacher shortage was highlighted but existing indicator on upgrading teachers were only focused on
 the number of teachers enrolled and graduated. Thus, it was unclear whether more qualified teachers
 improved teacher shortage in project areas.

 For the existing RF, the DLI matrix was consistent with the RF and with MOEYS' own monitoring
 framework, particularly in implementing activities to improve SBM. The PAD (table 6, pp. 51-55) provided
 clear details of the DLIs, including source of data, frequency of reporting, clear targets, allocated amounts,
 and verification protocols to facilitate disbursement.

 The M&E design also included an internal impact evaluation (IE) that supplemented the RF with qualitative
 findings, such as the impact of improving SBM on student learning outcomes in upper secondary schools.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E arrangements were well managed. The PMT convened weekly, monthly, and quarterly to
  discuss and update progress and challenges related to each activity under the project. The Bank team
  together with MOEYS monitored achievement and conducted the verification process for the DLIs. The
  findings were discussed at semi-annual review meetings between the government and the Bank team.

  The MTR (2019) highlighted that most indicators had already met their targets before that time, and the
  remaining were on track to do so. The MOEYS published annual status reports on the SIF program that
  included updates on all progress indicators in the SIF manual.

  The implementation and monitoring process was interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which delayed
  data collection for the impact evaluation. Regular in-person meetings were canceled during this time.



c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR noted that M&E findings were used for project monitoring and decision-making but lacks a
  discussion on how the IE was used by the MOE, if at all. The project team conducted routine monitoring
  of the indicators to improve design. The achievement of the indicators inspired MOEYS to broaden the
  scope and concept of SBM. MOEYS developed a new School Community Strategy (SCS) to replace
  SBM that will allow ministry staff and schools to learn from one another to achieve a common goal of
  improving student learning outcomes. Furthermore, the findings of the project also informed the
  subsequent project, the General Education Improvement Project (approved FY22), in expanding the
  SBM to an additional 420 secondary, 213 pre-primary, and 1,000 primary schools, and upscale the TUP
  and LUP to a larger number of teachers, school directors, and deputy directors.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



  In addition, the ICR noted that achievement of DLI targets supported the disbursement of 100 percent of
  credit funds allocated for DLI achievement. When a need for adjustments was identified, the project
  team was proactive and provided support to the sub-national level, schools, and national core trainers to
  guide schools to meet the minimum standards.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project triggered a total of three safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01),
   Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10, and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

   The project’s support to financing small scale construction triggered OB/BP 4.01 Environment Assessment.
   The project was classified as category “B” as it was not expected to have any major environmental impact.
   A social assessment (SA) was conducted with ethnic minority communities. The SA found that the project
   would have positive impacts, particularly for ethnic minority vulnerable children who would attend better-
   financed lower-secondary schools financed by the project. As a result of the SA, OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous
   Peoples (IP) was triggered. The project team prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, though
   it was delayed, with clear measures to ensure that IPs would participate in and benefit from the project. The
   ICR highlighted that, by 2021, at least 722 indigenous students from nine targeted schools benefited
   from the project. The project’s component 1.3, which financed the rehabilitation of existing structures or new
   classrooms and accommodation facilities for teachers, triggered OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.
   Although most of the construction and rehabilitation work was done at existing primary or lower secondary
   school compounds, a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared. At project preparation, a safeguard
   focal person was appointed to coordinate with the Inter-ministerial Resettlement Committee.

   During implementation, no major social or environmental issues were reported (ICR, p. 29). The indicators
   by gender were in compliance with social safeguard policies. The project prepared a gender strategy to
   guide gender dimension of project activities. For environmental safeguards, the Bank carried out training
   sessions to strengthen capacity of site engineers and conducted random visits to school construction to
   verify compliance.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At appraisal, financial risk was assessed as substantial. The PAD highlighted that MOEYS had an
   acceptable financial management (FM) arrangement that was used under the Bank’s ongoing Second
   Education Sector Support Project (SESSP) at the time. In this regard, the project used the same financial
   arrangements, with some modifications to comply with DLI-based disbursements. Overall, key risks were
   identified, which included: (i) insufficient time for FM staff of the government to dedicate to the project due
   to other commitments in their normal government tasks; (ii) lack of experience in working with cash
   requirement and reporting-based disbursement and DLI-related disbursements; (iii) delayed payments to

                                                                                                      Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



  civil works contractors; and (iv) the overall FM system outside of the MOEYS-designed financial
  management information system. To mitigate these risks, key measures were put in place, which included:
  (i) a supplementary FM manual with detailed payment processes, service standards, and monitoring
  mechanisms of payments to align with the project’s FM; (ii) contracting of one FM consultant to support the
  administration of FM; (iii) adoption of the accounting software that was used by the preceding project until
  new FM software was integrated in the Ministry’s system; and (iv) conducting of internal audits by the
  MOEYS Internal Audit Department.

  During implementation, FM was generally rated Satisfactory but was downgraded to Moderately
  Satisfactory in 2019-20, then improved to Satisfactory and upgraded to Highly Satisfactory at project
  closing. The downgraded rating in 2019 was due to insufficient quality of the Interim Financial Report and
  unclear of division of labor within the FM team. The improvement in FM was a result of strong
  management, where the Department of Finance was appointed by MOEYS to oversee the project’s FM. A
  consultant was also contracted to support FM.

  Procurement: At appraisal, procurement risk was assessed at substantial. A few shortcomings were
  identified: (i) understaffing and inexperienced staff at the procurement unit of MOEYS; (ii) possible delays
  in procurement due to slow technical inputs from concerned departments; and (iii) governance-associated
  risks.

  During implementation, procurement management had a slow start but later picked up and was rated
  Satisfactory throughout the lifetime of the project and Highly Satisfactory at project closing. The ICR noted
  that, in 2018, a post review found that there were delays in updating Systematic Tracking of Exchanges
  in Procurement (STEP) and conducting performance assessments for consultants. In addition, some
  communities did not comply fully with the agreed procedures and documentation requirements while
  payments were made continuously to those communities (ICR, p. 30). The Bank worked closely with the
  MOEYS to ensure closer monitoring of the compliance of communities’ procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR highlighted six positive unintended impacts observed as a result of the project.

       i. The improved SBM allowed the schools to improve their own operations and increase their own
          community engagement, leading to achieving the minimum school standards. With this success,
          MOEYS saw an opportunity to expand the SBM and developed and endorsed a new School
          Community Strategy (SCS) to replace SBM as a platform to promote knowledge exchange between
          ministry staff and schools at all levels to achieve a shared goal of increasing student learning
          outcomes. The ICR (p. 28) noted that the project organized the first online forum for all schools,
          including non-target schools, teacher training institutions, and other interested national or sub-
          national officers.
      ii. Beyond the scope of the project, the National Teacher Network and School Leader Network were
          established for teacher trainees to share their experiences and lessons from the TUP and LUP with
          the teacher/school leader network.
     iii. During COVID-19, the teachers and school directors used technology to keep their schools
          operating.
     iv. Pilot online exams for grades 9 – 12 were administered.

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



         v. The spillover effect of the success at targeted schools led parents of students in non-targeted
            school to transfer their children to the targeted schools under the project.
         vi. MOEYS and MEF approved requests from teachers from non-targeted schools to enroll in the TUP
            and LUP.




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                           Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                   Minor shortcomings in
Bank Performance                  Highly Satisfactory   Satisfactory               preparation that pertained to
                                                                                   monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                   Results Framework missed
                                                                                   opportunity to adequately
Quality of M&E                    High                  Substantial
                                                                                   measure the objective and
                                                                                   interventions of the project.
Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Three key lessons can be drawn from the project’s interventions:

    1. Strong leadership and timely implementation support can lead a project to achieve
       critical results needed to strengthen institutional capacity. In this project, strong
       leadership was exhibited by the Secretary of State, who acted as the Project Director, and
       the PMT, comprised of Directors and Director General of various departments under MOEYS
       to oversee the project’s activities and programs. As a result, monitoring was consistent and
       timely, and the project met its objectives without a need for restructuring.
    2. Structuring project implementation and financial management system around a
       government’s existing management arrangements can strengthen implementation and
       foster ownership of a project. In this case, the Department of Finance was responsible for
       the project’s overall financial management, which included the government’s own provision
       of funding on scholarships, tuition, and stipends to teachers and school management
       officials. This arrangement ensured government ownership while building sustainability for
       future expansion of the program.
    3. A performance-based approach through DLIs can provide governments with effective
       tools to promote fundamental change in improving service delivery. This project
       achieved critical results through the reform of SBM, which led to qualifying targeted schools

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Secondary Education Improvement Project (P157858)



         achieving the minimum effective school standards. In addition, centering communities at the
         forefront of school management and planning systems fostered strong institution building and
         ownership at the local level.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was well prepared and well written. The narrative was aligned with the objectives. The reported
achievements were supported by the project's results framework and by additional outcome evidence added by
the ICR. The ICR did not describe the methods used in the impact evaluation. The ICR appropriately
highlighted minor implementation shortcomings. Its lessons were insightful and should prove useful for other
projects in the sector.

A few inconsistencies in reporting of data were found in the ICR. Among these were: (i) the ICR did not report
on the actual costs for each component; and (ii) in the efficiency section, the values for the economic rate of
return at appraisal noted were different from values noted in the PAD; and (iii) inconsistencies in reported
results (i.e., number of lower secondary schools students enrolled was 6,671 (ICR, p. 15) vs. 66,671 (ICR, p.
34). Overall, however, the above shortcomings are deemed minor.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 19 of 19
