     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



                                                                              Report Number : ICRR0023514

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Program Name
 P155963                                 PK J&C P4R

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-86000                              31-Dec-2021                                         99,996,909.69

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2016                             31-Dec-2021

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                        100,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                     99,996,909.69                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Fernando Manibog           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objective (PDO) of the Program-for-Results (PfR) program as stated in the Loan
   Agreement (LA, Schedule 1, page 6) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page ii) is:

   " To improve the investment climate and to promote investments and jobs in more inclusive and
   sustainable industrial estates in Punjab. "



                                                                                               Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



   For this Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR), the objectives of the program are unpacked as
   follows:

   PDO 1. To improve the investment climate in Punjab.

   PDO 2. To promote investments and jobs in more inclusive and sustainable industrial estates in Punjab.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The program consisted of two results areas (LA, page 6).

   1. Investment Climate Reform. Reforms in this area aimed to improve regulations and capacity of the
   Government of Punjab (GovPunjab) to reduce the cost and risk of doing business, increase workers' safety,
   reduce child labor, facilitate women's employment and attract foreign investors. The activities in this
   component were designed to: (a) improve the administrative interface for business regulations through
   improved systems for business registration, contract enforcement, acquiring construction permits and
   registering property; (b) support the GovPunjab's contribution to meeting Pakistan's commitments to the
   European Union (EU) Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) + Labor Conventions; and (c) promote
   investments.

   2. Spatial Development. Reforms in this area aimed to help the GovPunjab in prioritizing and coordinating
   public investment projects in industrial and urban areas through a private sector-led approach. The activities
   in this component were designed to: (a) prioritize and coordinate large infrastructure investments in Punjab
   in support of its growth strategy; (b) improve industrial infrastructure through capacity building of the
   Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), investments in combined effluent treatment plants (hereafter
   CETP) in existing Industrial plants, and improving systems for developing new industrial estates through
   PPPs; and (c) develop and implement a new institutional set-up for supporting new industrial estates,
   existing industrial estates and industrial clusters.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Program cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$280.00 million. The actual cost was US$205.30
   million.




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



   Program financing. The program was financed by an IBRD loan of US$100.00 million. The amount
   disbursed was US$99.99 million.

   Borrower Contribution. Borrower contribution of US$180.00 million was planned at appraisal. Their actual
   contribution was US$105.31 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 31, 2016, launched on June 30, 2016 and closed as scheduled
   on December 31, 2021.

   Other changes. There were two level 2 restructurings.

   These main changes were made through the first project restructuring on June 16, 2020.

         The disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) were time bound in the original Loan Agreement. There
          were delays in implementing Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) #s 3,4,5 and 6 due to political
          leadership changes in Punjab following the 2018 general elections in Pakistan. Implementation
          picked up in August 2019 with the government change. Therefore, the Bank amended the Loan
          Agreement at government request to disburse against delayed achievements that were verified by a
          Third-Party Validation (TPV) firm.
         DLI # 4 on spatial competitiveness could not be achieved as planned by 2019 due to the delays in
          approval of the Punjab Spatial Strategy (PSS). Part of Bank's portfolio-wide response to the COVID
          - 19 pandemic included repurposing and diverting funds within the portfolio to provide immediate
          financing to governments. Therefore, DLI # 4 was replaced with a indicator designed to capture the
          Government's efforts to support the COVID - 19 response through spatial mapping for better
          allocation and management of resources across Punjab province.

   These main changes were made through the second project restructuring on December 23, 2021.

         DLI # 1 of the program relied on the Bank's Doing Business (DB) methodology. As the Bank
          discontinued the DB Report in 2021, this DLI was modified by an indicator that captured the
          'essence of what was intended in the original project design (discussed in section 3b).
         A new disbursement-linked results area (DLR) - the GovPunjab approves the Pakistan Regulatory
          Modernization Initiative (PRMI) Framework - was added.
         One indicator - " One Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) project in an existing industrial
          estate under PPP was operational" was dropped as it was not likely to be completed by December
          31, 2021. This DLR was not linked to any disbursements.
         DLR # 6b - The program implementing entity implements the Restructuring Plan of Punjab Small
          Industries Cooperation (PSIC) - was dropped as the restructuring plan was not likely to be
          completed during the remaining implementation period.

   Split rating. The PDOs were unchanged. Although some DLIs were modified, the modified DLIs captured
   the intent of the original design. As there was no change in the level of ambition of the program, a split
   rating of objectives is not applicable.




3. Relevance   TBL




                                                                                                  Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Country and Province context. Macroeconomic reforms initiated in Pakistan before appraisal, enabled over
  47 million people to escape poverty between 2001 and 2018. However, Pakistan experienced frequent
  macroeconomic crises due to a growth model based on private and government consumption, with
  investments and exports lagging behind. This was mainly due to a weak business environment for private
  investments. Punjab province accounted for over half of Pakistan's Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Hence,
  Punjab's business climate was expected to have a direct national impact.

  Government strategy. The Government of Punjab approved the "Punjab Growth Strategy" (PGS) in March
  2015. The PGS identified the main growth drivers (labor intensive manufacturing, agribusiness and
  services) and the main constraints standing in the way (trade policy, costs of doing business, access to well-
  located and well-serviced industrial land and access to technology skills). This operation supported key
  aspects of the PGS's Industrial Development Sector Plan aimed at re-igniting industrial growth through
  policies that encouraged private sector investment, increased firm-level productivity and helped in
  developing export-oriented industrial clusters (refers to the small and medium enterprises (SMEs) located
  within the "Golden Triangle - Sialkot, Gujrat and Gujranwala - north of Lahore in Punjab province). The PDO
  was relevant to the Pakistan Regulatory Modernization Initiative (PRMI) launched by the Government of
  Pakistan in 2019, a second-generation reform effort designed to build on the progress of the Ease of Doing
  Business program at the federal level.

  Bank strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Bank strategy for Pakistan. At appraisal, the PDO was
  aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2015 - 2019. Results Area Two of the CPF
  articulated the need for promoting private sector development, through reducing the costs and risk of doing
  business and promoting spatial development. The program is well-aligned with the "increasing
  competitiveness" pillar of the Bank's 2020 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Pakistan. The SCD
  reiterated the need for improving the business environment and promoting competition. The Bank's new
  Country Partnership Framework (CPF) is under preparation.

  Bank experience. The Bank has a long history of engagement with Pakistan. This PforR operation aimed to
  contribute to Punjab's competitiveness by reducing the cost of doing business. Support for the actions
  required to achieve the results of this operation was provided by a parallel program of Bank-executed
  technical assistance financed by the United Kingdom's Department of International Development (DFID).

  The Bank deemed a PforR instrument as an appropriate instrument for these reasons. First, a PforR would
  help improve the institutions and systems needed for economic development. Second, unlike a standard
  Investment Policy Financing (IPF) instrument, a PforR would support the program through the government
  budget. Third, unlike a Development Policy Financing (DPF) operation in which disbursements are
  contingent on achieving agreed prior actions, a PforR operation would support the program with
  disbursements proportional to achieving results verified by an independent mechanism. Fourth, a PforR
  operation was scalable and more flexible than a DPF, and finally, the PforR was not a new instrument in
  Punjab as the province had successfully implemented a PforR operation through the Bank-financed Punjab
  Public Management Reform Program.




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 17
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              PK J&C P4R (P155963)



                       The relevance of the PDO to the GovPunjab's priorities identified in PGS, Pakistan's Regulatory
                       Modernization Initiative and the Bank strategy for Pakistan is rated as High.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                         New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                DLI # 1. Aggregate improvement of Punjab's performance with respect business registration, contract
                enforcement, issuance of construction permits and property registration as measured through the Bank's Doing
                Business (DB) methodology.

                Rationale
                Results Area One. Investment climate reform.

                Before appraisal, businesses in Punjab were required to comply with onerous, time consuming and
                unpredictable regulations (such as for registering businesses, enforcing contracts, acquiring construction
                permits and registering property). Arbitrary and discretionary interpretation and enforcement of regulations
                increased the time and cost of doing business in Punjab. This DLI relied on the DB methodology for
                measuring Punjab's performance on this indicator. With the discontinuation of DB methodology by the Bank,
                this DLI was replaced by an indicator that captured the essence of the original program design.



                Rating
                Not Rated/Not Applicable

                DLI 1 REVISION 1
                Revised DLI
                Modified DLI # 1. Steps taken to improve business entry and dispute resolution in Punjab.

                Revised Rationale
                This DLI was linked to the steps taken by the GovPunjab to improve business entry and resolve disputes. The
                " Dispute Resolution" referred to the time and cost for resolving commercial disputes through a local court and
                judicial processes. The DLI evaluated whether the GovPunjab adopted a series of good practices for
                improving business entry and promoting efficiency of the judicial system for resolving business disputes (such
                as for registering businesses, enforcing contracts, acquiring construction permits and registering property).
                Progress on this reform was to be monitored through provincial data verified by a TPV firm.




                                                                                                                         Page 5 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK J&C P4R (P155963)



This indicator appropriately measured progress on institutionalizing the reforms for improving business entry
and was directly pertinent to the PDO of improving the investment climate. Therefore, the relevance of this
DLI is rated as substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
DLI # 2. Steps taken by the GovPunjab to improve its compliance its contribution to Pakistan's compliance with
the EU GSP + Labor Conventions.

Rationale
The EU granted conditional GSP + status to Pakistan in 2013, which accorded duty-free access to the EU
market for Pakistan's exports till 2022. This status enabled Pakistan's export-oriented industries to effectively
compete with competitors that had duty-free access to the EU market. Maintaining its conditional GSP +
status beyond 2022 required Pakistan to improve its regulatory framework through implementing 27
International Labor Organization's (ILOs) conventions such as on human rights, rights for women, labor
environment and good governance. The progress made by Punjab regarding GSP + Labor Conventions was
to be evaluated through the EU's biannual reports. Although the first compliance report published in 2016
acknowledged the significant progress made by Punjab, it identified several gaps that needed to be
addressed for Pakistan to maintain its GSP + status.

This DLI monitored the steps taken by GovPunjab that would help Pakistan in maintaining its EU GSP +
status. This DLI could be verified and directly measured progress on improving the investment
climate. Therefore, the relevance of this DLI is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
DLI # 3. Steps taken by the GovPunjab towards improvement of investment promotion.

Rationale
Before the launching of PGS, the Punjab Board of Investment and Trade (PBIT) neither had a business plan
nor the capacity to aggressively promote investments. The DLI # 3 measured the investment promotion
efforts the GovPunjab took for mobilizing foreign direct investments (FDI) in key industrial sectors. This DLI
monitored the number of investment announcements by foreign investors (defined as investments by
registered companies with a majority of shares owned either by non-Pakistanis or whose territories were not
Pakistan's territory).




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK J&C P4R (P155963)



This DLI directly tracked progress towards improving the investment climate and was monitorable. Therefore,
the relevance of this DLI is rated as substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
DLI # 4 Steps taken by the GovPunjab towards developing and implementing a Spatial Strategy for prioritizing
and coordinating public investments.

Rationale
Results Area: Spatial Development. DLI # 4 and 5 aimed to improve the spatial allocation of the industrial
infrastructure for facilitating private sector investment.

The program supported the development of the Punjab Spatial Strategy (PSS). This strategy aimed to assess
the potential of Punjab's growth corridors and growth nodes (including identifying cities with high growth
potential and addressing the constraints faced by them). The strategy aimed to prioritize and coordinate
public investments in connectivity infrastructure and developing industrial zones to facilitate private sector
investment. DLI # 4 monitored the steps the GovPunjab took to help ensure that infrastructure investments
are supported by the spatial economic analysis reflected in the PSS.

This DLI was a direct measure of the PDO of promoting investments and jobs in sustainable industrial
investments in sustainable industrial estates in Punjab. Therefore, the relevance of this DLI is rated as
substantial.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
DLI # 5. Steps taken by the GovPunjab towards the effectively developing industrial structures through PPPs
and mobilizing private sector resources for critical industrial estates and investments in CETPs.

Rationale
At appraisal, there was a growing need for well-located and well serviced industrial zones in Punjab for
attracting foreign investors and providing common facilities to large domestic manufacturers to set-up or
expand operations. This program aimed to support industrial estates and the financing of investments in
CETPs through PPPs to transition away from the less than satisfactory existing public sector led model. This
DLI monitored the steps taken by the GovPunjab to develop industrial infrastructure through PPPs and
mobilizing private sector resources for investments in CETP.




                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  PK J&C P4R (P155963)



                  Although this DLI was appropriate, this indicator was unachievable, given the timelines for designing and
                  developing a feasible CETP through PPP. The ICR (para 30) acknowledges that the program overestimated
                  the private sectors interest in CEPT - an activity that is typically considered to be within the domain of public
                  services in similar country contexts. The relevance of this DLI is rated as Modest.



                  Rating
                  Modest


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The PDOs were highly relevant to the Punjab Government's priorities identified in the PGS and the Bank
                  strategy for Pakistan. The original and modified DLI were directly related to the two results areas of improving
                  investment climate and spatial development and could be verified. Of the five DLIs of this program, four were
                  rated as substantial and one was rated as modest. The analytical underpinnings for the two results area were
                  sound (discussed in section 9). The PforR instrument was appropriate to incentivize the policy reforms.

                  The results areas complemented one another. Improving the investment climate would likely help in
                  facilitating private sector investment. Likewise, leveraging private sector investment through PPP
                  arrangements would likely help in spatial development of industrial estates that in turn would likely help in
                  promoting investments and jobs in sustainable industrial estates. The theory of change showing the causal
                  links between the results areas, the DLIs and the intended outcomes was logical and clear (discussed
                  below). Therefore, overall relevance is rated as substantial.



                  Rating
                  Substantial

                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING REVISION 1
                  Revised Rationale
                  The modified DLIs were appropriate for monitoring performance. The overall relevance of the modified DLIs
                  is rated as substantial for reasons discussed above.



                  Revised Rating
                  Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                       Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK J&C P4R (P155963)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
PDO 1. To improve the investment climate in Punjab.

Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change underlying the PDO was that simplifying the processes for
registering businesses, enforcing contracts, getting construction permits and registering property would likely
help in reducing the entry barriers faced by businesses. Steps taken by GovPunjab such as adopting new
labor laws would likely help Pakistan retain its duty-free status to the EU market. Steps taken by the
GovPunjab towards developing the Punjab Board of Investment and Trade (PBIT) strategy, developing a
database of potential foreign investors and overseas outreach missions, would likely help attract FDI. The
combination of these activities was likely to help improve investment climate in Punjab. The causal links
between the results area, the DLIs, and the intended outcomes were logical, and the outcomes were
monitorable.

The intended outcomes were predicated on these assumptions: (1) technical support is provided to the
Program Implementation Units (PIU) for the reforms associated with improving business performance; (ii) the
GovPunjab adopts the policies and plans developed through the PforR instrument.

Intermediate Outcomes.

The process of obtaining construction permits was automated to include online submission of
applications, electronic payments, online integration of construction permits, and property registration
systems in Lahore. The sub-registrar offices were integrated with land record offices for automating tile
search, agreements, stamp duties, and property records were digitized. The procedures for case
management of business disputes were automated at the Lahore High Court and the District High Court to
allow online filing, paying court fees, and completing litigation stages. Newly appointed judges were trained
under the program (No targets).

The program aided in amending several laws (The Factories Act of 1934, the Punjab Industrial Relations Act
of 2010, the Maternity Benefits Ordinance of 1958, and the Workmen Compensation Act of 1923) and
enacting new laws (Punjab Industrial Statistics Act of 2018, Punjab Restriction on Employment of Children
Act of 2016 and Punjab Minimum Wages Act of 2018. These laws were approved by the Provincial Tripartite
Consultation Committee (PTCC).

The Government's Investment Promotion Strategy was developed. An Investor Relationship Management
Database was developed to improve the organization's 'hit-rate". The PBIT established a single-window
investor support helpline to assist investors.

Outcomes.

According to the provincial data that was verified by an IVF, the time for registering business declined from
19 days at the baseline to two days. The number of days required for fulfilling the procedures associated with
property registration was 10 at the baseline. The number of procedures required for registering a property
online was reduced from six to four. The time taken for registering property declined from 15 days to 11.
Likewise, the number of procedures required for acquiring construction permits online was reduced. The time


                                                                                                  Page 9 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PK J&C P4R (P155963)



for acquiring construction permits declined from 251 days to 30 days. The time for enforcing contracts
declined from 1025 days to 180 days.

According to the EU biannual report and their June 2022 visit to Pakistan, the country made noticeable
achievements in complying with the EU GSP + conventions including adopting laws protecting the rights of
women and children and in reporting to the United Nations (UN) monitoring body since 2014. The EU report
confirmed that it would consider extending Pakistan's GSP + status beyond 2022. According to the
information provided subsequently by the team, EU agreed to extend the GSP + status to Pakistan for four
years (2024 - 2028).

US$ 2 billion in FDI was raised in Pakistan by way of FDI in export-driven industries (such as textiles, auto
parts, chemicals and ceramics) by December 31, 2020, as compared to the target of US$300 million. Of this,
US$ 579 million was in the Industrial Estates (IEs) in Punjab.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, given that the outcomes were realized.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2. To promote investments and jobs in more inclusive and sustainable industrial estates in Punjab.

Rationale
Theory of change. The theory of change underlying the PDO was that reforms aimed at developing the
Punjab Spatial Strategy (PSS) and improving the regulatory environment for enforcing the PSS would likely
help in prioritizing and coordinating public investments. Steps taken by GovPunjab for supporting industrial
infrastructure investments through PPPs, capacity building of the Punjab Industrial Estate Development and
Management Company (PIEDMC) to build PPP pipelines and creating a steering Committee to lead the
institutional reforms for creating industrial estates (IEs) would likely contribute to developing IEs. Steps taken
by the GovPunjab to restructure Punjab Small Industries Corporation (PSIC) would likely lead to developing
financially sustainable clusters. The combination of these activities were likely to result in promoting
investments and jobs in inclusive and sustainable IEs. The causal links between the results area, the DLIs
and the intended outcomes were logical, and the outcomes could be monitored.

Intermediate Outcomes.

The Government launched the Punjab Spatial Strategy (PSS) for improving site selection of Industrial Estates
(IEs) and providing a fact-based decision-making process for allocation of public funds for IEs which could
yield a high economic return on investment.

The PSS recommended PPP arrangements for improving the efficiency of public investments. Seven project
studies and feasibilities for IEs were presented to the PPP steering committee. The operation however could
not launch a CETP due to the lead time required for establishing and operationalizing it.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



  The cluster development initiative (CDI) was implemented with TA support from the United National Industrial
  Development Organization (UNIDO). An Impact Evaluation conducted at project closure highlighted the
  impact of CDI interventions on sales, diversification and market outreach of firms benefiting from CDI
  services.

  The program interventions emphasized establishing basic social safeguard measures, such as grievance
  address committees, provision of daycare facilities, establishing one-window facilities and developing a
  health, safety and environment safeguard manual for the IEs. The ICR (para 32) notes that several of these
  interventions could not be completed due to budget and time constraints.

  Outcomes.

  The intermediate outcomes discussed above were expected to increase the number of workers in the existing
  IEs.

  The number of people employed in the existing IEs increased from 82,000 at the baseline on June 30, 2016
  to 159, to 210 when the operation closed on December 31, 2021, exceeding the original and revised targets
  of 140,000 and 120,000, respectively. The number of women working in the existing IEs increased to 89,156,
  far exceeding the target of 32,000.

  Although some intermediate outcomes were not realized, the targets for the intended outcomes were
  exceeded. On balance, this review concludes that the operation made a significant contribution to promoting
  investments and employment in the industrial estates in Punjab.



  Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 Given that most of the intended outcomes were realized, overall efficacy is rated as substantial.



 Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the Punjab Government and the Bank strategy for Pakistan is rated as High. The
DLIs were appropriate for measuring and signaling the achievement of the outcomes. The program's DLIs were
linked to institutional strengthening and systems aimed at improving the investment climate and leveraging


                                                                                                     Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PK J&C P4R (P155963)



private sector investments in spatial development initiatives. The targets for most of the key outcome indicators
were met. This review rates the overall outcome as satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. There is a moderate risk to the sustainability of development outcomes.
The ICR (para 63) observes that the Punjab Government is strongly committed to the program. The reforms
under this operation to improve the business climate and put in place digital solutions to address the
institutional barriers are unlikely to be reversed. Also, the Pakistan Government's commitment is likely to be
maintained, given that business environment reforms initiated at the provincial level had evolved into the
Pakistan Regulatory Modernization Initiative (PRMI). However, there is a moderate risk associated with
losing institutional capacity given the high staff turnover in some entities such as the Punjab Small Industries
Corporation (PSIC).




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The operation's analytical underpinnings were sound and based on (i) the 2010 "Private Sector
  Development Strategy for Punjab" by the United Kingdom for International Development (DFID); (ii) the
  2010 - "Industrial Policy, its Spatial Aspects and Cluster Development in Pakistan' (Lahore University of
  Management Science); and the (iii) the 2010 "The constraints to Industry in Punjab, Pakistan" and
  "Garments as a Driver of Economic Growth" (International Growth Center). The Bank was to support
  implementation through a TA financed by DFID.

  The Bank preparation team comprised a private-sector development lead expert and an urban-sector
  specialist. This helped design interventions to improve the business-enabling environment and
  support balanced industrial and urban development. The DLIs were allocated sufficient financing to
  incentivize the government to undertake reforms.

  The implementation arrangements at appraisal were appropriate. The Punjab Resource Management
  Program (PRMP) in the Planning & Development Department (P&D) was responsible for program
  coordination. The PRMP which led the preparation of this operation had a track record of successfully
  coordinating the ongoing Bank-financed Public Management Reform Program operation (PAD, para 31).

  The Bank identified several risks including substantial technical, fiduciary, environmental, and social
  risks. Even with mitigation measures, the project risk was rated as substantial, given the complexity of the
  project design and the required technical assistance to improve the capacity of the key implementing
  agencies (PAD, para 78). The mitigating measures proved to be appropriate, as the operation's


                                                                                                     Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



  performance was not undermined by the risks identified at appraisal. The arrangements made at
  appraisal for M&E and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in Sections 8 and 9).

  There was one shortcoming at Quality-at-Entry. The program overestimated the private sector's appetite
  for investing in CETP - an activity that is typically considered within the domain of public services in
  similar country contexts.

  Overall Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 10 supervision missions during the operation's lifetime. The ICR (para 61) noted that
 the Bank team was well-staffed during implementation. The supervision team was co-led by one Bank Task
 Team Leader (TTL) and one International Finance Development (IFC) TTL (both based in Pakistan), who
 complemented each other in terms of skill sets and expertise. The continuity of the team was maintained,
 with limited turnover. With the discontinuation of the Bank's Doing Business methodology, the Bank aided
 by modifying the original DLI with another indicator that captured the 'essence of what was intended in the
 original design and added an indicator as part of the Bank's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The ICR
 (para 61) noted that the program could not carry out the planned Mid-Term Review (MTR) due to COVID-
 related restrictions. However, the quality of supervision was not compromised, as the task team relied on
 virtual missions. The support provided by the supervision aided in fiduciary compliance (discussed in
 section 10).

 Overall, the quality of supervision is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was well-aligned with the specific areas of the PGS. The DLIs were appropriate for monitoring
 the performance of the two results areas of improving the investment climate and spatial
 development. The PIU in the P&D department, with support from a competitively recruited firm, was in
 charge of reporting on the results indicators (PAD, para 34). The baseline figures and the targets for the


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



 indicators and the data sources were clearly specified at appraisal, and appropriate arrangements were
 made at appraisal for verifying the achievement of DLIs through IVF.



b. M&E Implementation
  The original DLI # 4 could not be achieved due to the delays in approval of the PSS. Hence, a COVID-19
  linked DLI was introduced to replace this indicator through the first project restructuring. With the
  discontinuation of Doing Business by the Bank, DLI # 1 was modified by an indicator that captured the
  'essence of the original design.

  The program had a robust four-tier M&E system: (i) at the institutional level through implementation
  partners. This enabled the partners (The Punjab Board of Investment and Trade (PBIT), the Faisalabad
  Industrial Estate Development and Management Company (FIEDMC), the Punjab Industrial Estate
  Development and Management Company (PIEDMC), and the Department of Labor (DOL) to track the
  progress of the DLIs. (ii) at the P&D level. The P&D was expected to notify three oversight
  committees: (1) Working Group chaired by the P&D Secretary; (2) the Program Steering Committee; and
  (3) Provincial Working Group (iii) through Third Party Validation (TPV). The PIU competitively recruited
  a TPV firm to verify the DLRs independently.(iv) through a Cluster Development Initiative's (CDI)
  Impact Evaluation. The United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) conducted an
  independent impact assessment of the CDI.

  The above mentioned M&E efforts were complemented by the Bank's implementation support missions to
  discuss results, assess compliance, identify gaps, and highlight areas where the attention of the
  GovPunjab was needed to achieve key actions (ICR, paragraphs 46 -51).



c. M&E Utilization
  The regularly tracked PDO level indicators were utilized for informing the project restructurings and for
  supporting course-correction efforts of the Punjab Government (ICR, para 52).

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Effects. The Bank prepared an Environmental and Social System Assessment
   (ESSA) at appraisal (PAD, para 58). This assessment included: (i) a summary of the environmental and
   social (E&S) risks and benefits of the proposed activities; (ii) an assessment of Punjab's environmental and
   social management systems; (iii) an evaluation of GovPunjab's track record in implementation; (iv) an
   assessment of the extent to which Punjab's E&S systems were consistent with the Bank's E&S principles

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)



   spelled out in the Bank policy on PforR; and (v) a set of recommendations for addressing environmental and
   social impacts. The ESSA was publicly-disclosed at appraisal (PAD, para 65).

   The program's compliance with the environmental and social safeguards was moderately satisfactory (ICR,
   para 55). Although there was some progress in implementing the ESSA recommendations, they were at a
   slow pace. Of the seven recommendations of the ESSA, two recommendations - establishing social units
   and a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) - were implemented. The ICR noted that the remaining
   recommendations of ESSA would be addressed through a Bank-financed follow-on PforR operation for the
   Punjab Government.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment (IFSA). The Bank conducted an assessment of the fiduciary
   risks relating to: (i) procurement, (ii) financial management, and (iii) governance (including corruption risks)
   of the key implementing entities. The assessment concluded that with the mitigation measures, the
   GovPunjab's fiduciary framework was adequate to support program implementation (PAD, para 48).

   Financial management. The Financial management was satisfactory (ICR, para 57). The PIU had
   adequate staff with financial management skills. Quarterly budget execution reports submitted by the PIU
   compared the program's original budget and annual expenditure. The PIU submitted financial audits in a
   timely fashion. The training sessions organized by the Bank's financial team on conducting PforR program
   audits aided in the completion of the financial management tasks by program closure.

   Procurement management. The Procurement performance was rated as satisfactory during
   implementation (ICR, para 58). The program had adequate staff, including a qualified and experienced
   procurement specialist at the PIU. The ICR noted that based on available information, procurement by all
   the participating entities remained consistent with stipulated values under PforR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory



                                                                                                      Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PK J&C P4R (P155963)



Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


11. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this Program, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Strong government ownership and involvement at the design stage may raise the potential
for the success of PforR operations. A key factor in this operation was that the design was based
on policy proposals developed under the Jobs and Competitiveness Non-Lending Technical
Assistance (J&C NLTA), which informed the Punjab Growth Strategy (PGS). The Bank's hands-on
support during design built a level of credibility and trust with the Government of Punjab that the
team nurtured throughout the operation's lifetime.

2. Internal collaboration within the World Bank Group can raise the potential for success in
programs with cross-cutting agendas. This operation combined the competitiveness and spatial
development agendas of the GovPunjab. The Bank brought in people with wide-ranging expertise,
not only from other units within the Bank, but also from the International Finance Corporation (IFC).
The seamless collaboration between the task team, the World Bank's Urban and Environment
Global Practices and IFC helped successfully link the competitiveness and spatial development
agendas.

3. An initial demand assessment to properly dimension the private sector appetite for
investing in Combined Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) could help design an appropriate
set of incentives. This program was unable to attract private sector interest despite the attempts
made by the Punjab Government to advertise the CETP's feasibilities. The lesson is that an initial
demand assessment could have helped in designing the appropriate set of incentives.

4, Including an Investment Policy Financing (IPC) component in the Program for Results
(PforR) can help provide incentives to steer reforms. This project had substantial technical
assistance (TA) activities to help the various implementing agencies. In this operation, procurement
by all the participating entities remained consistent with the stipulated values under the PforR.
However, the Bank was not able to have a deeper engagement with the implementing agencies due
to the absence of a TA component for implementation support.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PK J&C P4R (P155963)




The ICR is well-written and clear. The ICR provides a good rationale for using the Program for Results (PforR)
instrument. The theory of change postulated in the text clearly articulates the causal links between the reform
areas, outputs, and the intended outcomes. The quality of evidence and analysis provided in the ICR is candid
and adequate for assessing performance. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing
this operation.Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as High.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      High




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 17
