     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024386

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P152822                                    HOA: Support to FD Impacts

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa                Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-58210,IDA-58320,IDA-58330,IDA-         31-Dec-2021                                        329,212,509.19
 66660,IDA-D1200,IDA-D4210

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-May-2016                                30-Jun-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          175,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                           329,999,866.84                                               0.00

 Actual                                       329,324,973.36                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Maria Shkaratan            Fernando Manibog              Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




 P164101_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P164101                                    Uganda Support to FD Impacts ( P164101 )

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                     Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)




 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Apr-2019

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                              0.00



 P171409_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P171409                                    DJ: DRDIP in the HOA ( P171409 )

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Djibouti                                   Social Sustainability and Inclusion


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                  0

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 29-May-2020

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                      0.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                                       0.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                                   0.00                                              0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was “to improve access to basic social services, expand economic
   opportunities, and enhance environmental management for communities hosting refugees in Targeted Areas
   of the Recipient territory” (Financing Agreement, page 6). The PDO was stated almost identically in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD), with a clarification regarding recipient territories, as follows: “to improve



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



   access to basic social services, expand economic opportunities, and enhance environmental management for
   communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Uganda”. (PAD, page viii)

   The PDO was not revised.

   For the purposes of this ICR review, the objective will be assessed as follows:

   PDO 1: To improve access to basic social services for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of
   Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Uganda.

   PDO 2: To expand economic opportunities for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of Djibouti,
   Ethiopia, and Uganda.

   PDO 3: To enhance environmental management for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of
   Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Uganda.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  29-May-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Context: The Project was part of a regional operation in the Horn of Africa (HOA) and constituted Phase 1,
   which was followed by Phase 2 operation in Kenya. The Project used a community driven development
   (CDD) approach, supporting grassroots institutions, inclusive decision‐making, social cohesion, and local
   government capacity building in relation to service delivery.

   Component 1: Social and Economic Services and Infrastructure (cost at appraisal: US$85.0 million;
   actual cost: US$171.0 million) would aim at improving access to basic services and service-delivery
   capacity of subnational and local governments.

   Sub-component 1.a. Community Investment Fund would finance investment funds, which, combined
   with community contributions, would fund infrastructure sub-projects, improving access to basic services.
   Under the CDD approach, communities would identify, prioritize, implement, and monitor the sub-projects.

   Sub-component 1.b. Capacity Support for Local Planning and Decentralized Service Delivery would
   support capacity building of local governments in community-driven planning, local development, service



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



delivery, and the integration of Project interventions into planning and budgeting. It would also coordinate
local stakeholders and promote community learning.

Component 2 Sustainable Environmental Management (cost at appraisal: US$33.6 million; actual
cost: US$65.6 million) would aim to address environmental impacts of protracted refugee presence.

Sub-component 2.a. Integrated Natural Resources Management would aim to reverse the degradation
of ecosystems through such interventions as soil and stone bunds, artificial waterways, gully rehabilitation,
terraces, and tree planting. Activity selection would follow the CDD approach, and labor‐intensive public
work (LIPW) would be used, while integrating women in the work and as beneficiaries.

Sub-component 2.b. Access to Energy would finance the provision of improved cooking devices, solar
lanterns and lamps, and extending grid connections when possible.

Component 3 Livelihoods Program (cost at appraisal: US$36.85 million; actual cost: US$57.9
million) would aim to improve livelihoods and increase incomes of host communities by enhancing the
productivity of both agricultural and non‐agricultural (such as small businesses and services) livelihoods and
strengthening community resilience.

Subcomponent 3.a. Support to Traditional and Non‐Traditional Livelihoods would enhance
productivity of agriculture and fisheries and increase incomes, employment, and self-reliance of refugees. A
process-driven approach would be used, with three phases: (i) preparatory; (ii) livelihood business plan an
subproject preparation; and (iii) subproject implementation, mentoring, and commissioning.

Subcomponent 3.b Capacity Building of Community‐Based Organizations for Livelihoods would
support the establishment of community institutions, including farmer organizations, cooperatives, and
common-interest groups. Members would be trained in management, savings, financial management, and
bookkeeping. This activity would be implemented by local technical committees and/or facilitators.

Component 4 Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and Knowledge Sharing (cost
at appraisal: US$14.55 million; actual cost: US$30.6 million) would support Project management.

Component 5 Regional Support for Coordination, Capacity and Knowledge (cost at appraisal:
US$5.0 million; actual cost: US$5.0 million) would support the establishment of the Regional Secretariat
on Forced Displacement and Mixed Migration (RSFDMM), primarily for the HoA, but with linkages to the
Great Lakes Initiative. The RSFDMM would share the HoA approach, facilitate knowledge creation, and
promote a better understanding of the nexus of socioeconomic development, forced displacement, and
mixed migration in the HOA by commissioning studies. It would be anchored in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD).

Revised Components:

New subcomponents were added at Restructuring 2 (Additional Financing 1) in April 2019:

Subcomponent 1.3 Displacement Crisis Response Mechanism (DCRM) would support a mechanism for
rapidly scaling up assistance to communities affected by a refugee influx to expand education, health, and
water supply services.



                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



  Subcomponent 4.1 Strengthened Transparency, Accountability, and Anti-Corruption Mechanisms
  (TAAC) would contribute to increasing transparency and accountability in public service delivery in Project
  areas.

  Subcomponent 4.3 Policy Support would facilitate refugee policy formulation and dissemination,
  addressing fragmentation across government entities and strengthening coordination with humanitarian and
  development actors. It would promote an integrated approach to service delivery in both host and refugee
  communities in the medium and long term.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost: The appraisal estimate was US$175.0 million, while the actual disbursement amounted to
  US$329.2 million. The US$155.0 million discrepancy is due to two additional financing (AF) contributions
  amounting to US$155.0 million, which increased the total financing to US$330.0 million, the undisbursed
  amount of US$0.35 million, and the exchange rate fluctuations responsible for the remaining difference of
  US$0.45 million.

  Project Financing: At appraisal, the Project was financed by a US$170.0 million IDA credit (including
  US$20.0 million to Djibouti; US$100.0 million to Ethiopia; and US$50.0 million to Uganda) and a US$5.0
  million IDA grant to IGAD; the actual disbursement at closure was US$168.51 million and US$4.97 million,
  correspondingly. AF in the form of an IDA grant of US$150.0 million was provided to Uganda in April 2019;
  the actual disbursement at closure was US$151.16 million. Another AF in the form of an IDA credit of
  US$10.0 million was provided to Djibouti in May 2020; it was later revised to US$5.0 million; and the actual
  disbursement was US$4.57 million. Taken together, the IDA credit, the IDA grant, and the AF1 grant, and
  the AF2 credit amounted to a total actual disbursement of US$329.2 million.

  Borrower/Recipient contribution: There was no Borrower’s contribution.

  Project Dates: The Project was approved on May 31, 2016, and became effective two months later, on July
  20, 2016. The mid-term review (MTR) was planned for June 30, 2019, and it was concluded on September
  16, 2019. The Project was restructured 10 times, and two of the restructurings involved additional financing
  (AF). The original closing date was December 31, 2021. The Project was extended by a total of two years
  and six months (or 30 months), to June 30, 2024 (the actual closing date), due to two AFs, challenging
  external factors, and delays in activity completion due to internal factors, mainly related to limited
  implementing capacity.

  Restructurings involved: additional financing; increases in the Project’s scale and RF targets; reallocation
  of financing across disbursement categories; and several closing date extensions. There was no decrease
  in the Project scope.

  Restructuring 1 (February 13, 2018) was to revise the Uganda interventions. It added seven refugee
  hosting districts to the target area, increasing the Results Framework (RF) targets accordingly.

  Restructuring 2 (AF, April 17, 2019) was to provide additional US$150.0 million to Uganda though an
  IDA grant, to respond to the increased number of refugees. The main changes were:




                                                                                                  Page 5 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



      Scaling up original activities and correspondingly increasing RF targets for five out of six PDO
       indicators and most intermediate results indicators (IRIs);
      Adding three new subcomponents: (i) a Displacement Crisis Response Mechanism (DCRM), for
       contingency funds for rapid responses; (ii) a Transparency, Accountability, and Anti-Corruption
       (TAAC) in Project areas; and (iii) Policy Support to an integrated approach to service delivery in both
       host and refugee communities and improved coordination of related actions.
      Integrating a new cross-cutting approach to managing social risks, such as community violence and
       conflict, gender-based violence (GBV), and violence against children (VAC), including: (i) mitigating
       risks through peace building and cohesion between host and refugee communities; (ii) integrating
       GBV and VAC prevention into activities; (iii) VAC-related capacity building for Project staff.
      Extending the closing date for Uganda for 24 months (two years), from December 31, 2021, to
       December 31, 2023.

Restructuring 3 (AF, May 29, 2020) was to provide additional US$10 million to Djibouti through an IDA
credit, to meet additional needs of communities in the Project areas. The main changes were:

      Scaling up original activities and correspondingly increasing RF indicator targets;
      Adding Component 6 as a Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC).

Restructuring 4 (September 1, 2021) was to extend the closing date for Ethiopia from December 31,
2021, to December 30, 2022, due to the impacts of COVID-19, flooding, locust infestation, and localized
conflicts in the country.

Restructuring 5 (December 9, 2021) was to extend the closing date for Djibouti from December 31, 2021,
to June 30, 2023, and for the IGAD component from December 31, 2021, to December 31, 2022, to allow
time to complete the activities.

Restructuring 6 (December 21, 2022) was to extend the closing date for the IGAD component from
December 31, 2022, to September 30, 2023, to allow time to complete the activities.

Restructuring 7 (July 6, 2023) was for Djibouti, to reallocate financing across disbursement categories.

Restructuring 8 (December 14, 2023) was to extend the closing date for Djibouti from December 31, 2023,
to March 31, 2024, to allow time to complete the ongoing subprojects.

Restructuring 9 (December 20, 2023) was to update the RF and extend the closing date, as follows:

      Updating the RF targets to correct three typos in the AF1 Restructuring Paper (Uganda) and to
       account for the AF2 scale-up (Djibouti).
      Extending the closing date for Uganda from December 31, 2023, to June 30, 2024, to allow time to
       complete the ongoing subprojects.

Restructuring 10 (March 29, 2024) was to extend the closing date for Djibouti from March 31, 2024, to
June 30, 2024, and for Ethiopia from December 2022 to June 2024, to allow time to complete the activities.

Split evaluation and RF targets used in efficacy analysis. A split evaluation is not necessary, as there
was no decrease in the Project scope. The first three restructurings expanded the Project’s scope and
raised the RF targets. Therefore, Project efficacy will be assessed based on the RF targets as of

                                                                                                   Page 6 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



   Restructuring 3 (May 2020). Note that typos and inconsistencies in the RF targets in the AF Restructuring
   Papers were corrected during Restructuring 9 (December 2023), and this evaluation will use the corrected
   numbers.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context. The Horn of Africa (HoA) region, with a population of 242 million people,
includes eight countries: Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda.
HOA faces persistent development challenges, including endemic conflict, marginalization, poverty,
insecurity, environmental degradation, imbalanced service provision, increasing competition for scarce
natural resources, and frequent droughts and floods. Displacement has been a long-standing issue, starting
in Uganda in1959. At the time of the Project appraisal, HOA countries were hosting 6.5 million internally
displaced persons (IDPs) and three million refugees. The three Project countries – Ethiopia, Uganda, and
Djibouti – had 1.25 million refugees. Ethiopia had the largest number of refugees in Africa, followed by
Uganda. Djibouti served as a key transit route for migrants from HOA countries heading to the Middle East
and Europe. This situation posed challenges for host countries in providing basic services and economic
opportunities. The Project was designed to support the resilience and coping capacity of host communities
affected by the prolonged presence of refugees, while also enhancing refugee self-reliance and inclusion.
(ICR, pages 1, 7-8)

Relevance to Regional Strategies at closure. During Project implementation, the refugee population in
the three Project countries doubled, reaching 2.5 million people or about 10 percent of the HOA region’s
entire population. This made the Project’s long-term objectives of reducing pressure on host countries,
enhancing refugee self-reliance, and promoting social cohesion even more relevant at closure than at
appraisal. At closure, the Project was aligned with the international framework Global Compact on
Refugees (GCR), affirmed by the United Nations (UN) General Assembly in December 2018, specifically in
relation to two key response areas: (i) easing pressure on host countries, and (ii) enhancing refugee self-
reliance. The Project was also aligned with (and contributed to the development of) progressive forced
displacement policies in the HoA through the IGAD-led Nairobi Process (a series of initiatives addressing
forced displacement). These initiatives included the 2017 Nairobi Action Plan, a regional application of the
GCR, which treats refugee displacement as a development challenge rather than just a humanitarian crisis.
The Project further aligned with the IGAD’s 2021-25 Regional Strategy Framework, issued in 2020,
particularly Pillar 3 “Social Development”, Program Areas 3.2 “Migration and Displacement”, aiming at
durable solutions for affected populations and the protection of migrants, and 3.4 “Employment”, promoting
access to employment opportunities.

Relevance to the WBG’s Assistance Strategies at closure. At closing, the Project was aligned with the
Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) for the three Project countries. For Djibouti, it aligned with the
CPF FY2022-2026, specifically, with Pillar 1 on inclusive private sector-led growth, job creation, and human
capital; Pillar 2 on strengthening state capacity building; and the emphasis on gender parity and support to
good governance, both of which were priorities for the Project. For Ethiopia, the Project aligned with the
CPF FY2018-22, Pillar 2 of building resilience and inclusiveness, and draft CPF FY2024-28, areas of
enhancing social inclusion and resilience and increasing productivity in rural and urban economies. In
Uganda, it aligned with the CPF 2016-21, Objective 4 to enhance resilience of the poor and vulnerable,

                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



               particularly to ease pressures on host communities caused by forced displacement; reiterated in the
               Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of 2021. (ICR, page 8)

               Previous sector experience. At Project approval, the global approach to forced displacement was shifting
               from short-term humanitarian responses to longer-term development strategies. The Comprehensive
               Refugee Response Framework, a global initiative, was adopted by the UN in September 2016, and the
               Global Compact on Refugees (GCR) was affirmed by the UN in December 2018. (ICR, page 1) Before
               these documents were published, the World Bank launched a pioneering Regional Initiative in Support of
               the HoA on October 23, 2014, aimed at addressing vulnerability, increasing resilience and economic
               opportunities, and promoting development in HoA countries. The initiative included a series of projects,
               starting with the reviewed one, and a regional study “Forced Displacement and Mixed Migration in the Horn
               of Africa”, completed in June 2015. Following the reviewed Project, the second HoA Regional Initiative
               project was prepared for Kenya (P161067, approved in FY2017). Other potential countries include South
               Sudan, Somalia, Sudan, and Eritrea.

               The objectives were pitched at the correct level considering that the Project was part of a wider Bank
               program and aligned with a global initiative, adopted by the UN. The Project was responding to a priority
               need and aligned with the country’s and World Bank’s strategic objectives. The weak capacity was known
               at appraisal, and measures to address it were incorporated in the project's design through the inclusion of
               regional policy and institutional support (Component 5). Therefore, the Relevance of Objectives is rated as
               High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve access to basic social services for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of Djibouti,
                             Ethiopia, and Uganda.

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was created for the ICR. It listed
                             the Project activities, outputs, and outcomes for the three investment Objectives, as well as for the objective
                             of developing enabling policy for regional response to forced displacement. Under Objective 1, the Project
                             supported the following activities: (i) construction/rehabilitation of infrastructure through community funds; and
                             (ii) capacity building for local service delivery. The expected output of these activities was the constructed
                             social and economic infrastructure. The achievement of the output was expected to lead to the outcome of
                             improved access to basic social services.



                                                                                                                                 Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



The ToC listed main inputs (activities), outputs, and PDO outcomes of the Project and provided a clear
causality of the results chain from one level to the next: from inputs (activities) to outputs and then to the PDO
outcomes. However, the ToC could have been further improved by illustrating interconnections within each
level, specifically, across outputs. In addition, critical assumptions (conditions necessary for the result chains
to function as intended) were missing.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRI) results:

1. “Beneficiaries that feel Project investments reflected their needs, %”. The achievement at closure was 87
percent, against the target of 80 percent. The target was exceeded.

2. “Beneficiaries that feel Project investments reflected their needs ‐ female, number”. The achievement at
closure was 1,383,250 people, against the target of 1,470,885 people. The target was 94.4 percent achieved
(substantially achieved).

3. “Beneficiaries that feel Project investments reflected their needs ‐ male, number”. The achievement at
closure was 1,276,846 people, against the target of 1,470,885 people. The target was 87.1 percent achieved
(substantially achieved).

4. “Infrastructure investments for which local governments adopt recurrent budget allocations and/or
operation and maintenance plans, %”. The achievement at closure was 99 percent, against the target of 80
percent. The target was exceeded.

5. “Financed subprojects that are functioning or delivering services to communities six months after
completion, number”. The achievement at closure was 2,439 subprojects, against the target of 575
subprojects. The target was significantly exceeded.

PDO outcomes:

1. “Beneficiaries with access to social and economic services and infrastructure, number”. Monitored through
beneficiary assessments and progress reports, the indicator tracked the number of people benefiting from the
new infrastructure and services financed by the Project. The achievement at closure was 4,469,117 people,
against the target of 4,259,245 people. The target was exceeded.

The ICR noted that the impact evaluation showed improved access to services in Project areas, including: (i)
better school enrollment, attendance, and teacher retention, as well as reduced travel time and household
expenditures; (ii) better access to health care, with reduced waiting times and costs; (iii) improved electricity
access, resulting in upgrading hospital equipment and improved business operations. (ICR, page 9)

2. “Direct project beneficiaries, number”. Monitored through beneficiary assessments and progress reports,
the indicator tracked the number of people who were directly provided with new infrastructure or services,
such as new water connections or immunizations. The achievement at closure was 2,666,096 people, against
the target of 2,182,648 people. The target was exceeded. The gender specific sub-target for “Female
beneficiaries, %” was also exceeded, with 52 percent achieved compared to the target of 50 percent.

3. “Direct beneficiaries of the project (refugees), Uganda only, number”. The achievement at closure was
378,790 people, against the target of 396,133 people. The target was 95.6 percent achieved (almost fully



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



achieved). The gender specific sub-target for “Female refugee beneficiaries, Uganda only, %” was
substantially achieved, at 93 percent of the target.

4. “Number of households benefiting from displacement crisis response mechanism activities, Uganda only”.
The achievement at closure was 30,210 people, against the target of 31,469 people. The target was 95.0
percent achieved (almost fully achieved).

The ICR noted that, in support of the objective for an enabling policy on regional forced displacement
response, thematic meetings led by IGAD’s RSFDMM resulted in the Djibouti Declaration on Refugee
Education and the Mombasa Declaration on Health. These efforts led to the creation of national action plans
for refugee integration into education and health systems, moving away from costly parallel humanitarian
service. IGAD also supported service delivery dialogues and coordination mechanisms in the Project
countries. (ICR, page 9)

Rating. The Project exceeded or almost fully achieved its PDO indicator targets under Objective 1, which
focused on increasing access to services by both host communities and refugees. The ICR provided detailed
impact assessment data showing improved service provision across sectors and enhanced population
wellbeing. The Project also exceeded or substantially achieved its three IRIs on (i) the functionality of Project-
supported infrastructure six months post-construction, (ii) local government budgeting for infrastructure
investment and O&M, and (iii) beneficiaries’ perception that Project investments met their needs. Accordingly,
the rating is Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To expand economic opportunities for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of Djibouti,
Ethiopia, and Uganda.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was created for the ICR. It listed
the Project activities, outputs, and outcomes for the three investment Objectives, as well as for the objective
of developing enabling policy for regional response to forced displacement. Under Objective 2, the Project
supported the following activities: (i) skills development for employment and business development; (ii)
support programs for technological innovations; and (iii) creation of community organizations (such as
savings and financial literacy). The expected outputs of these activities were: (i) skills development training
provided; (ii) technological innovations supported; and (ii) community organizations receive credits and
training. The achievement of the outputs was expected to lead to increased productivity of farming and non-
farming economic activities.

The shortcomings of the ToC are listed under Objective 1. In addition, the additional shortcoming under
Objective 2 is the weak link between outputs and the PDO outcome. It is unclear how outputs like
employment skills development and credits to community organizations would lead to expanded economic


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



opportunities. Including intermediate results, such as improved employability and increased productivity, in
the ToC would have clarified this connection.

Intermediate Results Indicators (IRI) results:

1. “Community organizations formed or strengthened and still operational one year after receiving funding,
number”. The achievement at closure was 5,791 organizations, against the target of 4,955 organizations. The
target was exceeded.

2. “Beneficiaries of livelihood‐support activities, number”. The achievement at closure was 243,277 people,
against the target of 172,933 people. The target was exceeded.

3. “Percentage of participating parishes with functional community monitoring groups”. The achievement at
closure was 100 percent, against the target of 80 percent. The target was exceeded.

4. “Percentage of participating parishes in which social accountability is implemented using a community
score card (CSC)”. The achievement at closure was 100 percent, against the target of 80 percent. The target
was exceeded.

5. “Workdays created for short‐term employment in the subprojects, number. The achievement at closure was
8,430,979 workdays, against the target of 10,998,360 workdays. The target was 76.7 percent achieved
(partially achieved).

PDO outcome:

1. “Beneficiaries of economic development activities that report an increase in income, number”. The
achievement at closure was 181,024 people, against the target of 274,311 people. The target was 66 percent
achieved (partially achieved).

2. “Beneficiaries who engaged in economic activities (refugees and host community), Uganda only, number”.
The achievement at closure was 56,333 people, against the target of 51,357 people. The target was
exceeded.

The ICR noted that while impact evaluation data for PDO2 outcomes was only available for Uganda, a 12.2
percent increase in the average income for participants vs. non-participants supports the positive impact on
economic opportunities (ICR, page 10).

3. “Beneficiaries reporting increase in household assets, Uganda only, %”. The achievement at closure was
70 percent, against the target of 60 percent. The target was exceeded.

The ICR pointed out that, in support of the objective for an enabling policy on regional forced displacement
response, the project helped IGAD to formulate the Kampala Declaration on Livelihoods, Jobs, and Self-
reliance and organize a regional workshop on engaging the private sector in displacement-affected areas.
Adopted in March 2019, the Kampala declaration committed IGAD member states to advancing livelihood
opportunities and economic inclusion for refugees, returnees, and host communities. It also led to the creation
of national action plans to integrate refugees into the economy, promote self-reliance, and reduce
dependency on humanitarian aid. (ICR, page 10)



                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



Rating. Under Objective 2, the Project exceeded two PDO indicator targets for beneficiary engagement in
economic activities (Uganda only) and the reported increase in household assets, while partially achieving its
PDO indicator target for the number of beneficiaries of economic development activities whose income
increased. The ICR noted survey data showing a 12.2 percent income increase for Project beneficiaries
compared to non-participants in Uganda. The Project also exceeded four IRI targets, which measured the
functionality of community organizations one-year post-funding, the share of participating parishes with
functional community monitoring groups and those using CSCs, and the number of beneficiaries of the
livelihood‐support activities. At the same time, it only partially reached the fifth IRI target on workdays created.
Although one PDO indicator target was only partially reached, it relied on subjective self-reporting by
beneficiaries, limiting its value-added. Accordingly, the rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance environmental management for communities hosting refugees in the targeted areas of Djibouti,
Ethiopia, and Uganda.

Rationale
The theory of change (ToC) for the Project was not included in the PAD but was created for the ICR. It listed
the Project activities, outputs, and outcomes for the three investment Objectives, as well as for the objective
of developing enabling policy for regional response to forced displacement. Under Objective 3, the Project
supported the following activities: soil and water conservation, irrigation, afforestation, and alternative energy
sources. The expected outputs of this activity were: (i) soil and water conservation, irrigation management,
reforestation; and (ii) energy efficient technologies. The achievement of the outputs was expected to lead to
the PDO outcome of enhanced environmental management.

The shortcomings of the ToC are listed under Objective 1. In addition, the ToC under Objective 3 would have
benefited from including intermediate results, such as the reversal of soil and watershed degradation, and the
reduction of firewood consumption and deforestation. This would clarify how outputs like improved
conservation, irrigation, reforestation, and (especially) the use of energy efficient technologies, contribute to
enhanced environmental management.

IRI results:

1. “Beneficiaries with access to improved energy sources, number”. The achievement at closure was 191,561
people, against the target of 120,014 people. The target was exceeded.

The Project substantially benefited targeted communities by providing such alternative energy sources as
energy energy-saving stoves, solar lighting, and biogas equipment. These interventions reduced dependence
on wood for cooking; improved the safety of women, who previously had to harvest firewood; enhanced
health due to reduced pollution; and saved time that was previously spent collecting firewood.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 22
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



                            2. “Area provided with irrigation and drainage services, hectares”. The achievement at closure was 8,024
                            hectares, against the target of 20,000 hectares. The target was 40.1 percent achieved (modestly achieved).

                            3. “Area provided with irrigation and drainage services ‐ New, hectares”. The achievement at closure was
                            1,953 hectares, against the target of 14,000 hectares. The target was 14.0 percent achieved (barely
                            achieved).

                            4. “Area provided with irrigation and drainage services ‐ Improved, hectares”. The achievement at closure
                            was 6,071.5 hectares, against the target of 6,000 hectares. The target was exceeded.

                            6. “Land area in the refugee-hosting areas under soil and water conservation practices, Uganda only,
                            hectares”. The achievement at closure was 5,110 hectares, against the target of 5,169 hectares. The target
                            was 98.9 percent achieved (almost fully achieved).

                            PDO outcomes:

                            1. “Land area where sustainable land management practices have been adopted as a result of the project,
                            hectares”. The achievement at closure was 46,454 hectares, against the target of 42,806.5 hectares. The
                            target was reported as exceeded.

                            The ICR noted that in support of the objective for an enabling policy on regional forced displacement
                            response, IGAD conducted studies on renewable energy in the HOA, specifically on (i) lessons learned on
                            solar home systems (SHSs) and clean cooking, and (ii) challenges and strategies for improving the uptake of
                            renewable energy solutions through market-based approaches. IGAD’s innovation and technology
                            marketplace event also facilitated experience-sharing, particularly from the Project.

                            Rating. Under Objective 3, the Project exceeded its PDO result on land area under sustainable
                            management but partially achieved an important IRI target on area provided with irrigation and drainage
                            services and barely achieved the sub-target for newly irrigated areas. Other IRI targets were either exceeded
                            or substantially achieved. Accordingly, the rating is Modest, due to the low achievement of key targets on
                            irrigation.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy rating is Substantial, with moderate shortcomings. Access to basic social services
                            (Objective 1) was substantially expanded; and economic opportunities (Objective 2) were improved
                            substantially, with moderate shortcomings, as one PDO and one IRI target were only partially met. However,
                            enhanced environmental management (Objective 3) was only modestly reached due to low achievement of
                            key targets on irrigation and drainage.


                                                                                                                           Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic analysis

1. At approval, economic analysis was conducted for representative types of potential investments across the
three investment components (Components 1,2, and 3) and the three Project countries, as the specific
investments to be implemented were not known in advance. The analysis included seven interventions across
Components 1-3 and eight cross-cutting interventions, including the following: construction of boreholes, health
facilities, school buildings, paved roads, solar systems; and the implementation of financial systems. The
benefits included: reduced transportation costs; financial savings from improved access to water points,
education facilities, and primary health care; and increased productivity, efficiency, and economic returns in
agriculture due to better roads, irrigation, and environmental management. Net present value (NPV) was
estimated over five years at a social discount rate of 2.6 percent (equaling the inflation rate at the time of
appraisal). PAD presents NPV for two investment types: water boreholes (US$76,974) and agropastoral and
fishery (US$10,376,112). The investments showed positive NPV, which remained robust under a sensitivity
analysis of a 10 percent cost increase and a 10 percent benefits decrease. The Economic Internal Rate of
Return (EIRR) was 63.0 percent for agropastoral and fishery and at 184.0 percent for water boreholes.

2. At closure, the economic analysis was conducted for the implemented Components 1, 2, and 3, using an
average discount rate of 13.4 percent (compared to the HOA averaged Cost of Capital of 12.1 percent) and the
time horizon of 20 years. The benefits included: improved access to schools, improved water sources, health
centers, and energy sources, as well as upgraded economic infrastructure and increased productivity and
economic returns in agriculture. The overall NPV was estimated at US$35.8 million, and the EIRR at 63.2
percent.

It is worth noting that the time horizon of five years used in the economic analysis at approval is highly unusual,
and no explanation is presented in the PAD or the ICR. The significant difference in discount rates at appraisal
and at closure did not result in a large discrepancy between the EIRR at approval and closure mainly due to a
more comprehensive list of benefits included in the calculations at closure, as well as the 20-year time horizon
for accounting the benefits at closure.

Both at appraisal and closure, the NPV was positive. At appraisal, the EIRR was 63.0 percent and 184.0
percent, significantly above the opportunity cost of capital (discount rate) of 2.6 percent. At closure, the EIRR of
63.2 percent, also significantly exceeding the opportunity cost of capital of 13.4 percent. However, the economic
outcomes at appraisal and closure are not directly comparable due to the differences in analytical approaches.

Administrative efficiency

The ICR highlighted the Project’s efficiency in adapting to a challenging operating context through operational
responsiveness and restructurings, including securing additional financing due to rising refugee numbers. The
Bank team proactively identified and addressed implementation challenges, mitigating risks despite difficult


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



external circumstances and a complex structure spanning three countries and multiple localities. The CDD
approach supported efficiency, offering flexibility in conflict-affected Ethiopia and ensuring effective
implementation in Uganda (ICR, page 14-15).

The Project experienced a delay of two years and six months (30 months), extending from the original
implementation period of five years and seven months (60 months) to eight years and one month (97 months),
primarily due to external factors. These included a sharp rise in construction material prices due to global supply
chain disruptions in 2020–21, extreme drought and water shortages affecting environmental and livelihood
activities, insecurity in many Project areas in Ethiopia throughout Project implementation, delayed supplied due
to attacks on commercial vessels in Red Sea since November 2023, locust invasions, and COVID-19 (ICR, page
17). Political delays, such as a year-long effectiveness delay in Uganda’s parliamentary approval, and the
relocation of the IGAD RSFDMM from Nairobi to Djibouti Ville, leading to staff resignations, also contributed.
Internal challenges included limited capacity of Community Project Management Committees (CPMCs),
Community Procurement Committees (CPCs), and the original implementing agency in Uganda, the latter
necessitating a shift to a project unit under the Office of Prime Minister during implementation. Also, the capacity
of community facilitators was inconsistent. (ICR, pages 14-15)

Considering the Project’s economic efficiency at both approval and closure (demonstrated by EIRRs exceeding
the opportunity cost of capital (the discount rate) and a positive NPV at both stages), as well as timely
adjustments to both external and internal challenges, the Project’s efficiency is rated as Substantial, with
methodological shortcomings, primarily related to the non-comparability of PAD and ICRR economic analyses,
which lessens the verifiability of the economic evidence that the PDOs were achieved efficiently.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      89.20
 Appraisal                                                  88.80
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      63.20
 ICR Estimate                                               63.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of objectives is rated as High; efficacy as Substantial, with moderate shortcomings; and
efficiency as Substantial, with methodological shortcomings. Thus, the overall outcome is rated as Moderately
Satisfactory*.



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



* Based on a six-point scale, where: 1 = Highly Unsatisfactory, 2 = Unsatisfactory, 3 = Moderately
Unsatisfactory, 4 = Moderately Satisfactory, 5 = Satisfactory, and 6 = Highly Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Insecurity (the risk of political and climate shocks). The region’s high vulnerability to climate shocks and
security threats pose a significant risk to overall development efforts. Many of the project regions are
characterized by marginalization, poverty, insecurity, environmental degradation, uneven service provision,
increasing competition for scarce natural resources, and frequent droughts and floods. These challenges
have built up over decades, requiring a long-term development approach to address them effectively. To
mitigate this risk, more intensive development efforts will be necessary.

Government ownership. The risk of reduced government ownership was mitigated through the Project’s
significant support for institution building and policy development at the regional level, including the
establishment of the HoA’s Regional Secretariat on Forced Displacement and Mixed Migration (RSFDMM)
and the design of progressive policies under the IGAD-led Nairobi Process. At the country level, Ethiopia’s
2019 Refugee Proclamation is expected to support future policies on refugees and asylum-seeker access to
services. Similarly, Djibouti’s commitment to the Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework (CRRF) and
the integration of refugees into its National Development Plan, along with Uganda’s National Refugee Policy
and the Refugee and Host Population Empowerment (ReHoPE) strategy, are likely to incorporate future
refugee services into national plans. Djibouti's reclassification of refugee camps as integrated villages and
Ethiopia's inclusion of refugees in national statistics further support these efforts. At the operational level, the
Project’s CDD approach provided tangible successful integration, reinforcing regional policies and
encouraging national governments to adopt similar frameworks. (ICR, page 18)

Financial. The sustainability of project-supported investments depends on the availability of funds for
operations and maintenance (O&M). Limited public funds, due to competing priorities, present a challenge.
However, this risk is mitigated as O&M plans were developed for each Project-financed structure, and both
government and community commitment to funding recurrent costs was confirmed by the ICR mission and
the clients’ completion report. Overall, 99 percent of the Project’s infrastructure investments have O&M plans
and/or recurrent budget allocations from local governments. There are concerns about the sustainability of
environmental management results. A rapid assessment in Uganda identified that some Project-financed
woodlots may not be sustained, as O&M weakened once the LIPW payments ceased. Additionally, there are
also sustainability concerns regarding renewable energy due to a limited number of local suppliers and high
costs of replacements. Many solar systems are expected to require repairs and maintenance within a year of
operation. (ICR, page 18)

Technical. Technical capacity to provide O&M is crucial for the sustainability of project outcomes. While the
O&M training provided by the project offers a reasonable level of assurance that routine maintenance will be
carried out, major repairs—such as those for boreholes, which are technically complex—may present greater
challenges. Additionally, the sustainability of some water investments is at risk, as community motivation
might decline once the Labor-Intensive Public Works (LIPW) payments stopped.


                                                                                                        Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Project’s design was informed by in-depth analytical work and aligned with the shift from a
  humanitarian to a long-term development approach for refugee responses. A 2015 joint World Bank-UN
  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) study “Forced Displacement and Mixed Migration in the Horn
  of Africa” highlighted the need to address social, economic, and environmental challenges in host
  communities, reframing the refugee agenda from a crisis to a development concern. The project was
  designed in consultation with UNHCR, which played a key role in regional policy dialogue and ensuring
  access to remote refugee-hosting areas. (ICR, page 13-14) The ICR also noted that the Bank’s technical
  input, which helped create a common Project structure across three countries while customizing activities
  to each country context, was appropriate (ICR, page 17).

  The Project was well-structured, with a component design that was generally adequate for its objectives.
  However, there were some shortcomings, including the low capacity of the Uganda’s CPMCs, CPCs, and
  the original implementing agency, the latter necessitating a shift to a project unit under the Office of Prime
  Minister during implementation (ICR, page 14). Additionally, challenges arose with data aggregation for
  some RF indicators due to the lack of a common Management Information System (MIS) across the three
  Project countries (ICR, pages 17).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The supervision was effective in identifying and addressing implementation challenges, despite difficult
 external circumstances and a complex structure spanning three countries and multiple localities. The
 Project’s AF restructurings were appropriate and timely, securing financing to address an evolving crisis
 with increasing numbers of refugees in Uganda and to support underserved communities in Djibouti;
 expanding project activities to refugees; adding new subcomponents (DCRM and STAAC); and
 mainstreaming social risk management across Project activities in Uganda. The Project faced significant
 external challenges, including the COVID-19 impact on CDD activities, an increase in construction material
 prices due to global supply chain disruptions in 2020–21, extreme drought and water shortages, and
 insecurity in Project areas, thus resulting in a delay of 2.5 years. (ICR, page 17).

 On balance, considering the Project’s adequate design and implementation, and ability to adapt to
 challenging circumstances, while also accounting for some shortcomings in implementation arrangements,
 MIS design, and delays, the overall Bank Performance is rated as Satisfactory.




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original Results Framework (RF) reflected the logic of the Project interventions in the PAD and was
 aligned to the PDO, with clear quantitative indicators with baselines, targets, and time-bound parameters.
 The PDO indicators covered all main outcomes and were specific and measurable. The ICR reported that
 M&E design enabled uniform yet adaptable data collection across countries, with easy-to-monitor data. The
 Project included baseline, midline, and endline assessments for Ethiopia and Uganda, regular monitoring
 surveys for Djibouti, and an independent, impact evaluation in Ethiopia.

 The RF design had some shortcomings. The quality of IRIs differed by Objective. Under Objective 1
 (improved access to services), IRIs effectively linked activities (inputs) to outcomes and provided the
 necessary details (e.g., on service provision linked to actual needs of community members, subproject
 sustainability, and recurrent budget allocations for the financed assets’ O&M). However, under Objective 2
 (expanded economic opportunities), IRIs only partially linked activities to outcomes, missing important
 intermediate results. It was unclear if the PDO indicator on reported increased incomes was achieved
 through improved productivity, as intended, since the IRIs focused on (i) community organizations’
 formation and sustainability, (ii) number of livelihood support recipients, and (iii) social accountability
 through CSC use. Similarly, under Objective 3, IRIs lacked a clear link to outcomes, except for the one on
 access to improved energy sources. IRIs measuring irrigation service areas did not translate into enhanced
 environmental management. The ICR noted that while M&E design was consistent across the three Project
 countries, the absence of a common Management Information System (MIS) caused issues with
 standardized real-time data monitoring, data aggregation across the countries, and reporting (ICR, page
 15).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR reported that the initial issues with Project level data aggregation, occurring due to the lack of a
  common MIS, were soon resolved, ensuring accurate monitoring. The innovative Kobo Box, introduced
  through the World Bank’s Geo-Enabling Initiative for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS), was fully
  utilized in Uganda and piloted in Ethiopia, improving data collection methods. Due to challenges in
  Ethiopia, particularly security issues, data were collected manually. Overall, M&E data were collected
  regularly in each of the countries, and inconsistencies were detected and corrected as needed. (ICR,
  page 16)



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                     Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



  The ICR reported that the M&E data were regularly used to (i) identify implementation lags, (ii) make
  cashflow and disbursement projections, and (iii) adjust the scope and timeframe of activities and through
  project restructurings, including the loan closing date extension. The data facilitated investment
  integration across components and informed decision-making. Although the MIS did not meet
  expectations for real-time, accurate data provision, the data were still regularly used to inform
  implementation planning. (ICR, page 16)

  Considering both the strengths and shortcomings of the RF design, along with adequate M&E
  implementation and utilization in a challenging environment, the M&E quality is rated as Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Safeguards. The ICR reported that at appraisal, the Project was classified as
   Environmental Category B and triggered seven Bank’s environmental and social (E&S) safeguard policies:
   Environmental Assessment (Operations Policy (OP)/Bank Procedures (BP) 4.01), Pest Management (OP
   4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Forests (OP/BP
   4.36), Safety of Dams (OP/BP4.37), and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50). Safeguards
   performance was rated as Satisfactory for the first four years of implementation, until November 2020, then
   downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory until project closure. The downgrade was due to (i) implementation
   of some subprojects without evidence of proper environmental and social (E&S) screening or preparation of
   appropriate safeguards instruments, (ii) delays in the E&S reporting, and (iii) weak compliance monitoring.
   Action plans were implemented to address these issues. (ICR, page 16)




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management (FM). The ICR reported that FM management was adequate, aligned with
   applicable policies and the Project Operations Manual (POM), and that the FM Manual was developed
   early on. While there were occasional delays in submitting the Annual Work Plans and Budgets (AWPBs)
   and Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) in Ethiopia and Djibouti, they did not cause major issues. Djibouti had
   a late submission of an unqualified external audit report. FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory throughout
   implementation. (ICR, page 16)

   Procurement.

   The ICR indicated that procurement activities were aligned with applicable policies, the POM, and the
   Procurement Manual, with no significant issues. All procurement risks mitigation measures recommended
   during Project preparation were implemented. Shortcomings including incomplete filing of some
   procurement activities in Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) and a delayed
   procurement audit in Ethiopia, though the firm was eventually hired, and audits began in 2018.

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



   Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory or Satisfactory throughout implementation,
   with the last three ratings being fully Satisfactory (ICR, pages 16-17).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   --



d. Other
   Gender. The ICR reported that the Project contributed to empowering women across the three countries.
   The benefits included female socio-economic advancement via expanded economic activities; increased
   female school enrolment due to separate sanitation facilities and streetlighting; inclusion in decision-making
   in local social and livelihood activities; better health through enhanced pre- and post-natal care; significant
   time savings and reduced cases of GBV due to new improved water sources; and increased female
   participation in household financial decision-making. Additionally, infrastructure investments, such as new
   roads, bridges, and street lighting, allowed women to extend working hours and start small businesses,
   therefore increasing incomes and savings. (ICR, page 13)



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                  IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Modest rating for Objective 3 on
                                                                                 environmental management. As
                                                                                 per the ICR review guidelines,
Outcome                           Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory    the Outcome Rating of a project
                                                                                 with a modest achievement of
                                                                                 one or more of the objectives, is
                                                                                 Moderately Satisfactory.
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                 Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons were derived from the ICR (based on ICR, pages 18-19):

1. While addressing forced displacement is most effectively done at the local and community
levels, consolidating enabling policy and institutional reforms at the regional level creates
essential synergy and enables action on the ground. Through regional policy engagement, peer
learning, and a common approach, the Project offered participating countries greater opportunities to

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



take concrete actions. The Project established the HoA’s Regional Secretariat on Forced
Displacement and Mixed Migration (RSFDMM), under the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), to facilitate cross-country approach and knowledge. This supported the design
of progressive policies by the IGAD-led Nairobi Process (a series of initiatives to address forced
displacement, treating it as a development challenge rather than a humanitarian crisis), which
provided a platform for discussing previously muted sensitive issues, setting goals, and defining
monitoring processes, thus enabling action. Additionally, IGAD-coordinated research and learning
enabled countries to share experiences and inspire each other.

2. An integrated approach to service delivery in both host and refugee communities builds a
critical social foundation for addressing forced displacement. Initially, the Project focused on
host communities, based on the understanding that they were underserved, while refugee
settlements received international assistance for basic services. However, an analysis of legal and
policy framework for refugee integration, conducted during the additional financing for Uganda (April
2019), revealed challenges refugees faced in securing livelihoods and accessing social services,
including limited land access and employment opportunities, and language barriers. (Source: AF
Restructuring Paper, page 26). Building on this assessment and leveraging the positive attitudes in
the Project-supported host communities towards including refugees as beneficiaries, the Project
introduced an integrated approach to promote long-term refugee inclusion and host-refugee
coherence.

3. Community procurement enhances speed and cost effectiveness. During Project
implementation, procurement for subprojects in Ethiopia and Uganda was managed by communities
as part of the CDD approach, in line with World Bank’s procurement guidelines. Community
procurement proved to be faster, more cost effective and, according to multiple stakeholders, less
susceptible to elite capture compared to standard public procurement methods. It was widely
regarded as a key element of the Project’s success. In Uganda, strong and consistent positive
feedback was received at the subnational level from District Chairs and Chief Administrative
Officers. Incorporating community procurement into country systems would further support this
approach in the future.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides sufficient technical details on the Project’s background, key implementation factors,
restructurings, Bank performance, and M&E implementation and utilization. It offers a solid justification for the
PDOs' strategic relevance and provides relevant information on the economic analysis and risk to development
outcome. The ICR is technical, analytical, and internally consistent. The lessons learned are well-connected to
the implementation experience, offering valuable insights for similar future operations.

However, the ICR has the following shortcomings:


                                                                                                   Page 21 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      HOA: Support to FD Impacts (P152822)



(i) There are concerns regarding the efficacy analysis methodology and the level of technical details. While the
OPCS guidelines require the use of formally approved targets in efficacy analysis, the ICR erroneously used
the unapproved targets from the latest Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR) dated February 23,
2024, four months prior to Project closure. Note that in this Project, the RF targets were continuously adjusted
in ISRs, but approved changes in targets occurred only twice: in relation to Restructurings 2 and 3 (the Uganda
AF of April 2019 and the Djibouti AF of May 2020). These changes were clarified in the Project Paper for
Restructuring 9, which corrected previous typos, inconsistencies, and omissions in the presentations of the
target increases. The ICR’s use of ISR targets led to a skewed analysis, obscuring the low achievement of
some PDO3 environmental management targets, specifically for area provided with irrigation and drainage,
newly irrigated area, and workdays.

(ii) The administrative efficiency discussion was absent from the ICR’s Efficiency section.

On balance, considering the wealth of technical information and the analytical value-added the ICR provides,
and despite the shortcomings in the efficacy analysis, the Quality of ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                   Page 22 of 22
