     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



                                                                              Report Number : ICRR0024306

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Program Name
 P163760                                   RMPBEE Program

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Serbia                                    Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)           Total Program Cost (USD)
                                                                                             91,770,020.18

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 02-Nov-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                    0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                0.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan               Vibecke Dixon               Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in the
   Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 10) is:

   " To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure by strengthening
   government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency ".



                                                                                               Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



   As the program encompassed activities in the transport and energy sectors, the PDO is assessed in this
   Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR) as follows:

   PDO 1: To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure (road sector) by
   strengthening government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency.

   PDO 2: To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure (energy sector) by
   strengthening government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  23-Dec-2023

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The program consisted of the following activities (LA, page 5):

   One: The transport sector. This component was to support the Government: (a) in maintaining 8,000
   kilometers (Km) of national roads in the Government's road maintenance program (1,000 km using
   traditional maintenance contracts, 2,000 km using enhanced maintenance contracts and 5,000 km using
   performance-based maintenance contracts (PBMC) for the 3rd year), managed by the Public Enterprise
   "Roads of Serbia" (PERS) over the 2017 - 2020 period: and (b) supporting PERS in implementing PBMC for
   maintaining national roads through: (i) a service level agreement (SLA) between the Ministry of
   Construction, Transport and Infrastructure (MTCI) and PERS (Under this long-term agreement between the
   Government and PERS, PERS was to be given details about the level of fiscal support the government
   would provide PERS for maintaining roads with incentives for better performance); (ii) supporting PERS in
   developing a three year performance-based maintenance plan for 2017-2021; and (c) supporting PERS in
   developing an asset management plan integrating management, financial, economic and engineering
   practices.

   Two: The energy sector. This component aimed to support renovation of 234 buildings, identified as
   municipal priorities and approved by the government under the program for reconstruction and improvement
   of state-owned public facilities in the Education, Health Care and Social Protection sectors.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



   Program cost. The estimated program cost at appraisal was US$763.95 million. The actual cost was
   US$832.90 million.

   Financing. The program was financed by an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
   (IBRD) loan of US$118.60 million. The amount disbursed was US$91.77 million.

   Non- World Bank (WB) contribution. The government was expected to contribute US$129.40
   million. Their actual contribution was US$175.40 million. Local sources of Serbia (through toll revenues of
   PERS) were expected to contribute US$515.95 million. Their contribution was US$565.73 million.

   Dates. The program was approved and became effective on November 2, 2017 and scheduled to close on
   December 3, 2021. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held on November 14, 2022. The program closed two
   years behind schedule on December 31, 2023.

   Changes. The project was restructured twice during implementation.

   The following change was made through the first project restructuring on December 22, 2023.

         The closing date was extended by two years to December 31, 2023, to account for the delays in the
          initial years and bottlenecks in the initial years of implementation, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
          The PDO, the project scope and the targets of the indicators were however unchanged.

   The main change made through the second project restructuring on December 26, 2023.

         Targets of five of the ten disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) had not been achieved, due to the
          delays in the initial years. Therefore, the project scope was reduced, with targets for several
          indicators in the energy sector reduced to reflect the reduced project scope.

   Split rating. The project scope was not changed in the transport sector. However, the targets in the energy
   sector were significantly reduced with the second restructuring when US$71.79 of the loan was disbursed.
   This review uses a split rating of objective for determining the overall outcome rating.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Country context. Serbia's public sector performance was ranked 132nd by the 2016-2017 Global
  Competitiveness Report, worse than its overall ranking of 94 in the report. Serbia ranked low in the
  government's procurement of advanced technology. When this project was under preparation, Serbia had
  made substantial progress towards its entry to the European Union (EU). The prospects for EU accession
  provided an impetus to the government for public sector reforms.




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RMPBEE Program (P163760)



Road sector context. Limited use of modern technology had contributed to deterioration of road quality. The
challenges faced by the sector were: (i) a maintenance backlog; (ii) a need for modernizing management for
preserving assets; (iii) a need for strengthening institutional arrangements; and (iv) a need for increasing the
resilience of the network.

Energy sector context. Serbia is an energy and carbon intensive country. The building sector (residential,
public and commercial) dominated energy consumption, representing 45% of final energy use. The carbon
intensity of Serbia was over 2.5 times that of the European Union (EU) - 28 average. (EU - 28 is an
abbreviation of EU, which consists of a group of 28 countries that operate as an economic block). Much of
these inefficiencies were due to the chronic lack of investment, aging building stock with insufficient thermal
insulation elements and inefficient technologies.

Government strategy at appraisal. The PDO was well-aligned with the government's priorities at
appraisal. To address the maintenance backlog, the Government embarked on an International Finance
Institutions (IFs) supported National Road Rehabilitation and Safety Program. In the energy sector, the
Government adopted the Law on Efficient Use of Energy in 2013 to provide the legal foundation for energy
efficiency measures. The relevance of the PDO was strengthened by the government adopting new laws and
sector strategies during implementation: These included: (i) The Laws on Renewable Energy Sources and
Energy Efficiency and the Rational Use of Energy in April 2021; (ii) The Long-Term building renovation
strategy in February 2022; and (iii) The integrated National Energy and Climate Plan in 2024 that set specific
energy efficiency targets for public buildings by 2030.

World Bank (WB) strategy at appraisal. The PDO was well-aligned with the WB's Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for 2016 - 2020. The CPF identified infrastructure as one of the six areas for engagement
under Focus Area One: Economic Governance and the role of the state. The CPF articulated the need for
reforms aimed at improving efficiency in public spending, better maintenance of infrastructure and
prioritization of public investments.

Current WB strategy. The PDO continues to be relevant to the challenges identified by the 2020
Systematic Country Diagnostic Update (SCD) and is consistent with the objectives of the CPF for
2022 - 2026. The SCD update noted that government effectiveness, efficiency and accountability are critical
and that continued efforts are needed to improve service delivery and make the transition to greener
growth. The CPF for 2022 - 2025 focused on areas where institutional strengthening needed to be
consolidated based on the experience of the previous CPF. This included greener and more resilient growth
(Objective 1,2: Greener investments and transition to a low-carbon and resilient economy) and the need to
address the emerging priorities stemming from the impact of the global pandemic (building back better).

Previous Bank experience. The Bank has been heavily engaged in infrastructure development in Serbia
through investment support to national road construction and support to energy sector reforms. On the
transport side, the Bank supported technical work to mainstream Performance Based Maintenance
Contracting (PBMC) in the road sector under the Transport Sector Rehabilitation Project (2004 - 2012). The
Bank supported the Government in introducing DLIs in the Road Rehabilitation and Safety Project (2013 -
2020). Alongside these projects, the Bank financed the Corridor X Highway Project (2010 - 2019) to
complement the government's efforts to improve the quality of roads. Previous Bank engagements in the
transport sector indicated that although Serbia had a well-defined roads maintenance program, the
portfolio was underfunded, contracts were not tendered competitively and there was no programmatic
results-oriented approach to maintenance.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              RMPBEE Program (P163760)



                       In the energy sector, the Bank financed the Serbia Energy Efficiency Project (2004 - 2013), which included
                       renovation of 82 public buildings and supported energy efficiency. This project however, did not achieve
                       significant scale (renovating less than a percent of the public building stock) and not sustainable, as no
                       further government spending was made available to support new investments. This Program for Results
                       (PforR) operation aimed at continuing WB's involvement in the infrastructure sector by improving the
                       management of the transport and energy sectors, while seeking concurrent enhancements in the public
                       institutional capacity and long-term sustainability of the sectors. The priority areas selected were consistent
                       with the standards that Serbia had to meet for joining the EU in the energy and transport sectors.

                       Relevance of the PforR lending instrument. The Bank deemed the PforR as appropriate for the following
                       reasons: (i) the operation supported ongoing government infrastructure programs, as opposed to
                       implementing a few large investments: (ii) the Bank experience was expected to add value to improve the
                       efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability of the program; (iii) The program results were measurable and
                       aligned with Serbia's energy savings and greenhouse gas emission reduction targets and commercialization
                       of road maintenance practices: (iv) Given the needs for public buildings and limited scope offered by a
                       traditional Investment Policy Financing (IPF) operation, a PforR was expected to have the best opportunity
                       for scale, as this was a national program; and (v) Serbia had previous experience with the lending
                       instrument.

                       That said, the operation which was a multi-sectoral program, encompassing energy efficiency and road
                       maintenance objectives was overly ambitious. The unrelated scope and lack of synergy between the sectors
                       was challenging, given the weak implementation capacities. This was particularly so since the Bank financing
                       for this operation did not specifically earmark funds for technical assistance (TA) activities for providing
                       implementation support.

                       Relevance of the PDO. The PDO continues to be relevant for the Government strategy and the current WB
                       strategy for Serbia. However, the PDO with activities in the road and energy sectors were however ambitious
                       in the country context. Therefore, the relevance of the PDO is rated as substantial. The PforR comprised
                       ten disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) (six for transport and four for energy efficiency) (discussed below).


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                         New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                The Public Enterprise Roads of Serbia (PERS) completes maintenance of 1,000 km of the national road network
                (using the traditional approach).

                Rationale
                Under this approach, PERS had to ensure that no potholes remain open, there are no edge breaks between
                the pavement and shoulders and that the horizontal markings and vertical signs are installed to comply with


                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RMPBEE Program (P163760)



critical road safety requirements. This indicator was pertinent to the PDO. However, this indicator was modest
in terms of the level of ambition, as the traditional road maintenance are routine practices for PERS.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
Service Level Agreement (SLA) between PERS and the Ministry of Communication, Transport and
Infrastructure (MCTI) is signed.

Rationale
SLA between MCTI and PERS, articulating the terms and support the MCTI would provide to PERS in return
for meeting road maintenance service levels for a specified time (typically three to five years), was
appropriate as it signaled the MCTI's intention to ensure sustainability of the road maintenance program. This
indicator was verifiable.



Rating
High

DLI 3
DLI
PERS adopts its three year Performance based Maintenance Plan.

Rationale
Adoption of the three year performance based road maintenance plan, following the signing of the SLA
between the MCTI and PERS was in line with the PERS Long and Medium-Term business strategies for
2017-2021. Such a plan was likely to enhance the institutional capacity for maintaining the national road
network in the medium term.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
PERS completes maintenance of 2,000 km of the national road network using enhanced road maintenance
contract.

Rationale



                                                                                                 Page 6 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RMPBEE Program (P163760)



This DLI was linked to maintenance of 2,000 km of the road network using enhanced road maintenance
contract in the second year of program implementation. This indicator was not clearly defined and lacked
precision as to what was meant by 'enhanced road maintenance contract'.



Rating
Modest

DLI 5
DLI
PERS adopts the asset management plan.

Rationale
This DLI was linked to the adoption of an asset management plan integrating management, financial,
economic and engineering practices. Such a plan would likely help is designing similar projects in future and
was consistent with the standards Serbia had to meet for EU entry. This DLI was directly linked to the PDO of
improving the institutional capacity for managing the national road network.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
At least 5,000 km of the national road work managed by PERS is maintained using Performance-based
management contract (PBMC).

Rationale
This DLI was linked to maintaining 5,000 km of the road network using PBMC, following the signing of the
SLA between the MPTI and PERS. The Bank financing for the operation covered the third year and the
financing for the fourth and fifth year would be covered under the terms of SLA agreement between the MPTI
and PERS. This indicator was appropriate as it signaled the government's intention to move towards results-
oriented environment for road maintenance. The indicator although measurable, proved to be ambitious,
given the weak implementation capacity.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
The Management Office of the Public Investment Management Office (PIMO) adopts and publishes a Program
Operation Manual (POM) for the energy sector.


                                                                                                Page 7 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RMPBEE Program (P163760)




Rationale
The POM was expected to aid in setting up energy efficiency standards and procedures that were aligned
with the legal framework and best practices. This could be useful for designing similar projects in the energy
sector.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 8
DLI
The Government issues and publishes in the Official Gazette a decision on the PIMO's adoption of a medium-
term national plan for renovation of public buildings.

Rationale
The medium-term plan for renovating public buildings was likely to help in institutionalizing a strategic
roadmap for scaling up energy efficiency investments. This indicator was appropriate for improving the
institutional capacity for managing the energy sector.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 9
DLI
The PIMO designs and operationalizes a consolidated Program Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system.

Rationale
While the medium-term plan for the energy sector would help in scaling up energy efficiency investments, a
consolidated Program M&E system would likely help in complementing this effort by building the institutional
capacity for implementing and managing energy projects and likely to help in the accountability of energy
sector investments.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 10
DLI
Renovation of 234 public buildings that (a) had acceptance reports signed and issued; (ii) had acceptance
reports that showed class C energy performance or are two classes higher than the class of the respective pre-
renovated building; and (iii) had paid all the renovation invoices.

Rationale

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 19
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  RMPBEE Program (P163760)



                  This DLI was linked to renovating 234 public buildings identified by the municipalities as priorities and
                  approved by the Government. This DLI was linked to concrete results and likely to help in enhancing the
                  energy efficiency of public buildings and in decreasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (GHC). The results
                  could be verified.



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  The program included specific DLIs to foster institutional development and sustain the reforms envisaged
                  under the government program. On the transport side DLIs 2, 3, 4, and 5 focused on the institutional
                  framework needed to operate road maintenance on a performance-based approach to road maintenance.
                  DLIs 7,8 and 9 aimed at developing the required planning and tools for the energy sector. For the most part,
                  DLIs monitored critical milestones for achieving the PDO.

                  However, there were some shortcomings. One DLI was not defined properly and some DLIs were not set at
                  the right level of ambition. And more important, some DLIs were interlocked, affecting progress in achieving
                  the Program objectives. By design, some DLIs were contingent upon others, that created a cascading effect
                  that impacted the achievement of results. For instance, implementing PBMCs were contingent upon the
                  signing of the SLA between MCTI and PERS and delays in signing the SLA affected the implementation and
                  associated disbursements.

                  Overall relevance is rated substantial, based on the rating for relevance of the objective and relevance of the
                  DLIs.



                  Rating
                  Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure (road sector) by strengthening
                       government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency.

                       Rationale

                                                                                                                       Page 9 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RMPBEE Program (P163760)



Theory of change. The outputs such as maintaining 8,000 km of national roads (1,000 km using traditional
maintenance, 2,000 km using enhanced maintenance and 5,000 km using PBMC) were likely to aid in
strengthening the government capacity for maintaining national roads. The outputs of activities such as
adopting a SLA between the MCTI and PERS, adopting a three year performance-based maintenance plan
and a road asset management plan were likely to contribute to improving the government capacity for
managing the sustainability of the road network. The causal links between activities, outputs and intended
outcomes were clear and the outcomes were monitorable.

The outcomes were predicated on these assumptions: (i) PERS toll revenues remains stable; and (ii) PERS
has the capacity to implement PMBC. These assumptions proved to be unrealistic as the toll revenues of
PERS did not remain stable and PERS lacked the capacity to implement PMBC.

Outputs.

      15,274 km of the road survey was completed, exceeding the target of 14,894 km.
      The Board of PERS adopted a three year business plan in December 25, 2023 as originally targeted.
      An asset management plan was adopted by PERS in December 2023 to utilize PERS physical assets
       in a cost-effective way by integrating evidence-based data in its management, financial, economic and
       engineering practices, as originally targeted.
      3,000 km of the national roads were maintained, far short of the target of 8,000 km. This included
       1,000 km under the traditional maintenance approach and 2,000 under the enhanced maintenance
       approach. As the PBMC was not implemented, the program was not able to achieve the original target
       of 5,000 km of roads under the PBMC.
      The road safety inspection was not carried out and road safety measures were not implemented as
       target, as the PBMC was not implemented.
      A rule requiring environmental compliance reports as a condition for payments to contractors were not
       completed.

Outcomes.

The outputs were expected to contribute to two desired outcomes: (i) enhanced motorist satisfaction through
better pavement condition; and (ii) The SLA between the MCTI and PERS is implemented.

      Enhanced motorist satisfaction through better pavement condition was not measured and ultimately
       not achieved, as the Program failed to rehabilitate 5,000 km of the road network using PBMC.
      Implementation of the SLA was not achieved, although the SLA was signed on December 20, 2023. At
       the time of Program closure, several requirements outlined in the SLA, including the allocation of a
       dedicated budget, had not been met.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest, as the Program fell short of achieving the PDO indicator targets.



Rating
Modest



                                                                                                Page 10 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RMPBEE Program (P163760)




OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure (road sector) by strengthening
government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency.

Revised Rationale
Same as above since there was no revision to the original targets.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO 2: To improve the management and sustainability of select public infrastructure (energy sector) by
strengthening government capacity and systems, upgrading assets and increasing expenditure efficiency.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs such as renovating public buildings to achieve class C energy performance
level were likely to aid in strengthening the government capacity for meeting the energy efficiency standards
in the sector. The outputs of activities such as adopting a program operations manual, developing and
adopting a medium-term national plan for renovating public buildings, implementing a comprehensive
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, were likely to contribute to the intended objective of improving the
government capacity for managing the sustainability of the energy sector. The causal links between activities,
outputs and intended outcomes were clear and the outcomes were monitorable.

The outcomes were predicated on these assumptions: (i) There is strong political will to support medium-term
building initiatives. and (ii) Building renovation costs stay predictable during implementation. These
assumptions proved to be unrealistic in the face of wavering political will and cost overruns for renovating
public buildings which resulted in significant reduction in the number of buildings that were renovated.

Outputs.

      293 bidding documents (including technical designs) were completed and approved, exceeding the
       original target of 234.
      Government adopted a Long-Term Building Renovation Strategy as originally targeted.
      The PIMO designed and implemented a consolidated Program M&E system as originally targeted.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to have the following outcomes: (i) Projected lifetime energy
savings due to renovation of old buildings; (ii) The number of renovated buildings that met Class C (or 2
classes higher) energy performance certificates with final acceptance report; (iii) reduce carbon dioxide
emissions from energy saved in renovated building; and (iv) Number of direct project beneficiaries.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   RMPBEE Program (P163760)




      1,145,119 MWh of lifetime energy savings were realized when the operation finished, exceeding the
         original and revised targets of 1,100,000 MWh, respectively. (The original target for this indicator was
         revised downwards, with the project restructuring). However, the original target was exceeded when
         the project closed. The ICR (para 35) acknowledges that although lifetime energy savings exceeded
         the original target despite the reduction in the number of renovated buildings, suggests that the
         original target was underestimated.
        182 buildings were renovated that met Class C standards, short of the original target of 234.
        There was reduction of 18,773 tons of Carbon dioxide emissions from energy saved in renovated
         buildings, slightly short of the original target of 19,000.
        3,674,987 people directly benefitted from Program activities, exceeding the original target of
         1,381,000. 52.5% of the beneficiaries were females, exceeding the target of 51%.
        85.8% of the stakeholders expressed satisfaction when the project closed, short of the original target
         of 98%.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as modest before project restructuring, as three of the original targets were not
realized and the original target for one indicator may have been underestimated.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised. However, the targets in the energy sector were reduced with the restructuring of
the project.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

as described above.

Outcomes.

      1,145,119 MWh of lifetime energy savings were realized when the operation, exceeding the revised
         target of 858,000 MWh.
        182 buildings were renovated that met Class C standards as per the revised target.
        There was reduction of 18,773 tons of Carbon dioxide emissions from energy saved in renovated
         buildings, exceeding the revised target of 14,820.
        3,674,987 people directly benefitted from Program activities, exceeding the revised target of
         1,077,181. 52.5% of the beneficiaries were females, exceeding the target of 51%.
        85.8% of the stakeholders expressed satisfaction when the project closed, short of the original target
         of 98%.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RMPBEE Program (P163760)



  Efficacy of the PDO is rated as substantial after project restructuring, as the revised targets were realized for
  the most part.



  Revised Rating
  Substantial




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The achievement of the PDO in the road sector and energy was modest before restructuring. Thus, the
 overall efficacy is rated as Modest.



 Rating                                                     Primary Reason
 Modest                                                     Low achievement

 OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
 Revised Rationale
 The achievement of the PDO in the road sector was modes after restructuring. The achievements of the PDO
 in the energy sector was substantial after restructuring, as the revised targets were realized for the most part.
 Overall, the efficacy is rated as Modest given the significant shortcomings in achievement of the first aspect of
 the PDO.



 Revised Rating                                             Primary Reason
 Modest                                                     Low achievement


5. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government and Bank strategy is rated as Substantial. Efficacy of PDO 1 was
rated as modest, given the low achievement, both before and after restructuring. Efficacy of PDO 1 was modest
before restructuring and substantial after restructuring, as the revised targets were realized. Taking the share of
disbursement before and after restructuring into account, the overall outcome is Moderately Unsatisfactory.

Table: Overall Outcome Rating Using Split Rating Methodology

                                                    Original PDO and
                                                                               Revised PDO and targets
                                                         targets
             Relevance of PDO                                              Substantial
           PDO 1. Road Maintenance                       Modest                           Modest

                                                                                                     Page 13 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      RMPBEE Program (P163760)



          PDO 2. Energy Efficiency                       Modest                      Substantial
           Overall Efficacy (PDO)                        Modest                        Modest
                                                       Moderately
               Outcome ratings                                                Moderately Unsatisfactory
                                                      Unsatisfactory
  Numerical value of the outcome ratings                    3                              3
         Share of disbursement                            0.74                           0.26
   Weighted value of the outcome rating                   2.22                           0.78
          Final Outcome rating                                   3 = Moderately Unsatisfactory
    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Unsatisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Political commitment. There is risk to the sustainability of development outcomes, particularly in the road
sector. Although the SLA between the MCTI and PERS was signed before the operation closed, there is
dedicated source of government funding yet for road maintenance activities. Given that strong political
commitments in terms of allocation of resources in required for PBMC, frequent Government changes and
high staff turnover could undermine the technical gains achieved through Program implementation.

Financial risk. There is risk that political commitment to sensitive reforms, notably on the green transition
front may waver is the face of budget constraints.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this operation based on the experiences from previous Bank-financed transport
  projects in Serbia and from PforR operations financed by the Bank in Nepal and Uruguay. The analytical
  underpinnings of the operation were sound. The Bank conducted an economic analysis for the operation
  based on a sample of the road network and public buildings. The analysis concluded that the economic
  benefits far outweighed the costs.

  The implementation arrangements were appropriate. For the transport sector, PERS, the entity
  responsible for managing the road network, was in charge day-to-day road sector work. For the energy
  sector, the Public Investment Management Office (PIMO) was responsible for program coordination
  among the involved government entities. Both PERS and PIMO had previous experience in implementing
  similar programs and had worked with the WB. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and
  fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  There were significant shortcomings at the Quality-at-Entry: One, the multi-sector operation was overly
  ambitious. The unrelated scope and lack of synergy between sectors was challenging in the country
  context, with weak implementation capacities. Moreover, the project design did not include TA activities
  to improve the implementation capacities. Two, although the operation identified risks associated with

                                                                                                     Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



  technical design and implementation capacities, the mitigation measures were inadequate. This was
  particularly so as the Bank financing for this operation did not earmark funds for TA activities to
  support implementation. Three, the design included advance payments to facilitate disbursements.
  However, the advance payments were not earmarked to PERS. This affected the PERS cash flow and
  their ability to deliver the agreed results for some DLIs. Four, there were cost overruns, with the costs of
  renovating buildings higher during the first phase of Program implementation due to the rise in
  construction cost. The cost escalations placed a burden on PIMO's budgetary allocation (as the Bank
  contribution to the Program was fixed). The cost overruns undermined the effectiveness of the original
  plan. and five, there were M&E design shortcomings (discussed in section 8).

  Due to the shortcomings mentioned above, Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as Moderately
  Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Eleven Implementation Status and Results (ISR) reports were conducted over the project lifetime, implying
 twice a year supervision missions. The ICR (para 77) noted that the team's familiarity with the client
 contributed to a stable working relations. The Bank also made the judicious decision to restructure the
 project twice, in the face of realities on the ground. The support provided by the team aided in fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10).

 There were significant supervision shortcomings. The ICR (para 76) noted that although several missions
 were conducted during Program implementation, the number of Aide Memoires (AM) and Management
 Letters (MLs) documenting these missions was relatively low. The Energy and Transport had co-Task
 Team Leaders (TTLs) to ensure sector-specific technical support and supervision. However, there
 were frequent staff turnovers and each of the co TTLs was replaced three times from the preparation
 phase to the final year. Moreover, none of the co TTLs was placed in Serbia, which hindered the Bank's
 ability to proactively push for reforms. There were delays in holding the Mid-Term Review (MTR), with the
 MTR conducted just a year before project closure. The delays in holding the MTR on time undermined the
 Bank supervision team to take appropriate corrective actions, particularly in the road sector.

 Bank performance during supervision was rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately unsatisfactory due to the significant shortcomings both at
 Quality-at-Entry and during supervision.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



  Moderately Unsatisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 There were conceptualization issues in the results framework, which compromised the final assessment of
 the results achieved by the Program. Some indicators were not clearly articulated. For instance, while both
 DLI 2 and PDO indicator focused on the SLA, the DLI was linked to "signing of the SLA" while the PDO
 indicator measured "implemented SLA". As a result indicator 2 was not achieved, although the related DLI
 was completed (the SLA was signed by project closure). The indicator pertaining to 'enhanced road
 maintenance" was not defined. The results indicator included some indicators that were not easy to
 measure such as the PDO pertaining to enhanced motorist satisfaction.



b. M&E Implementation
  The deficiencies in M&E design were not rectified during implementation. The ICR (para 58) noted that
  the M&E implementation was not consistent across sectors. While annual progress reports were
  submitted by PIMO consistently, the lack of reporting from PERS hindered overall Program
  monitoring. M&E implementation was constrained by data limitations. On the transport side, it was not
  possible to measure some of the results indicators such as motorist satisfaction. On the energy side, the
  discontinuation of the social survey after 2020, made it difficult to assess progress in the energy sector.



c. M&E Utilization
  While the progress reports were a useful information source to support M&E of implementation progress,
  they were not systematically used to inform Program management and decision-making. The ICR (para
  61) acknowledges that while most implementation challenges were clearly noted, issues were not
  always promptly addressed. This resulted in cumulative delays that required higher level attention in the
  final year of implementation.

  Overall M&E is rated as Modest, due to shortcomings in design, implementation and utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental and Social Risks. The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) that was
   conducted at appraisal, concluded that the Program would have long-term positive and social impacts, while
   the negative impacts would be short-term and linked to the rehabilitation works. On the social side, the
   negative impacts were expected to be site-specific (such as occupational, health and safety risks). On the

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    RMPBEE Program (P163760)



  environmental side, the risks related to the negative impacts of construction works, including noise/dust
  emissions and waste management related risks.

  The performance of the environmental and social systems of the Program was rated as Moderately
  Satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 63). Most Project-Affected Persons (PAP) actions were
  implemented. However, the Program failed to conduct the annual social survey on the energy efficiency
  component, which was discontinued following the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. On the transport
  side, the action related to introducing environmental compliance as an obligatory precondition for making
  payments to contractors was not achieved (ICR, para 65).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management (FM). The Bank conducted an assessment of the FM systems of the Program.
  The assessment concluded that the systems were adequate for the use of Program funds (PAD, para
  109).

  FM was satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 70). The ICR also noted that budgeting was
  credible, and levels of expenditure were sufficient and exceeded the amounts disbursed against the DLS.
  Audit reports were received in a timely fashion and these reports did not raise any issues. One weakness
  during implementation was that the implementing agencies did not deliver in-year financial reports to the
  Bank in a regular manner (a legal covenant), necessitating the Bank team to invest additional efforts for
  obtaining the reports.

  Procurement. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the implementing agencies at appraisal.
  The assessment concluded that Serbia's procurement systems for the Program were adequate for
  implementing the program (PAD, para 118).

  Procurement performance was assessed as moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 71). A new public Public
  Procurement Law enacted in 2020 put in place an electronic system for bid submissions. Restrictions on
  the use of public funds imposed by the Ministry of Finance in the same year caused delays in procurement
  processes, particularly affecting civil works.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
  Not applicable.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     RMPBEE Program (P163760)



10. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Outcome
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
                                 Moderately            Moderately
Bank Performance
                                 Unsatisfactory        Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                   Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                   ---                   Substantial


11. Lessons

The ICR draws the following two main lessons from the experience of implementing this PforR
operation, with some adaptation of language.

1. Allocation of Bank funds for Technical Assistance (TA) may raise the potential for success
of PforR operations. This program relied heavily on the government's continued ownership and
political commitment to the reform agenda. However, circumstances evolved rapidly and
opportunities that were available at appraisal became limited during implementation. Lack of
dedicated funds for TA hindered the capacity of the Program to adapt to these changes. The lesson
is that TA activities may be especially helpful for PforR operation, especially in operations involving
ambitious multi-sector operations.

2. Linking Program disbursements to the dedicated account of the implementing institutions
can help in PforR operations. Although the design of this operation had facilities for advance
payments to move the reforms forward, disbursements were not earmarked to the implementing
agencies, which resulted in liquidity constraints and disincentives for the timely delivery of activities.
This ultimately affected the achievement of agreed targets. The lesson is that since PforR operations
rely heavily on financial incentives to drive results, ensuring that disbursements remain closely tied
to the agencies that are in charge of Program implementation, PforR can better align incentives and
results.

3, A careful consideration of the links between activities may help in reducing
implementation challenges on the ground. This project encompassed energy efficiency and road
maintenance activities. The largely unrelated scope of the activities posed significant challenges
during preparation, as the activities seemed more like separate operations rather than
complementary elements of a cohesive program. The lack of synergy made it difficult to develop a
focused PDO, without being overly broad and to create a unified results framework that effectively
addressed the objectives of both sectors.



12. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                                      Page 18 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       RMPBEE Program (P163760)



  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text clearly shows the causal links
between the activities, outputs and intended outcomes. The theory of change explicitly states the assumptions
underlying the operation. The ICR provides adequate evidence to assess the Program's outcomes. The ICR
draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of implementing this operation. Overall, the quality of the
ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 19
