     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024149

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P124268                                    ERKP

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pakistan                                   Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-99175,TF-A4251                          30-Jun-2020                                         39,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 22-Aug-2011                                30-Jun-2022

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           39,000,000.00                                    39,000,000.00

 Revised Commitment                            39,000,000.00                                    39,000,000.00

 Actual                                        39,000,000.00                                    39,000,000.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz            Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) Grant Agreement (p.4) dated October 11, 2011, and the
   Emergency Project Paper (p.10) the project development objective (PDO) was “to support the Government of
   Pakistan in the economic recovery and revitalization of the crisis affected areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP)
   province and Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), by creating sustainable employment opportunities
   through rehabilitation of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), investment mobilization, and institutional
   capacity building”.


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ERKP (P124268)



The PDO was revised on March 24, 2017, for the Additional Financing (AF) and restructuring as “to support
the Government of Pakistan in creating sustainable employment opportunities, generating private sector
investment, and laying the foundations for the future development of selected economic sectors in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and Federally Administered Tribal Areas”. It was further streamlined at the last restructuring in
June 2020 and the final PDO was “‘to support the Government of Pakistan in creating sustainable
employment opportunities and developing the selected economic sectors in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province”.

Almost all indicator targets were increased with the Additional Financing. However, the PDO formulation was
revised twice, with some significant changes clarified in the table below:

Original Objectives                 1st revised objectives            2nd revised objectives
to support the Government of
Pakistan in the economic recovery
and revitalization of the crisis
                                    to support the Government of      to support the Government
affected areas of Khyber
                                    Pakistan                          of Pakistan
Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province and
Federally Administered Tribal Areas
(FATA)
1 by creating sustainable
                                                                      1 in creating sustainable
employment opportunities through 1 in creating sustainable
                                                                      employment opportunities,
rehabilitation of Small and Medium employment opportunities,
                                                                      and
Enterprises (SMEs),
                                    2 generating private sector
2 Investment mobilization, and                                        2 dropped
                                    investment, and
3 Institutional capacity building   3 dropped                         3 dropped
                                     4 (new) laying the foundations
                                    for the future development of     4 (revised) developing the
                                    selected economic sectors in      selected economic sectors
                                    Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and            in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
                                    Federally Administered Tribal     province
                                    Areas



These revisions to the PDO formulations trigger a double split rating, and the objectives to be assessed in this
ICRR are thus the following:

Original objectives:

To support the Government of Pakistan in the economic recovery and revitalization of the crisis affected areas
of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province and Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA)

    1. By creating sustainable employment opportunities through rehabilitation of Small and Medium
       Enterprises (SMEs),
    2. By investment mobilization, and
    3. By institutional capacity building.


                                                                                                   Page 2 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



   1st revision of the objectives:

   To support the Government of Pakistan

         1.   In creating sustainable employment opportunities (not significantly changed).
         2.   In generating private sector investment (wording slightly revised), and
         3.   (Dropped)
         4.   Laying the foundations for the future development of selected economic sectors in KP and FATA

   2nd revision of the objectives:

   To support the Government of Pakistan

         1.   In creating sustainable employment opportunities (remains the same)
         2.   (Dropped)
         3.   (Dropped)
         4.   (revised) In developing selected economic sectors in KP province



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  24-Mar-2017

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The Economic Revitalization of KP and FATA (ERKF) Project originally consisted of three components:

   1. SME Development. (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$14 million; Revised cost with US$ 11.60 million
   AF: US$25.60 million; Revised cost at the fifth restructuring: US$22.60 million; Actual Cost at Closing:
   US$22.60 million) This component was to provide direct support to the crisis-affected SMEs in KP and
   FATA, through a matching grants (MG) program that was to be managed and administered by the KP office
   of the Small and Medium Enterprise Development Authority (SMEDA). The SME Development component
   was to initially focus on all sectors and SMEs in the crisis-affected areas identified in the Post Crisis Needs
   Assessment (PCNA) Report. The component had three sub-components: 1.1 Rehabilitation support: This
   sub-component was to provide direct support specifically to the SMEs which had to shut down their
   business or cease to operate efficiently due to unfavorable conditions in the target region. The grants
   provided were to be used as working capital, for reconstruction of basic infrastructure, acquiring/repairing
   machinery and equipment for productive activities. 1.2 Up-gradation Support: This support was to be
   provided to eligible individual SMEs for projects and up-gradation, as well as to a group of SMEs for cluster

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ERKP (P124268)



development programs. The grants were to be used for both capital investment and working capital. 1.3
Capacity Building and Business Development Support: This subcomponent was to support
procurement of business development services (BDS) and capacity building of SMEs through service
providers including the International Finance Corporation (IFC)’s Business Edge (BE) Program.

2. Attracting Investment from the Diaspora. (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$2 million; Revised cost at
the first restructuring: US$1.70 million; Revised cost at the third restructuring: US$0.80 million; Actual Cost
at Closing: US$0.80 million) This component was to provide financial and technical support to the
governments of KP and FATA for attracting investment from Diaspora and immigrant workers with an
objective to generate economic activities and link the two economies to domestic and international markets.
The activities under this component were to include i) Preparation of a Pre-Feasibility Study for a
Private/Public Sector Bond for SMEs that would establish the need, justification, mechanics, and structure
of an appropriate financial instrument with the intent to encourage investment from overseas Pakistanis;
and (ii) Preparation of an Outreach Program for Mobilizing Diaspora Investment with a focus on KP and
erstwhile FATA. These activities were to complement the SME Development component of the Project.

3. Project Management and Capacity Building Support. (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$4 million;
Revised cost at the first restructuring: US$4.30 million; Revised cost at the third restructuring: US$5.20
million; Revised Cost with US$3.40 million AF: US$8.60 million; Revised cost at the fifth restructuring:
US$9.35 million; Actual Cost at Closing: US$9.35 million) With an aim to create favorable conditions and
attract investments in KP and FATA, this component was to provide support for i) Capacity building of
governments of KP and FATA; (ii) the development of a Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) mechanism to
promote reforms; (iii) Investment promotion; and (iv) Implementation support.

Revised Components:

The AF and the fourth restructuring of 2017:

      Upscaling of Component 1: The AF enabled upscaling the activities addressing the established
       demand under Component 1 but also to cater for the areas in the erstwhile FATA that were not
       accessible during the original period due to ongoing military operations to clear the area from
       militants. Accordingly, the total cost of this component was increased from US$14 million to
       US$25.60 million. Under the original grant, this component also had a subcomponent on the BDS.
       Under the AF, beneficiaries were to be able to direct a portion of rehabilitation and upgradation MGs
       for seeking BDS from the private sector, if required. The component was not to support land
       acquisition, as the implementation of the MGs did not involve construction of new units or physical
       extension of the existing units.
      Introduction of a new component: Component 4 (Supporting the Competitive Sectors)
       (Estimated Cost at Appraisal: US$4 million; Revised cost at the fifth restructuring: US$6.25 million;
       Actual Cost at Closing: US$6.25 million) To build on the success of the first phase of the ERKF
       project and to respond to client demand for support in specific sectors, this component was to
       encourage economic growth by supporting selected economic sectors in KP and FATA. While
       Component 1 was to address the immediate financial constraints of the existing crisis-affected
       SMEs, this component was to support the identification of scalable pilots, introduce information
       management technology, and encourage new entrepreneurs. In KP, the AF was to support tourism
       sector through the activities of implementation of tourism management system, tourism sector




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ERKP (P124268)



         survey and renovation of Tourist Information Centers. In FATA, dry fruit and marble value chains
         were to be supported.

  The fifth restructuring in 2020:

        Component 1: The restructuring was to enable the Project also to serve additional segments of the
         SMEs for immediate job restoration/creation. These included SMEs with a repurposed and/or
         upgraded products and services lines, modes of operation and delivery, needed to contain the
         spread of COVID-19. Accordingly, adjustments in the eligibility criteria for the matching grants were
         introduced.
        Component 4: The component name was revised (Support to Competitive Sectors and Pandemic
         Response) together with the addition of certain activities. After restructuring this component was to
         support select economic sectors in KP, including tourism and agribusiness through, inter alia: (a)
         renovation, repairs and rehabilitation of publicly owned properties such as tourist facilities and
         industrial infrastructure; (b) training, business development services and communication; and (c)
         procurement of essential technology and equipment for enhancing sectors’ competitiveness. In
         addition, support was to be provided to the government of KP to respond to COVID-19 and other
         emergencies.
        Introduction of a new component - Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response
         Component (CERC): This component was added to provide immediate response to an eligible
         crisis or emergency with zero allocation.

  Further details regarding the Restructurings are provided under section 2.e below.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$20 million. An additional financing of USD$19
  million was granted increasing the total project cost to US$39 million. The actual cost at project closing was
  US$39 million. All project funds were disbursed.

  Financing: At appraisal, the Multi Donor Trust Fund (TF-99175) grant amount was estimated at US$20
  million. In March 2017 an additional grant financing (TF-A4251) was granted in the amount of USD$19
  million accordingly the total financing for the project reached US$39 million. By closing, the project
  disbursed all allocated funds.

  Borrower Contribution: Borrower contribution was not foreseen and none was materialized by project
  closing.

  Restructurings: The project underwent five restructurings and one additional financing.

  Restructuring No.1 (June 29, 2015- Level 2): The restructuring extended the project closing date by four
  months from June 30, 2015 to December 12, 2015 to meet strong demand from the SME sector for
  technical assistance. Also, since the originally planned activities under Component 2 were completed, the
  undisbursed US$0.3 million was reallocated from Component 2 to Component 3. As a result, the total cost
  of Component 2 decreased from US$2 million to US$1.7 million whereas the cost for Component 3
  increased from US$4 million to US$4.3 million.


                                                                                                   Page 5 of 27
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ERKP (P124268)



Restructuring No.2 (December 9, 2015- Level 2): The restructuring extended the project closing from
December 12, 2015 to June 30, 2016 to ensure disbursement of the outstanding Project amount of
US$3.66 million in the form of matching grants to the crisis affected SMEs of KP region. It was to enable the
government of KP to address the unmet demand of SME clusters for matching grants, thereby striving to
fully achieve the project intermediate results indicators.

Restructuring No.3 (June 23, 2016- Level 2): This restructuring included a reallocation of US$0.90 million
from Component 2 to Component 3. Since the government of KP could not organize the initially planned
Investment Road Show (IRS) in United Kingdom during May 2016, hence the savings from Component 2
was transferred to Component 3. As a result, total costs of Components 2 and 3 were US$0.8 million and
US$5.20 million respectively. The restructuring extended the project closing date by six months from June
30, 2016 to December 31, 2016 as well to ensure disbursement of the outstanding amounts under the MG
scheme.

Restructuring No.4 (December 20, 2016- Level 2): The restructuring granted three months extension
(from December 31, 2016 to March 31, 2017) to the project closing date to ensure the Project's continuity
while the AF is processed.

Additional Financing and restructuring (March 24, 2017- Level 1): The revisions proposed as part of the
AF was built on the lessons learned from the implementation of the project between 2011 and 2016. These
included changes in the design of Component 1 to ensure greater transparency in the award of MGs. In
addition, the AF was to scale up the ongoing job creation efforts of the ERKF project, primarily through MGs
and also through supporting the value chains which had high potential for creating jobs, such as tourism.
Accordingly, the PDO was revised as “to support the government of Pakistan in creating sustainable
employment opportunities, generating private sector investment, and laying the foundations for the future
development of selected economic sectors in KP and the erstwhile FATA”. The targets of selected
indicators were made more ambitious. Since the objective for capacity building was dropped in the PDO,
the relevant indicators were also dropped. A new indicator (Number of private enterprises using the Tourist
Information Management System -MIS developed under the Project, target value 30) was introduced. The
wording of the first PDO indicator was revised while increasing the target for the share of women owned MG
beneficiary SMEs to 5% from 2-3%. The total end target for MG beneficiaries was also increased from 850
to 2,500. The target value for direct jobs created was increased from 8,000 to 13,800. Also, a new indicator
was added to measure direct jobs created for women with a target value of 315 jobs. The names of the
investment institutions mentioned in the wording of the PDO indicator for operationalization of investment
authorities for KP and FATA were deleted since the names of the institutions kept changing. Lastly a new
component was introduced. Under the new component (Component 4-Competitive sectors) the following
activities were to be implemented: Improving planning systems and information management tools for KP’s
Department of Tourism (DoT), conducting a tourism sector survey, renovation of tourist information centers,
supporting KP’s “System to Assess and Reward Talent” (a business plan competition), conducting feasibility
assessments for Mohmand Marble City and supporting improvement of processing of local pine nuts. The
loan closing date for the AF was set to be June 30, 2020.

Restructuring No.5 (June 26, 2020-Level 2): Under this restructuring in 2020, further changes were made
to the PDO. Following the merger of KP and FATA provinces, the PDO included the reference for KP
province only. In addition, the reference in the PDO to the generating private sector investments and the
relevant indicators in the results framework were removed. Also, the project’s name was revised as
‘Economic Revitalization of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Project’ (ERKP). The PDO indicator for tourism sector
was revised and replaced by a new PDO indicator (the number of tourist facilities and sites supported

                                                                                                Page 6 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



   through the project) since the Tourism Management Information System was already developed and used
   by enterprises at the time of the restructuring. The scope of Component 4 was revised to cover eligible
   emergencies and activities for supporting competitive sectors were clarified. Lastly, the grant closing date
   was extended from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2022, to allow for completion of the expanded activities
   included under the AF and some activities whose implementation was affected by the COVID pandemic in
   2020-2022 in addition to the impacts of security issues and floods.

   Dates: The project was approved on August 22, 2011, and became effective on October 11, 2011. The
   Mid-Term Review was conducted in December 6, 2013. The original project closing date was June 30,
   2015. With the AF the closing date was set as June 13, 2020. During the implementation it was extended by
   2 years (please see section on restructuring above for the reasons of project closing date extensions). The
   project closed on June 30, 2022.

   Reasons for not to undertake split assessment of the project outcome: The ICR review implements a
   double split rating since the PDO and the relevant PDO indicators were revised at the AF and the fifth
   restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
The World Bank Strategy: The project objectives were in line with the World Bank strategy as defined in
the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY2015-19. The CPF for FY2015-19 was extended and
remained in effect by project closing. The CPS focused on the crisis-affected regions of erstwhile FATA,
KP, and Balochistan and Pillar 2 of the CPS focused on private sector development, improving the
conditions for doing business, and investing in disaster and climate resilience. The project’s objective of
creating sustainable employment opportunities in the crisis effective regions as well as development of
selected sectors are thus well aligned with the CPS.

Country Context: The KP-FATA region has been one of the poorest regions of Pakistan. Both areas
lagged behind other provinces across a wide range of social and economic indicators, with a lag even more
pronounced when viewed through a gender lens. Illiteracy levels were as high as 97% for women in FATA
compared to 71% for men; the comparative figures for KP were 32 % for women and 67% for men,
respectively at the time of appraisal (ICR, p.6). The war on terrorism, military operations and also floods
experienced in 2010 further deteriorated the situation resulting in internal migration/displacement, massive
loss of livelihoods as well as significant damage to physical infrastructure. The government of Pakistan
(GoP) requested the World Bank’s (WB) assistance to help respond to the above said emergency situation.
A Damage and Needs Assessment (DNA) (completed with the support of WB and Asian Development
Bank) and a subsequent Post Crisis Needs Assessment (PCNA), supported by the Asian Development
Bank, European Commission (EC), United Nations (UN) and WB, was formally issued in October 2010. The
PDO was designed on the Pillar 2 of the PCNA that recommended creation of employment generating
opportunities in farm and non-farm sectors, development of marketable skills, rehabilitation of enterprises
and improving the investment and business climate for medium to long term economic growth and peace
building in these areas. In this respect, the PDO was well aligned with the country’s priorities since it



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 27
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ERKP (P124268)



               enabled direction of resources towards the economic sectors identified in the growth strategies of KP and
               FATA such as tourism, agribusiness and marble and targeted creation of employment opportunities.

               Previous Sector Experience: The preparation and appraisal of this project relied heavily on the World
               Bank’s international and regional experience of implementing economic revitalization and capacity building
               programs in crisis affected areas. The learning from these programs helped formulate the contents of the
               proposed project (PAD, p. 15). The ERKF was WB’s first jobs and private sector development intervention
               for KP.

               The PDO is substantially relevant in addressing the development problem (economic revitalization of crisis
               affected regions). To achieve economic revitalization, the PDO targeted creation of new jobs and/or
               restoring jobs that have been lost during the crisis through the MG scheme and by facilitating domestic and
               international investments in KP & FATA. Overall, the project objective was well aligned with the World Bank
               strategy and it was appropriately pitched for the development status, capacities, and needs in the country
               as identified in the DNA and PCNA. Based on these assessments, the relevance of objectives is rated
               Substantial.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To support the Government of Pakistan by creating sustainable employment opportunities in Khyber
                             Pakhtunkhwa and in Federally Administered Tribal Areas

                             Rationale
                             KP and FATA have been among the poorest regions in Pakistan heavily impacted by the military
                             occupancies, conflicts, and natural disasters. The region has consistently experienced higher rates of
                             unemployment than the rest of Pakistan. The theory of change suggests that if SMEs and business owners
                             were to be supported financially and technically, sustainable employment opportunities would be
                             developed. The project inputs were to be used to finance the project activities consisting of the following:
                             provision of rehabilitation and upgradation MGs to SMEs, provision of machinery pool grants to SMEs,
                             provision of business development services, training, The activities were expected to lead to the project
                             outputs of an established SME development and support program. These outputs were expected to result in
                             creation of jobs, the SMEs becoming more sustainable through the support provided by the project and some
                             private sector investments were to be generated as intermediate outcomes. In the longer perspective, these
                             would lead to increased investments, generating more private sector employment, contributing to inclusive
                             growth and reducing poverty. Overall, the causal pathways from support financing to expected results
                             (restoring and/or creating jobs) were valid and direct.


                                                                                                                            Page 8 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)



The critical assumptions were that there would be demand for the funds offered through the MG scheme and
the SMEs would be willing to rehabilitate/upgrade their activities to restore and create jobs in the region.

Overall, the theory of change was clear and direct. It can be reasonably expected that the support provided to
the SMEs to build/restore their businesses would result in increased employment opportunities However,
what is meant by “sustainable” employment opportunities was not defined in the PAD or in the ICR. Although
the relevant indicators suggest the beneficiaries were to be operational by project closing and the jobs to be
restored, it is not clear for how long these jobs to be restored to secure sustainability.

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Through the matching grant scheme, a total of 3,042 SMEs were rehabilitated and up-graded,
       exceeding the target of 850 SMEs. The share of enterprises owned and managed by women was 7%,
       exceeding the target of 2-3%.
      The project provided matching grants for the up-gradation of 561 SMEs meeting the eligibility criteria,
       exceeding the target of 80 SME beneficiaries. By project closing, the number of SME rehabilitation
       support provided through the MGs was 2,386 exceeding the target of 200.
      ERKP provided grants for 6 machinery pools/common facilities in marble, health and construction
       sectors exceeding the target of supporting 4 facilities. These grants supported the procurement of
       brand-new heavy machinery not readily/previously available in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province
       and erstwhile Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA). A grant for upgrading health facilities was
       awarded to a cluster of three private sector hospitals in District Swabi to establish an advanced
       diagnostic center that would provide services of advanced CT scan, COVID Testing, Medical
       Diagnostic Testing and Hormone Analysis testing under one roof. The grants to marble processing
       sector were utilized to procure modern machinery. Lastly, a grant was awarded to a CNG kits testing
       laboratory to support the use of compressed natural gas as an alternate to diesel and petroleum that
       contribute hugely to air pollution through smoke emission (Written response of the Project Team to
       IEG questions, August 5, 2024).
      By project closing the number of SMEs/clusters that have used the Business Development Services
       (BDS) was 800 exceeding the target of 500.Target exceeded.

Among the 3,475 supported SMEs under MG scheme, 1,854 of them were in trade sector which had the
largest share (53%) which was a priority sector for FATA (Meeting with the project team, August 5, 2024). It
was followed by services (12.6%), marble and minerals sectors (8.1%) and textile and handicraft sector
(8.1%). Other sectors supported within the scope of the project were travel and tourism, education and
processing and manufacturing.

Outcomes:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      By project closing 16,425 direct jobs were restored/created through the support provided under the
       MG scheme implemented under Component 1, exceeding the target of 8,000 jobs (direct and indirect).
       Of these, 7,323 were in the trade sector and 3,418 were in the service sector.



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)




      75% of the assisted SMEs were operational and productive at the completion of the Project,
       exceeding the target of -60%.

The successful implementation of the original grant scheme led to a high response from the SMEs to
undertake rehabilitation and upgradation of their facilities which as a result led to the demand for AF by the
GoP (ICR, p.17).

Additional outcome achievements reported in the ICR:

      The implementation of the project contributed to increased financial inclusion. Under component 1 it
       was mandatory that the transfer of funds to MG beneficiaries be made directly into the bank accounts
       (online). The SMEs which did not have banking accounts prior to the ERKP, opened banking
       accounts. This resulted in increase in financial inclusion. The ICR (p.22) reports that many
       beneficiaries from the erstwhile FATA never had a bank account but were introduced to the banking
       system due to this project.

Overall, the project’s efficacy in achieving the first original objective was Substantial. The project achieved
creating employment opportunities and generating sustainable jobs through the matching grant scheme.
However, the evidence for sustainability of the jobs created is weak.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in creating sustainable employment opportunities in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa and in Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale
This objective was not revised. The theory of change remained the same. However, targets for the PDO and
output level indicators were revised upwards (were made more ambitious) and the relevant wordings clarified.

Outputs:

      Through the matching grant scheme, a total 3,042 SMEs were rehabilitated and up-gradated while
       exceeding the revised target of 2,500 SMEs. The share of enterprises owned and managed by women
       was 7%, exceeding the revised target of 5%.
      The project provided matching grants for the up-gradation of 561 SMEs meeting the eligibility criteria,
       exceeding the revised target of 300 SME beneficiaries. By project closing, the number of SME
       rehabilitation support provided through the MGs was 2,386, exceeding the revised target of 2200.
      The project supported 6 machinery pools/common facilities, meeting the revised target of 6.
      The number of SMEs/clusters that have used the Business Development Services (BDS) was 800, not
       achieving the revised target of 1000.


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)




      80% of the beneficiary SMEs were satisfied with the processing of the MGs under the AF of Project,
       meeting the target of 80% (new indicator).

Outcomes:

      The project exceeded the revised target of creating 13,500 jobs by creating 16,425 direct jobs by
       project closing.
      865 direct jobs were restored and created for women, exceeding the target of 315 jobs for women
       (new indicator).
      75% of the assisted SMEs were operational and productive at the completion of the Project, meeting
       the revised target of 75%.

The project achieved all its outcome and intermediate results indicators with respect to creating employment
opportunities, however, the sustainability of these created opportunities is not evident.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in creating sustainable employment opportunities in Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa province

Revised Rationale
The wording of the revised objective was only modified to reflect the merger of KP and FATA provinces. It
remained essentially the same. The relevant PDO indicators were not revised. The target for one output
indicator was revised upwards. The theory of change did not change. Therefore, the rating remained the
same.

Outputs:

      The project provided matching grants for the up-gradation of 561 SMEs meeting the eligibility criteria,
       exceeding the revised target of 450 SME beneficiaries.

The project achieved all its outcome and intermediate results indicators with respect to creating employment
opportunities, however, the sustainability of these created opportunities is not evident.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                Page 11 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)




Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in investment mobilization in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and in Federally
Administered Tribal Areas

Rationale
Theory of Change:

To support economic revitalization of crisis affected regions of KP and FATA significant investments were
needed. The theory of change states that if financial and technical support were to be provided to the
Governments of KP and FATA for attracting investments, economic activities would be generated and two
economies would be linked to domestic and international markets. The project inputs were to be used to
finance the project activities consisting of the following: identification of scalable investments, conducting a
pre-feasibility study for a private/public sector diaspora bond for SMEs, development of Reconnect Pakistan
website. The activities were expected to lead to the project outputs of an Outreach Program for Mobilizing
Diaspora Investment and mobilized private sector investments. The critical assumptions were that the
diaspora and the immigrant workers would be willing to provide financial contribution to the designed
programs and the financial products (bonds) would be attractive for these target groups. The project’s third
objective was to complement achievement of this objective. However, the theory of change was not direct.
The results achieved could not be directly attributable to the project activities or outputs since there could be
other factors which would impact mobilization of investment such as availability of a favorable investment
climate which is beyond the scope of the project. In this case, even if the financing from diaspora and
immigrant workers were secured, the investment conditions would not support realization of such
investments.

Outputs:

      Within the scope of the project, a web tool for attracting investments from the diaspora was developed
       (Re-connect Pakistan) and was operational. By project closing, the web tool was receiving 42,683 hits,
       exceeding the original target of 10,000 hits.
      In addition to the web tool, 9 investment mobilization events were organized within the framework of
       diaspora outreach program, exceeding the target of 3 events. The ICR (p. 17) reports that during an
       international investment road show held in 2015 through ERKP, the GoKP leveraged this momentum
       and signed 18 Letters of Intent with investors in Dubai for feasible projects in tourism and energy
       sectors, out of which two materialized for the tourism sector of KP.

Outcomes:

Within the scope of the project, the estimated investments made under the Matching Grants reached PKR 4
billion (US$31.61 million) and an investment of US$10 million (Century Steel at SEZ Rashakai, Nowshera)
from private investors was made, achieving the original target for investments generated of US$10 million.
However, this investment amount was not coming from diaspora or migrant workers from KP and FATA but
was from MGs and from existing private sector. Since the Objective was “to support the Government of
Pakistan in investment mobilization” and the objective itself did not specify where the investments were to
come from, achievement of the original Objective 2 is rated Substantial.



Rating

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)



Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in generating private sector investment in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and
in Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale
The wording of the objective was slightly revised, since attracting investments from the diaspora and
immigrant workers were found to be challenging. The wording for the PDO indicator was also revised to
reflect “private sector investments generated” instead of “investments mobilized”. However, the target did not
change.

Outputs:

        The revised target of 7 outreach events for investment mobilization was achieved and exceeded as 9
         events were organized by project closing.

Outcomes:

        Within the scope of the project, the estimated investments made under the Matching Grants reached
         PKR 4 billion (US$31.61 million) and an investment of US$10 million (Century Steel at SEZ Rashakai,
         Nowshera) from private investors was made, achieving the original target for investments generated of
         US$10 million. Target was achieved.

Overall, the project generated significant private sector investments though MG scheme and other private
sector investments.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in generating private sector investment in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and
in Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale
As a result of the last restructuring this objective was dropped from the PDO. Therefore, it is not rated.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)




OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in institutional capacity building in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and in
Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Rationale
The project inputs were to be used to finance the project activities consisting of the following: Provision of
technical assistance and training to counterpart institutions, the development of a Public-Private Dialogue
(PPD) mechanism to promote reforms, technical assistance in investment promotion; and implementation
support. These activities were expected to lead to increased capacities in the institutions in charge of
investments to undertake regulatory reforms and promote investments.

Outputs:

      The project targeted introduction of two regulatory/institutional reforms to be introduced/notified by
       Industries Department for private sector development in KP. This target was achieved.
      Project targeted the establishment of two PPD platforms in KP and FATA. However, this could not be
       achieved. This indicator was dropped at the time of the AF.
      The project supported 5 investment promotion authorities in KP province, exceeding the target of 2
       authorities. These were KP's Board of Investment, Special Economic Zones Authority and other
       relevant departments (Tourism, Industries, and TEVTA). These achievements contribute to the
       sustainability of the achievements in relation to generating investments.

Outcomes:

The Investment Facilitation Authority (IFA) in FATA and the Investment Facilitation Center (IFC) in KP were
established with the support of the project, achieving the target to support establishment of these two
institutions.

The project achieved its outcome target and one of the two output targets. Project provided support to the
investment institutions in the targeted regions contributing to sustainability of the achievements in relation to
generating investments.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in institutional capacity building in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and in
Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)



This objective was dropped during the AF; therefore, not rated.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in institutional capacity building in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and in
Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale
This objective was dropped during the AF; therefore, not rated.



Revised Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in laying the foundations for the future development of selected
economic sectors in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Rationale
This objective was introduced through the AF and its related restructuring.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To support the Government of Pakistan in laying the foundations for the future development of selected
economic sectors in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Federally Administered Tribal Areas

Revised Rationale
While under the first objective the project addressed the immediate financial constraint of the existing crisis-
affected SMEs, the fourth objective aimed to encourage economic growth by supporting selected economic
sectors in KP (tourism sector) and FATA (marble and agribusiness). The project inputs were to be used to
finance activities of identification of scalable pilots, development of a tourism sector analysis for KP,
development of Destination Investment and Management Plans and Visitors’ Management Plans, training and
capacity building activities to relevant authorities in tourism and to potential new entrepreneurs in sectors

                                                                                                 Page 15 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)



including tourism and agribusiness (pine nuts) and marbling, supply of equipment and facilities for eco-
tourism and waste management renovation, repairs and rehabilitation of publicly owned properties such as
tourist facilities and industrial infrastructure, and procurement of essential technology and equipment for
enhancing sectors’ competitiveness. The activities were expected to lead to the project outputs of improved
destination planning, improved tourism infrastructure and services, an operational tourism management
system. These outputs would have been expected to lay the foundations for development of value chains as
intermediate outcome. In the longer perspective, these would lead to increased investments, generating more
private sector employment, contributing to inclusive growth and reducing poverty. Overall, the causal
pathways for tourism sector from activities to expected results (restoring and/or creating jobs) were valid and
direct. The activities related to marble and agribusiness (more specifically pine nuts) were relatively limited.
The M&E framework was designed to monitor achievements in tourism sector only. As a result, progress in
the remaining priority sectors could not be captured. In addition, the PDO indicator for this objective was in
fact an output level indicator. The critical assumptions were that the government would be committed to
support the selected sectors and relevant authorities would be willing to be supported.

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      7 scalable projects and activities were identified in the competitive sectors of KP, exceeding the target
       of 6 projects (Written response of the Project Team to IEG questions, August 5, 2024). These
       included:
            o The initiative of Kalam Kumrat Cable Car (KMCC) was taken forward by the DoT of KP and a
               feasibility study is being caried out for it under the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Integrated Tourism
               Development Project (KITE) P163562 which was approved in 2019 and is currently under
               implementation,
            o Development of destination investment and management plans (DIMPs) for tourist sites was
               initiated by ERKP that was completed through funding provided by KITE,
            o Solid Waste Management initiative including feasibility studies for sanitary landfill sites was
               initiated by ERKP that is being carried out by KITE,
            o Travel Responsibly for Experiencing Ecotourism in KP (TREK) was identified by ERKP that is
               an ongoing activity being carried out by DoT. TREK is being implemented by DoT in
               partnership with Nestle Pakistan and Hashoo Foundation (a leading hospitality group of
               Pakistan),
            o ERKP procured road clearing equipment for the development authorities at the tourist
               destinations paving way for winter tourism. The initiative was upscaled through KITE and in
               future the Government may procure such machinery through own resources,
            o ERKP supported establishment of pre-fab toilets at the tourist destinations as lack of these
               facilities was identified as a major issue by tourists. The initiative was upscaled through KITE
               as more toilets were established to facilitate tourism,
            o Facilitation of investment by Century Steel in the SEZ (Please see additional outcome
               achievements under Objective 1).

Additional achievements reported in the ICR, not covered by the RF and hence without target values:

Tourism sector:



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ERKP (P124268)




     The project supported development of the first tourism sector analysis for KP. The analysis focused on
      existing tourist destinations of KP including Kalam, Kumrat, Naran and Galiyat which laid foundation
      for tourism site development in a structured manner (ICR, p.19).
     The project financed the development of a tourism management information system including mobile
      applications and the installation of traffic counting systems in Galiyat to support better assessment of
      travel patterns and traffic count. According to the restructuring paper (RES26662) the external
      interface was no longer required due to independent private sector digital platforms were now
      available for travel and tour bookings. (This indicator was dropped at the next restructuring as the MIS
      system was already up and running).
     Capacity-building activities implemented for the KP’s DoT, Galiyat Development Authority, Kaghan
      Development Authority, Tehsil Municipal Authority of Swat. A total of 104 officials of the Government
      of KP (GoKP) received training and participated at study tours in technical areas, including (i) trade
      and commerce, (ii) tourism and destination management and (iii) project management. In addition, 50
      tour guides and operators were trained in professional hospitality and tour management.
     Under Component 1, the project provided matching grants for 173 tourism SMEs, including 105 for
      hotels and guesthouses, 47 for restaurants,17 for handicraft producing artisans, and 4 for tour
      operators.

     Infrastructure for eco-tourism facilities was upgraded through supply of needed equipment and
      facilities including prefabricated public toilets; garbage collection and composting equipment; wheel
      loaders and excavators; and tourist coaches and sightseeing carts for tourist transport.
     To attract young tourists, facilities for youth hostels were renovated and operationalized in Batakundi,
      Naran (Mansehra district of KP).
     The project increased the technical capacity of the Directorate of Archeology and Museum, through
      the installation of solar system, audio tour guides for Peshawar Museum, and establishment of a
      specialized digital lab at the Directorate to support the conservation efforts.

Pine nuts and marbling sectors:

     Matching grants were provided to 284 SMEs from the marble and minerals sector amounting to PKR
      379.32 million.
     Training was provided to a total of 125 SMEs that covered women in marble mosaic making,
      enterprise development and technical training in operating specialized machinery (Written response of
      the Project Team to IEG questions, August 5, 2024).
     A total of 1,600 individuals (500 women) were trained on pine nuts value chain with a focus on women
      to improve processing and collection of pine nuts through modern tools and practices (Written
      response of the Project Team to IEG questions, August 5, 2024).
     As a follow up, an MDTF sponsored project for marble and agribusiness (Competitive Industries
      Project of KP, CIPK) was launched in 2015, which equipped and established a common facility and
      machinery pool in KP. The CIPK procured 13 excavators to marble quarries across the province on
      rental and also completed pre-feasibilities for fruits and vegetables hydration, pulping and packaging
      plant, and a dates processing facility (Written response of the Project Team to IEG questions, August
      5, 2024).

Outcomes:



                                                                                                Page 17 of 27
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ERKP (P124268)




                                  The project supported the renovation of 15 guest houses and tourist information centers in Galiyat
                                   (Abbottabad district of KP) leading to 100 percent increase in revenue through room bookings (ICR,
                                   p.19).

                            The ICR reports that the ERKP laid a foundation for better assessment of priority needs and further tourism
                            sector development that are now being pursued under KITE (ICR, p.19). To evaluate achievements under this
                            objective the results framework included only one PDO indicator (which was in fact an output level indicator).
                            According to the ICR and the written response of the project team to IEG’s questions (August 5, 2024), the
                            project supported a significant number of activities in the tourism sector. However, there is insufficient
                            evidence regarding the outcome of these activities. Regarding the remaining selected priority sectors (marble
                            and pine nuts) evidence is also very limited. Therefore, the rating of this objective is Modest.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


                            OBJECTIVE 4 REVISION 2
                            Revised Objective
                            To support the Government of Pakistan in developing the selected economic sectors in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.

                            Revised Rationale
                            The PDO was revised. A new PDO indicator and another new output indicator was introduced. In addition,
                            indicators on training were merged into one indicator. The theory of Change remained essentially the same.

                            Outputs:

                                  The project provided support to 59 tourism facilities, exceeding the target of 50 facilities (new PDO
                                   indicator).
                                  The project supported training of a total of 2,935 micro-enterprises, workers (including women) and
                                   SMEs, exceeding the target of 1,000 (merged indicator).
                                  The project provided 1,530 medical equipment and supplies for COVID-19 pandemic response to
                                   Health Department of KP (new indicator) exceeding the target of 200 equipment.

                            The rating remains Modest due to insufficient evidence.



                            Revised Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale

                                                                                                                             Page 18 of 27
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             ERKP (P124268)



         The overall original efficacy is assessed as Substantial based on underlying efficacy ratings of Substantial for
         Objective 1 and Objective 3 and Modest for Objective 2.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Under Revision 1, the overall efficacy is assessed as Substantial based on underlying efficacy ratings of
         Substantial for Objective 1 and Objective 3, High for Objective 2 and Modest for Objective 4.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Under Revision 2, the overall efficacy is assessed as Substantial with moderate shortcomings based on
         underlying efficacy ratings of Substantial for Objective 1 and Modest for Objective 4.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and financial analysis:

At appraisal, an economic efficiency analysis was conducted. For the overall project, the Economic Internal Rate
of Return (EIRR) was estimated at 44.1% and the Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) at US$ 32.57 million
(with a discount rate of 12 percent). Under the 2017 AF, the economic costs-benefits were estimated for the
additional investment planned under Component 1, indicating an EIRR of 75.6% and an ENPV of US$ 19.46
million. The ICR reports that due to constraints on availability of information regarding Components 2 and 4, the
analysis at closing concentrated on Component 1 of the project. It is based on the financial results observed
from a representative sample of 157 SMEs from various sectors participating under the matching grants. The
analysis for 157 SMEs resulted in an NPV of US$2.11 million with a discount rate of 12%. The profitability ratio
of sample SMEs ranged from 33% to 50%. The ICR (p.45) reports that extrapolating from the results of the
sample to the overall population of SMEs, the net economic benefits under the SME component were assessed
as substantial with an NPV of around US$25 million (as compared to US$20 million estimated at appraisal). The

                                                                                                           Page 19 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ERKP (P124268)



cost-effectiveness analysis comparing the total job creation (total of direct and indirect jobs: 51,425) to the
estimated total investment (matching grants and own investments) of US$54 million resulted that, the cost per
job created is estimated at about US$1,050.

Administrative and operational efficiency:

The project’s originally planned implementation period was 46 months (3.8 years). The actual Project duration
was 130 months (10.8 years). The project was implemented under difficult conditions due to conflicts, unrests,
floods and later COVID-19. The ICR reports that the areas most impacted by unrest (erstwhile FATA and now
called the Newly Merged Districts) were inaccessible during the original tenure of the project until 2016. Despite
these conditions the project funds (both the original grant and AF) were fully disbursed and PDO targets were
achieved. The AF Grant scaled-up Component 1 and enabled, financing the needs of a high number of
Temporary Displaced Persons (TDPs) in KP and erstwhile FATA which had been partly previously inaccessible.
The project’s restructurings facilitated meeting the changing needs of the borrower. The project experienced a
change in governance structure (merger of KP and FATA) which directly impacted the management structure
and developed system. However, this change did not have a negative impact on the implementation due to swift
actions jointly taken by the WB team and the management of Newly Merged Districts devising a new
implementation mechanism.

Overall, the economic and financial analysis reveal positive results for the MG component which had the largest
share in project costs. The project did not experience significant administrative and operational inefficiencies.
The efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance PDO               Substantial
Efficacy PDO                Original                    1st Revision (AF)           2nd Revision
Objective 1                 Substantial                 Substantial                 Substantial
Objective 2                 Substantial                 High                        ---

                                                                                                    Page 20 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ERKP (P124268)



Objective 3                  Substantial                  ---                          ---
Objective 4                  --                           Modest                       Modest
Overall Efficacy             Substantial                  Substantial                  Substantial
Efficiency                   Substantial
Outcome Ratings              Satisfactory                 Satisfactory                 Moderately Satisfactory
Numerical value of the
                             5                            5                            4
outcome ratings
Disbursement                 US$20 million                US$15.65 million             US$3.36 million
Share of disbursement        %51 (0.51)                   %40 (0.40)                   %9 (0.09)
Weighted value               2.55                         2                            0.36
                             Satisfactory
Final outcome rating
                             2.55+2+0.36=4.91=5

Rating of Outcome: Based on the split evaluation, the ICRR rates the Project's outcome as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial: Financial risk is high. In order to pursue revitalization efforts and supporting SMEs the regions will
require availability of financial programs and willingness of the financial institutions to participate in those
programs. The relevant authorities will need to allocate funds for development of such support programs.

Institutional: Institutional risk is relatively low. The achievements with respect to project entities and/or other
related organization is likely to be sustained. The project provided some capacity building to the relevant
institutions taking part in the priority sectors such as KP-Board of Investments, KP-Special Economic Zone
Authority. This will ensure some sustainability of the results achieved in these sectors. The ICR reports that
these institutions are now fully capacitated, able to prepare their own Annual Development Plans and are
regularly funded by the GoKP (ICR, p.30).

Security: Security risk is high. As ICR (p. 28) reports that although the GoP’s actions to contain insurgency
and militant activities have been successful to date, the risk remains that a revival of such activities could
take place, with adverse impacts on the sustainability of the Project’s outcomes in KP and erstwhile FATA. In
addition, the overall regional conflicts may also negatively impact the country.

Policy: Policy risk is relatively low. During the implementation of the project, GoP and GoKP demonstrated
continued commitment and ownership. It is likely that such commitment is pursued, and that support to
SMEs and the development of the selected sectors are sustained. These increased capacities would
contribute to sustainability of achievements. In addition, the implementation of the follow up projects also
indicate continued policy support to the priority sectors.




                                                                                                         Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project had a strategic relevance as it supported the Government of Pakistan’s priorities and
  emergency needs identified in the Damage and Needs Assessment as well as Post Crisis Needs
  Assessment which recommended creation of employment generating opportunities in farm and non-farm
  sectors, development of marketable skills, rehabilitation of enterprises and improving the investment and
  business climate. The WB team had extensive dialogue and conducted intensive consultations with
  TDPs, the private sector and concerned departments during preparation and project design was built on
  result of these consultations. As implementation approach, a matching grant scheme was chosen with
  financing from the MDTF. The implementation arrangements at appraisal were sufficient. The main
  implementing agency for Component 1 (SME Development) was SMEDA, which possessed inherent
  capacity and was represented in KP & erstwhile FATA. The Industries, Commerce, and Technical
  Education Department was the responsible entity for the implementation of the remaining components.
  Independent steering committees for KP and FATA were to be established for strategy and policy
  formulation and overall supervision. Two separate PCUs were to be established in KP and FATA. The
  PCUs were to coordinate overall project implementation and reporting. Specific technical capacity was to
  be provided to the PCUs to implement the three components of the project. At appraisal, significant
  reputational, implementation and operational risks were identified. They were adequately assessed and
  the mitigation measures including identification of a communication approach, provision of training to
  implementing agencies and close supervision, were implemented. The planned safeguards and fiduciary
  arrangements were adequate. The M&E arrangements at appraisal was overall sufficient.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During the implementation period of nearly 11 years, the project had only two Task Team Leaders. This
 contributed to continuity in relation to the counterparts and stability of project supervision and monitoring.
 During this period, the WB team conducted 24 implementation support missions. The supervision team
 was adequately staffed with safeguards and fiduciary specialists. The progress of the project was candidly
 reported in the Implementation Status and Results Reports. The World Bank team’s focus on development
 results was demonstrated by their effort to address the challenges experienced during the implementation
 and needs of the Borrower and to restructure the project accordingly. In addition to the restructurings, the
 AF was secured to meet the increasing demand for the MG by the SMEs. The restructurings facilitated the
 implementation of MGs, supported the Borrower’s development agenda in specific sectors and also with
 the extension of the implementation period enabled achievement of the project’s objective fully. To match
 with the revisions introduced with the AF and the restructurings, the project team also revised the results
 framework. However, the additional indicators introduced regarding the support to the selected sectors
 involved only tourism sector. Therefore, project results under the other two selected sectors (marble and
 agribusiness) could not be fully captured. The project team in collaboration with the GKP managed the

                                                                                                    Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



 structural changes following the merger of FATA and KP provinces efficiently. Although this was a
 challenging development (merging PCUs in one PCU, combining steering committees), it was managed
 efficiently. The ICR (p. 24) reports that ultimately, this led to a positive change and a more integrated PMU
 was able to lead the implementation successfully and achieved the PDO by closing date.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Overall, the theory of change was sound and well reflected in the results framework. The objectives were
 clearly defined. However, they were revised twice, in line with the developments and priorities in the
 country (initially the project was to provide immediate response to crisis then with the AF, supported
 selected economic sectors). The indicators assessing the project’s impact on creating employment
 opportunities were limited since they provided information on the number of jobs created but not on their
 sustainability. On the other hand, “supporting selected economic sectors” as part of the PDO statement
 (introduced by the AF) was not reflected in the results framework sufficiently. The results framework
 included one outcome indicator in relation to tourism sector, which was in fact an intermediate level
 indicator. The results of the activities and the outputs (i.e., supported facilities, improved infrastructure) in
 the tourism sector could not be captured. The intermediate results indicators were concentrated on tourism
 sector and the results framework did not include any indicators which could assess project results on the
 other selected sectors. The M&E arrangements and relevant institutions were identified clearly. The PMUs
 in KP (and FATA) were responsible for monitoring the overall progress of the Project. The Project Unit (PU)
 under SMEDA was to monitor the MGs. A Management Information System (MIS) was foreseen for the PU
 to capture all data and results. The PMUs and PU teams were to include M&E specialists who were to be
 mainly responsible for collection, recording and analysis of data. Specifically for the MG scheme, the
 GoKP’s Directorate for Monitoring and Evaluation also was to conduct an assessment of beneficiary SMEs
 before they were awarded. In addition, for quality assurance and cross verification, a third-party monitoring
 agent (TPMA) was to be hired to provide independent assessment of the reported progress and to enable
 access through the agent to security challenged areas.



b. M&E Implementation
  In line with the restructurings, the project team revised the results framework. With the extended
  implementation period and AF, the set targets were increased to match the project’s ambition and some
  target definitions were revised. However, the weakness mentioned in the M&E Design section in relation
  to the results framework remained. During the implementation, the TPMA enabled independent
  verification and validation of various indicators regarding the Project’s results including beneficiary
  satisfaction and operational status of SMEs on quarterly basis. This was achieved through customized

                                                                                                      Page 23 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



  surveys and careful selection of sample comprising matching grants beneficiaries. The MIS developed
  and launched for the PU, enabled capturing all data and results such as the number of MG beneficiaries,
  share of women owned/managed enterprises in the MG beneficiaries, jobs created. On the other hand,
  the ICR (p.21) reports some limitations about availability of information regarding generating private
  sector investments and information on selected economic sectors. The tourism sector survey conducted
  within the scope of the project partly helped overcoming this difficulty (Meeting with the project team,
  August 5, 2024). However, the problem prevailed with regard to the remaining economic sectors. This
  also impacted development of the ex-post efficiency analysis for the second and the third components of
  the project.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E findings were regularly reviewed by the project team and the implementing agencies. The
  M&E framework enabled the project team to make appropriate adjustments to the implementation plan,
  depending on the status of physical progress. During the implementation, the M&E system was also
  used as a tool to facilitate decision making and achieving the PDO by the implementing partners.

  Overall, while the M&E quality was sufficient, the M&E design and the M&E implementation had some
  shortcomings particularly in relation to assessing the outcome of project results in selected sectors and
  limitations on information availability. M&E Quality is hence rated Substantial with shortcomings.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The original project was processed as an emergency operation under OP 8.0 (Emergency Recovery) and
   remained as Category B project during the entire implementation. The project triggered the Environmental
   Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01). Since the activities supported under component 1 (construction and
   operation of the SMEs) could potentially cause negative environmental and social impacts, an
   Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) was prepared (a general
   framework applicable to all projects/operations under the MDTF). The Framework defined the
   environmental and social assessment requirements which the implementing agencies both in KP and FATA
   were to fulfill for each subproject under the Project. In addition, an Environmental and Social Management
   Plan (ESMP) specific to ERKF was also prepared and disclosed. The ICR (p. 26) reports that around 86
   percent of the SMEs had fully complied with E&S plus Occupational Health and Safety (OHS)/COVID-19
   requirements during (Oct 2020-Sep 2021). The remaining SMEs were sensitized, and training was given on
   how to better comply with the E&S, OHS as well as COVID-19 Infection Prevention and Control
   requirements of the project and the country regulations.




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ERKP (P124268)



b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management: The financial management (FM) risk was assessed as high at appraisal. During
   the first phase of implementation, two FM specialists were assigned to each of the PCUs in KP and FATA.
   An internal auditor was appointed for the entire project activities. However, despite high risk, the FM
   arrangements were implemented successfully. The ICR reports that the project’s FM performance was
   “satisfactory” through most of the implementation period and by closing of the project. The required
   acceptable financial reports, including Interim Financial Reports and Audited Financial Statements, were
   submitted to the Bank on time. External audits of the project were conducted by the Auditor General of
   Pakistan, which was an arrangement acceptable to the Bank. The reports were unqualified for all the
   financial years of the project implementation.

   Procurement: Project procurements were to largely cover selection of consultancies, both firms and
   individuals, besides some goods. The project Officer for Component 3 was the procurement focal point. By
   project closing, the procurement performance rating was “moderately satisfactory”. The ICR (p.27) reports
   that this was mainly due to delays in contract awards and extensions in the contract closing dates.
   However, despite these delays, most of the procurements were completed without Fraud and Corruption
   concerns and were in general compliant with the overall process.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The use of MDTF and implementing MG under ERKP facilitated and set a good example for
   implementation of further projects in KP. The ICR (p.24) reports that it was due to the investments made in
   the tourism and industrial sectors of the province through the ERKF and its AF, that the WB received the
   requests for IDA financing for KITE and Khyber Pass Economic Corridor (KPEC) Projects which are now
   being implemented in collaboration between the Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation (FCI) and
   Transport Global Practices (GPs) of the WB. In addition, the concept of the matching grants was also
   taken up and integrated within the design of the MDTF financed Balochistan Livelihoods and
   Entrepreneurship Project (BLEP).

   The targets with respect to female specific indicators were set quite low (i.e., at least 5% of MG
   beneficiaries). However, this could be attributable to the extreme conditions for women in the project area.
   Nevertheless, women-owned businesses were given a priority and were encouraged to apply to the
   matching grants in project regions.



d. Other
   None



11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 25 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ERKP (P124268)



Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons are derived from the ICR (p. 29 and 30):

        A flexible and adaptable design for matching grants scheme can help addressing
         changing needs during the implementation and can increase success of the program.
         In the case of ERKF, initially selection process for MG beneficiaries was clear. However,
         right after the AF went into effectiveness, SMEDA received more than 10,000 applications at
         the same time which were difficult to manage. As a result, the PMU and SMEDA had to
         design a simplified approach for applications’ screening and establish a strong MIS gathering
         all financial and ground data to help a quicker processing of applications as well as
         monitoring. The flexible and adaptable design contributed to this achievement.

        Conducting extensive stakeholder and beneficiary consultations before and during
         implementation in a fragile country context can ensure relevance and help achieving
         expected results of the projects. The WB team conducted extensive dialogue and
         intensive consultations with TDPs, the private sector and concerned departments during
         preparation. The project design was built on the result of these consultations. During the
         implementation, close dialogue continued between the parties. This enabled necessary
         revisions/adjustments in the component structures leading towards improvements in
         implementation in accordance with the changing circumstances.

        Sustained government commitment and ownership at the provincial level can help
         overcoming implementation issues resulting from low capacity and weaknesses in the
         key implementing agencies. Throughout the implementation of ERKF, the GoP’s and
         GoKP’s ownership and commitment were at the highest levels. The project provided
         considerable technical assistance and financial support to the key implementing agencies in
         KP and erstwhile FATA. The commitment of the relevant authorities coupled with strong
         technical assistance resulted in successful project implementation.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a good summary of the project, which was implemented during a long period of close to 11
years. It is candid in explaining the issues encountered at different phases of implementation. The report is

                                                                                                  Page 26 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ERKP (P124268)



internally consistent and follows the guidelines. There is a logical linking of the various parts of the report. The
lessons are clear, useful and based on evidence and analysis. The ICR had some shortcomings. The
information provided regarding the achievement of the indicators are brief. In the main text, the narrative refers
to the Annex 1 for details of the achievements. However, the information in the Annex 1 is mainly the repeating
of the main text. The efficacy section of the ICR could have been enriched particularly by providing additional
information on achievements in the selected value chains. This gap was partially addressed by the additional
information provided by the project team (Written response of the project team to IEG’s questions, August 5,
2024). The quality of the ICR could be further improved by putting emphasize on the impact of the project’s
intervention and consequences.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 27 of 27
