     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024363

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P163531                                     Property Rights Strengthening Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Nicaragua                                   Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-61980                                   15-Mar-2024                                         49,979,992.83

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2018                                 15-Mar-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             50,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              49,979,992.83                                              0.00

 Actual                                          49,979,992.83                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 6-7) is:

   " To provide beneficiaries in selected municipalities with: (a) updated and integrated cadastral and
   property registry information; and (b) improved land administration services ".



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



   In addition to the PDO stated above, the following objective was added with the project restructuring on
   September 28, 2021.

   " To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible emergency".



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Sep-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There were five components: (PAD, pages 16 -18).

   1. Institutional and Policy Framework and System Integration. The estimated cost at appraisal was
   US$18.75 million. The revised estimate following the project restructuring on September 28, 2021 was
   US$14.98 million. The actual cost was US$13.34 million. This component planned to strengthen
   Nicaragua's land administration system. There were three subcomponents:

   1a. Improving land administration policies and interinstitutional collaboration through: (i) revising land
   administration policies, standards and technical manuals; (ii) capacity building and training for
   institutionalization of policies and procedures and improved understanding of the inter-relationship between
   the cadaster and the property registry; and (iii) conducting institutional, policy and environmental studies for
   government's future policy and strategy.

   1b. Strengthening the integration of cadastre and registry information through: (i) implementing the
   Integrated Cadaster-Registry Information System's (SIICAR) management model in selected property
   registries; (ii) migration and linking of cadastral and registry data in the Departments of Esteli and Managua;
   and (iii) preparing a Change Management and Sustainability Strategy for SIICAR.

   1c. Modernizing the national cadaster system and related services through: (i) implementing a
   Cadaster Modernization Strategy set in the Project Operation Manual (POM); (ii) establishing six new
   Continuously Operating Reference Stations (CORS) as per the criteria set in the POM; (iii) establishing
   Cadaster Regional Offices in the departments of Boaco, Chontales and Rio San Juan; (iv) conducting a
   spatial data infrastructure pilot, including integrating the Nicaraguan Institute for Territorial Studies
   (INETER's) geo-spatial databases; (v) preparing a national strategy for Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI's)
   interoperability with other governmental databases; and (vi) implementing a monitoring and quality control
   system for private cadastral surveyors.



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



2. Cadaster, Regularization and Titling Services. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$25.76 million.
The revised estimate was US$19.71 million. The actual cost was US$21.88 million. This component
planned to support production of cadastral information, and clarifying of land rights through systematic and
on-demand land regularization and issuing legal documents, new titles and their registration. There were
four sub-components:

2a. Expanding cadastral coverage through: (i) systematic and on-demand cadastral surveying including
through acquiring aerial photography and field activities; and (ii) incorporating cadastral information into the
national database.

2b. Expanding land regularization, titling and registration through: (i) land regularization, titling and
registration in selected municipalities; (ii) demand-based land regularization, titling and registration for
beneficiaries prioritized by national programs; (iii) implementing a Communication Strategy.

2c. Demarcating Protected Areas (PAs) in selected municipalities through: (i) preparatory work, data
collection and consultation of beneficiaries, geo-referencing and physical demarcation of PAs in selected
municipalities, and their registration in the National System for Environmental Information; and (iii)
communication and outreach campaigns in PAs and neighboring communities.

2d. Implementing mediation and conflict resolution through: (i) mediation services during the cadastral
and regularization processes; and (ii) conflict resolution training for mediators and staff of co-executing
agencies.

3. Municipal Land Administration Services. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.64 million. The
revised estimate was US$2.02 million. The actual cost was US$2.01 million. This component planned to
strengthen land administration capacities at the municipal level. There were two-sub-components;

3a. Integration of municipalities into the national cadastral system through: (i) installing the updated
cadastral system (SISCAT) in municipalities and supporting its integration with the national cadastral
information system; (ii) technical assistance (TA) and training municipalities on: (a) incorporating cadastral
information into SISCAT; (b) integrating SISCAT into the national cadastral information system; (c) the
municipalities' role in maintaining the national cadastral information system; (iii) preparing procedures and
guidelines on the role of municipalities in the national cadastral information system and managing the
municipal cadaster; and (iv) preparing a strategy for maintaining cadastral information in municipal cadastral
databases linked to SIICAR.

3b. Strengthening municipal capacities for using the cadastral information for multiple purposes
through: (i) TA and training on the use of geospatial information for disaster risk assessments, investment
planning and territorial development; and (ii) carrying out analysis of shared and municipal lands.

4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$2.92
million. The revised estimate was US$2.28 million. The actual cost was US$2.28 million. This component
planned to support the Nicaraguan Attorney General's Office (PGR) and its Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
to manage the project. There were two sub-components:

4a. Supporting Project Management through: (i) trainings and workshops; (ii) support for coordination,
administrative and fiduciary aspects and audits; and (iii) carrying out the oversight of the Project
communication and gender strategies.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



   4b. Supporting Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) through: (i) collection of base line data to assess the
   social, environmental and economic impacts; and (ii) preparing semi-annual progress reports, midterm
   review and final evaluation report, including surveys and data collection activities.

   5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). No costs were estimated at appraisal.
   Reflecting the strategic approach taken in Nicaragua, across the World Bank's portfolio, this component
   planned to provide immediate response to finance emergency activities through reallocating funds from the
   Project. The CERC component was activated at government request on February 25, 2021, to support the
   Government's response to the adverse impacts of Hurricanes Eta and Lota. The actual cost was US$9.92
   million.

   Activities planned in this component: (i) rehabilitating over 450 kilometers (km) of roads to transit of
   agricultural products: and (ii) rehabilitating productive activities in the artisanal fisheries sector.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$50.00 million. The actual cost was US$49.79 million.

   Financing. The Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit of
   US$50.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$49.79 million.

   Recipient contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal.

   Dates. The project was approved on March 15, 2018, became effective on July 2, 2018, and was to close
   on March 15, 2024. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held on May 2, 2022, and the project closed as
   scheduled on March 15, 2024.

   Changes. The following changes were made with the Level 1 restructuring on September 28, 2021.

         With the activation of the CERC component, a new PDO was added to reflect the change in project
          components.
         Following the activation of the CERC, US$11.00 million of the uncommitted funds (out of the IDA
          Credit of US$50.00 million) from the project component one activities, was diverted to finance
          immediate activities.
         The results framework was changed. The original project scope was scaled down and original
          targets were reduced.
         .With the activation of the CERC, the safeguards on Indigenous People (OP 4.10) was triggered.

   Split rating. With the activation of the CERC component, a new PDO was added. However, the original
   scope and targets were reduced to fund the CERC component, when US$20.91 million of the loan was
   disbursed,. Therefore, this review uses the split rating of objectives methodology for determining the
   outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

                                                                                                       Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)




Rationale
Country context. Despite satisfactory economic growth in the years before appraisal, Nicaragua was the
second poorest country in Latin America. Poverty in Nicaragua was concentrated, with 70% of its poor living
in rural areas. Nicaragua also remained vulnerable to natural disasters such as hurricanes and extreme
rainfalls. Strengthening property rights and the land administration system was critical for Nicaragua's
sustained poverty reduction efforts.

Sector context. Nicaragua had made efforts in land administration through enacting new laws and
modernizing land institutions before appraisal. Despite these reforms, challenges remained due to factors
such as, inconsistent legal and administrative decisions that contributed to tenure insecurity. About a third
of parcels of land lacked clear land titles. Overall land tenure insecurity undermined land market
transactions and generated land disputes.

Government strategy at appraisal. The PDO was well-aligned with the government's
priorities. Recognizing the importance of land tenure challenges, the Government with World Bank (WB)
support implemented a medium-term strategy. The strategy's goal was to strengthen property rights and
promote land governance, underpinned by an understanding that institutional development and clarifying
property rights requires continued commitment and investments for a substantial period. The government
also rolled out the Land Administration Project (PRODEP) selectively throughout Nicaragua. PRODEP was
consistent with the National Plan for Human Development for 2021 - 2016. This plan recognized the
contribution of land tenure security to economic development through expanding access to credit and
facilitating land regularization at the subnational level.

Current government strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the current Government strategy. articulated
in the 2022-26 National Plan to Fight Poverty and for Human Development and the Plan's strategic axis
"Guaranteeing Property Rights at the Countryside". The Government's prioritization and commitment to
land issues is also reflected in its decision to continue financing PRODEP with its own resources.

WB strategy at appraisal. The PDO was well-aligned with the third pillar of the Country Partnership
Strategy (CPF) for 2018 - 2022 "Improving institutions for Resilience and Sustainability". Under this pillar,
the Project was expected to contribute directly to improving government transparency and capacity through
improved availability of data, building public sector capacity to facilitate effective allocation of resources and
provide an enabling legal and administrative framework for land transactions. The Project was also
expected to contribute to improving natural resource management and reducing vulnerability to natural
hazards. The CPF also articulated the need for shifting focus to the country program.                   .

Current WB strategy. The ICR (para 28) noted that a new CPF had not been completed, when the
Implementation Completion Report (ICR) was prepared. However, the Performance and Learning Review
(PLR) of the 2018 -2022 CPF, completed in February 2022, reiterated the relevance of the 2018-2022 CPF.
The PLR confirmed the importance of WB support to land tenure security and land governance, especially
in a context where the scope to the WB's country program had been reduced. The PDO remained relevant
as it directly reflected the national key challenges, priorities and needs of municipalities, communities and
Indigenous Peoples.

Bank experience. The WB's engagement with land administration projects started in 2002, when the Bank
financed the first Land Administration Project. Given the substantial issues faced by the country at that time,
including a post-conflict transition, this project was designed as a pilot focused on selected municipalities.

                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



               The Bank's second Land Administration Project in Nicaragua was launched in 2013. The second operation
               helped in consolidating the land administration framework, including integrating the land regularization
               agency into the Attorney General's office (PGR) to improve coordination and established the National
               Commission of Property Registries to better manage standards and procedures.

               This was the third and final phase of the Bank-financed Government's PRODEP program. This project
               aimed at consolidating the improvements made on the legal and institutional framework, expanding the
               reach of land administration services to the population across more municipalities, deepen the
               interconnection between the central and local governments and advance the government's priority of
               advancing gender equality in aspects relating to property rights.

               Relevance of the PDO. Given that Bank's previous experience with land administration projects take long
               time to show the desired results, the project, the results chain was pitched at an appropriate outcome level,
               as it directly addressed a development problem of high incidence of poverty in the rural areas of
               Nicaragua. Since the PDO continues to be relevant to the Government strategy and the current Bank
               strategy for Nicaragua, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To provide beneficiaries in selected municipalities with updated and integrated cadastral and property registry
                             information.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as linking municipal cadasters to the national
                             cadaster, developing municipal capacities for using cadaster/ geospatial information for Disaster Risk
                             Management (DRM), territorial planning and property taxation and conducting land tenure diagnostics, were
                             likely to help in strengthening municipal capacities to administer land services. These outcomes were likely to
                             help in the medium and long-term outcome of improving the dynamism of the real estate market. The causal
                             links between activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. The
                             intended outcomes were predicated on the realistic assumptions that municipalities remained committed and
                             that the roles of the central land agencies and local governments are clearly specified.

                             Outputs.

                                        15 municipalities with technical cadaster were certified by the Nicaraguan Institute for Territorial
                                          Information (INETER) and the Nicaraguan Institute of Municipal Development (INIFOM) achieving the
                                          original and revised targets of municipalities respectively.

                                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)




        15 municipal land diagnostics were performed, achieving the original and revised targets of
         municipalities respectively.
        21 municipalities incorporated at least 90% of INTER cadastral database into SISCAT, exceeding the
         original and revised targets of 15 municipalities respectively.

Outcomes.

        21 municipalities managed cadastral information with the Municipal Cadastral System (SISCAT) that
         were linked to the national cadaster, when the project closed, exceeding the target of 18. (The original
         target for this indicator was revised from 19 to 18 with the project restructuring).

The original targets were exceeded, despite the funds allocated to this component reduced with the activation
of the CERC.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not revised. However, the original targets were revised with the restructuring of the project.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

The outputs discussed above were relevant to the objective.

Outcomes.

        21 municipalities managed cadastral information with the Municipal Cadastral System, exceeding the
         revised target of 18.
        Five municipalities used the tool linking the Integrated Cadaster and Registry System (SIICAR) and
         the Municipal Cadaster System (SISCAT), exceeding the revised target of three municipalities (This
         indicator was added with the project restructuring). The linkage represented a step forward in bringing
         together the full interaction of information between municipalities, INTER and the property registry.
         Although the initial plan envisaged linkage in only three municipalities, two more were added based on
         the progress made.

Efficacy of the PDO is rated as high, as the revised targets were exceeded.



Revised Rating

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To provide beneficiaries in selected municipalities with Improved land administration services .

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as developing policies and procedures, providing technical
assistance (TA) for deepening interinstitutional coordination and modernizing the national cadaster system
were likely to help in strengthening the institutional framework for developing land administration policies. The
outputs of activities such as integrating cadaster and registry information, increasing coverage of cadaster
information in the national data base, regularizing land tenure, setting mechanisms for resolving land
conflicts, demarcating Protected Areas (PAs) and conducting educational campaigns for environmental
management were likely to aid in improving land administration services. The causal links between activities,
outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable. The intended outcomes were
predicated on the realistic assumptions that there is coordination among the executing agencies, the
integrated cadaster and registry Information System (SIICAR) is adequately maintained, new titles are
properly registered and that Government continues to invest in maintaining and updating the systems.

Outputs.

        Four new technical manuals were developed to establish and simplify the institutional processes with
           a focus on gender equity. achieving the original target of four.
          The strategy and Business Plan for SIICAR were completed as originally targeted. The strategy and
           business plan were adopted by the Nicaraguan Supreme Court of Justice (CSI) and the Nicaraguan
           Institute for Territorial Studies (INETER) as originally targeted.
          The geospatial information database of INETER was integrated under INETER's Spatial Data
           Infrastructure as originally targeted.
          146,515 parcels of land were incorporated into the National Cadaster database, exceeding the original
           target of 116,500. The original target for this indicator was revised downwards to 98,339 following the
           project restructuring.
          100% of the grievances related to the project with an average period of five business days, exceeding
           the target of 90%.
          The gender strategy was implemented as per the original target.
          Four household impact evaluations were conducted as per the original target.
          115,713 new titles or deeds were registered in the property register, exceeding the original and
           revised targets of 86,000 and 77,400 respectively. 51% of the new titles were issued to women
           exceeding the original and revised targets of 50% respectively.
          1100000 hectares (ha) were covered by cadastral surveying as originally targeted.
          70% of mediation agreements pre-qualified as potentially registrable were formalized in the property
           register. Targets were not specified for this indicator.
          Eight demarcated Protected Areas (PAs) were registered in the database of the National System of
           Environmental Information, as originally targeted.
          One geospatial information database of the Nicaraguan Institute of Territorial Studies (INTER) was
           integrated under INTER's Spatial Data Infrastructure, short of the original target of four.

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)




      98,339 parcels of land were incorporated into the national cadaster database, short of the original
       target of 116,500.
      Areas covered by cadastral surveying was reduced to 435,671 hectares (ha), short of the original
       target of 1,100,000 ha.

Outcomes.

      68% of the parcel-based data were identified and linked in the cadastral and property registry modules
       of the Integrated Cadaster and Registry System (SIICAR), exceeding the original and revised targets
       of 50% respectively.
      According to the evaluation of SIICAR, carried out by an Independent Consultant, 96% of the
       beneficiaries were highly satisfied with SIICAR's performance in terms of safety, operation and
       integration, exceeding the target of 90%.
      137,021 legal documents were issued, exceeding the target of 77,400. Of these 58,800 titles were
       issued to women, either individually or jointly with their spouses. This represented 51% of women
       beneficiaries, exceeding the target of 50%.

Although the original targets were exceeded, this was despite reduction in funding to the activities, following
the activation of CERC. Some of the output level indicators were not achieved. Therefore, the efficacy of this
PDO is rated as Substantial before restructuring.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was not changed. However, the targets were reduced with the project restructuring.

Revised Rationale
Outputs.

Outputs discussed above were relevant to this objective.

Outcomes.

      68% of the parcel-based data were identified and linked in the cadastral and property registry modules
       of the Integrated Cadaster and Registry System (SIICAR), exceeding the revised target of 50%.
      An Independent evaluation showed that 96% of the beneficiaries were satisfied with the performance
       of SIICAR in terms of operation, data and security, exceeding the revised target of 90%..
      The number of days required to complete recording of purchase/sale of a property in the Property
       Registers with SIICAR reduced from 35 days at the baseline to 12 days, exceeding the revised target
       of 25 days.



                                                                                                  Page 9 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



Efficacy of this PDO is rated as High after restructuring, as the revised targets were exceeded.



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective


Rationale
Not applicable



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To provide immediate and effective response to an emergency.

Revised Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs of activities such as rehabilitation of rural roads and provision of urgent
recovery support for the artisanal fisheries sector, mainly benefitting indigenous communities were aimed at
providing emergency response to the communities affected by the hurricanes Eta and Iota. The causal links
between project activities, outputs and outcomes are clear and the intended outcomes are monitorable.

Outputs.

          263.95 rural roads were rehabilitated, short of the planned 450 km of rural roads.
          1,816 fishing boats were repaired, exceeding the target of 294.
          391 productive kits were provided to artisan fishing communities, exceeding the target of 173.
          1,445 lobster pots were provided for economic recovery to artisan fishing communities, exceeding the
           target of 787.

Outcomes.

        62,396 beneficiaries benefitted from CERC activities, short of the target of 85,000. 44% of the
           beneficiaries were women. There were no targets for this indicator.
        The time taken to implement the CERC was 18 months as targeted. The CERC was activated on
           February 25, 2021 and concluded on August 25, 2022. Therefore, it was completed in the planned 18
           months implementation period.


                                                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



                              Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, as the targets were realized.



                              Revised Rating
                              High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The achievements of the original PDO was rated as High before restructuring, as the original targets were
                            exceeded. The original Objective 2 was rated as Substantial, as while all the outcome targets were exceeded,
                            some of the output targets were not achieved. Efficacy of the added objective was High, as the outcomes
                            were realized. Original overall efficacy is thus High.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High

                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            The revised objectives were rated High as the revised objectives were exceeded. Therefore, the revised
                            overall efficacy is rated as High.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure to assess the economic
   viability of the project, using the same methodology. The economic benefits were assumed to come from higher
   property values due to increased land tenure security after titling. The likely impact of titling on property value
   was estimated through econometric and other statistical methods that allowed for isolating, with a reasonable
   degree of statistical significance (95%), the effect of property titling on perceived market values from the effect of
   other variables contributing to determining property prices. Other economic benefits such as the demarcation of
   Protected Areas (PAs), the impact of reduction of land conflicts and financial benefits related formal land
   transactions were not included, due to the difficulties of either monetizing or obtaining information.



                                                                                                                               Page 11 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



The Net Present Value (NPV) at 10% discount rate when the project closed was US$30.00 million, as compared
to the NPV of US$14.13 million at appraisal. The ex-post Intern Rate of Return (EIRR) was 19%, as compared
to the ex-ante EIRR of 19.33%.

The NPV of road rehabilitation activities undertaken as part of CERC was US$1.50 million and an EIRR of
22.3%, while the artisanal fishing sector showed a NPV of US$2.47 million and an EIRR of 10%. The EIRR for
lobster fishing showed an EIRR of 31%.

The project demonstrated other aspects of cost efficiency. The Project's unit land surveying costs were
estimated at US$83.3/parcel for urban and US$109.3/parcel for rural land. As compared to the prior Bank-
financed land administration project in Nicaragua, surveying costs in rural areas had decreased by 25%, while
surveying costs in urban areas were about the same. The Project Management cost was US$1.62 million, as
compared to the US$2.93 estimated at appraisal.

Project implementation efficiency. The project was implemented within the period planned at appraisal.

Overall efficiency is rated as High.


Efficiency Rating
High


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?           Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 19.33
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              19.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current WB strategy for Nicaragua is rated as High.
Efficacy of the original PDO is rated as High, both before and after restructuring. Efficacy of the added objective
with the activation of the CERC component is rated as High. Efficiency is rated as substantial in view of the
economic rationale for the project. Taking the share of disbursement before and after restructuring into account,
overall outcome is rated as Highly satisfactory.

Table: Overall Outcome Rating using the split rating methodology.




                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



                                                 Original Objectives and
                                                                         Revised Objectives and targets
                                                     targets without
                                                                               with restructuring
                                                      restructuring
              Relevance of PDO                                            High
                 Efficacy PDO
                   PDO 1a                                   High                             High
                   PDO 1b                                 Substantial                        High
                   PDO 2.                                                      High
                 Efficiency                                                    High
                                                                                            Highly
              Outcome ratings                          Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                        Satisfactory
  Numerical value of the outcome ratings                     6                                6
              Disbursement                             US$20.91 million                  US$29.06
          Share of disbursement                            0.418                           0.582
   Weighted value of the outcome rating                     2.5                             3.50
    Final Outcome rating (2.5+3.50 = 6)                                Highly Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ownership. The ICR notes that the risk to development outcome is low(ICR,
page 78). The Government has a clear vision that is reflected in the long-term program. The ICR notes that
the Project outcomes are likely to be sustained given the institutional commitment, increased capacity and
the close inter-institutional collaboration and coordination fostered through the program. In addition, the
Integrated Cadaster-Registry Information System (SIICAR), which was developed could be established
relatively rapidly in the rest of the property registries. Also, the cadaster and registry information
management model that underpins SIICAR was expanded to 11 of the offices. The ICR notes that the
Government with WB support has developed and adopted a sustainability strategy and allocated resources
for its implementation. The Government commitment was also demonstrated by its decision to finalize
regularization processes and system expansion with its own resources.

Natural disaster risk. There is risk to development outcome, given that Nicaragua is vulnerable to natural
disasters.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on analytical underpinnings from the WB's Systematic Country
  Diagnostics (SCD), which called for continued efforts to secure land property rights to increase
  productivity, especially in the agricultural sector. The Bank prepared this project based on the lessons
  from the WB's programmatic support to land administration in Nicaragua. Key lessons incorporated at
  design included: One, recognizing that land administration reforms require long term and programmatic
  support. Two, focusing on sustainability and mainstreaming results through building the capacities of
  municipalities. Three, securing commitment to land administration modernization efforts by engaging key
  land agencies. Four, cadaster and land regularization activities need to pay attention to social aspects,
  besides technical issues. and five, capacity development for conflict resolution and close inter-institutional
  coordination.

  The implementation arrangements replicated the arrangements of the ongoing Bank-financed Second
  Land Administration Project. The arrangements included: The Attorney General's Office (PGR) - the
  leading agency for the land sector in Nicaragua - overall in charge of implementing the project. The
  Project Coordination Unit (PCU) housed in PGR was in charge of day-to-day project implementation
  (PAD, para 40). The arrangements proved to be adequate for implementing this project as well.

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal including risks with ensuring continuous inter-
  institutional collaboration, weak implementation capacities of the municipalities and Nicaragua's
  vulnerability to natural disasters. With mitigation measures, overall project risk was rated as moderate
  (PAD, para 48). The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance were
  appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry was rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 A total of 18 supervision missions were held during the project lifetime (five of which were technical visits).
 These were supplemented by multiple audioconferences. The ICR (para 76) noted that missions were
 timely, appropriately resourced and solution-oriented. Effective decisions and agreements resulted from the
 Mid-Term Review (MTR). The ICR notes that critical issues were handled by bringing in international
 expertise and collaborating with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). The Bank at government
 request activated the CERC component and provided immediate response to finance emergency activities
 through reallocating funds from the Project, to support the Government's response to the impacts of
 Hurricanes Eta and Lota. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Bank continued to provide support remotely
 through virtual meetings. The support provided by the supervision team aided in safeguards and fiduciary
 compliance (discussed in section 10). There was good and continued leadership with the same Task Team
 Leader (TTL) from beginning to project closure and the TTL had also led the preceding project.

 Bank performance during supervision is rated as satisfactory.


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



 Overall Bank performance is rated as Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PGR through the PCU was responsible for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The IDA Credit was to
 finance activities relating to gathering baseline date to assess the Project's social, environmental and
 economic impacts, including gender-differentiated data (PAD, para 45). The results framework was clear,
 and the key outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project performance (discussed in section
 four).



b. M&E Implementation
  With the activation of the CERC component, key outcome and intermediate indicators were specified for
  the added component. With the project restructuring, the results framework was revised to reflect the
  scaled down activities. Four household impact evaluation surveys were conducted during the project
  execution period.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data on project performance, progress and results were used to inform project management and
  decision-making. The impact evaluation and an additional economic evaluation contracted by the PCU,
  provided key data to develop the ex-post economic analysis.

  Overall M&E is rated as High, given the well-developed M&E system that was well implemented and
  used (in addition to having four household impact evaluation surveys).



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                               Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



  The Project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
  Five safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural
  Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); Forests (OP/BP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary
  Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 4). Indigenous Peoples (4.10( was triggered during implementation,
  with the activation of CERC.

  Environment Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests and Physical Cultural Resources. Major adverse
  environmental impacts were not expected from the Project activities. The PAD (para 56) noted that minor
  works under components one and two could have some impacts. These works were generally small in
  number, temporary and reversible. The safeguards on Natural Habitats and Forests were triggered, as land
  regularization in rural areas could have adverse impacts for critical natural habitats and forests. The
  safeguards was triggered to address "chance finds". An Environment Assessment (EA) and Environmental
  Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at appraisal to address these safeguards.

  Overall safeguards was rated as satisfactory at Project closing (ICR, para 70). The Project fully complied
  with the WB policies, excepting for a brief period between June 2022 and June 2023, when there were
  issues related to the rural roads rehabilitation activities under the CERC. These issues were
  satisfactorily addressed. An issue pertaining to a road accident in April 2022, was also resolved when the
  Project closed (ICR, para 70).

  Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples (IP). Physical displacement was not expected under
  the Project. However, the safeguards on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered considering the potential
  restriction of access to natural resources related to the demarcation of the external boundaries of the
  Protected Areas (PAs). At appraisal a Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to assess any risk of
  impacts on stakeholders, and a Process Framework was prepared and publicly disclosed. The safeguards
  on IPs was triggered, as the CERC planned to finance activities for the recovery of of the artisanal fishing
  sector to benefit IP in the Caribbean Region. The Government prepared a required Emergency Action Plan
  to support early recovery activities.

  The performance on social safeguards was deemed satisfactory (ICR, para 71). The project avoided
  restricting community members' access by adopting a collaborative approach with local communities,
  enlisting their involvement in activities related to the natural resources of the protected areas.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management (FM). The Bank conducted an assessment of the FM arrangements of the PCU in
  the PGR . The assessment concluded that the FM arrangements were adequate to carry out the financial
  activities of the Project (PAD, para 53).

  FM performance was rated as Satisfactory during implementation (ICR, para 72). The FM system
  implemented and operated satisfactorily. Bi-annual interim financial reports were submitted in a timely
  fashion. Audit reports that were submitted timely to the WB were unmodified, with clear opinions.




                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment of the PCU at appraisal.
   The PCU had gained experience while executing the second Bank-financed second land operation and the
   assessment concluded that the procurement arrangements were satisfactory (PAD, para 54).

   The procurement rating was satisfactory throughout implementation (ICR, para 73). The procurement plan
   was updated periodically during implementation. The support provided by the team aided in procurement
   compliance and there was no reported case of mis-procurement.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   High                   High

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Sustained engagement might improve the potential for land administration projects. Bank's
experience with such projects is that they require time. The lesson from this project is that it might
help in initially focusing on the key building blocks of land administration in the country, then building
institutional capacity through pilot interventions and scaling up progressively to ensure that results
are sustainable.

2. Focusing on immediate recovery needs can help in designing a contingent emergency
response component (CERC). In this project, the CERC activities were agreed upon first before
identifying the strategic emergency response needs, the World Bank crisis response toolkit, options
available for the country and coordination with development partners.




                                                                                                      Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Property Rights Strengthening Project (P163531)



3. Designing a gender strategy may raise the potential for securing women's land rights. This
project prioritized a Gender strategy. This helped in generating a high level of women's participation
in field activities, training and leadership. The strategy was also facilitated by the Project's provision
of childcare spaces during meetings and events. These factors allowed women to engage fully in the
project and underscored the importance of women's role in economic stability and community
development.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is well-written and adheres to the recommended page length. The theory of change provided in the
text clearly specifies the causal links between the project activities, outputs and the intended outcomes. The
ICR also explicitly states the assumptions underlying the results framework. The evidence provided in the text
is adequate to assess project performance. The ICR draws reasonably good lessons from the experience of
implementing this project.

One shortcoming of the ICR is that no split rating was done despite the reduction in project scope and
targets, when the Contingent Emergency Response was activated. Given that the targets were reduced, the
IEG guidelines call for a split rating methodology to determine the outcome rating. The ICR could have clarified
that the split evaluation was considered but not done since some of the original targets were exceeded.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 18 of 18
