     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024347

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P170595                                     Lima Metropolitano North Extension

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Peru                                        Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-90400                                  31-Jan-2023                                         92,998,154.78

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 30-Jan-2020                                 30-Apr-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            93,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             93,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         92,999,999.74                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Natalya Stankevich          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Loan Agreement (Schedule 1) and the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 11) are “to improve urban mobility and accessibility to jobs in the area of
   influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension”. BRT stands for Bus Rapid Transit. The PAD defines the
   area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension as the districts of Comas, Los Olivos,
   Independencia, and the urban areas of Carabayllo.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



   In this validation, the PDOs are assessed in the two parts as follows:

   (i) to improve urban mobility in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension; and

   (ii) to improve accessibility to jobs in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1. BRT infrastructure and equipment. (Cost at appraisal: US$117 million, of which the
   IBRD’s commitment was US$92 million and Metropolitan Municipality of Lima’s (MML’s) commitment was
   US$25 million; actual cost was US$110.7 million, of which the IBRD’s actual share was US$91.5 million and
   MML’s actual contribution was US$19.2 million). This component was to finance:

        a. the Metropolitano BRT North Extension through (i) (a) construction of 10.2 km of segregated
           busways between Terminal Naranjal and the new Terminal Chimpu Ocllo, 17 passenger stations, 21
           pedestrian crossings, two pedestrian footbridges, and one bus terminal; (b) expansion of the existing
           bus depot in the Sinchi Roca Park; (c) installation of road safety signaling; and (d) upgrading of the
           wastewater treatment plant and installation of a technified irrigation system; (ii) installation of
           equipment and technology to support BRT operations and traffic control; (iii) carrying out of
           complementary works for the removal of utilities by replacing water and sanitation mains in some
           intersections of the extended corridor mentioned herein; (iv) implementation of environmental and
           social instruments; and (v) carrying out of supervision of the works and services.
        b. Optimization of the Metropolitano BRT operations and services, including: (i) the preparation of
           a pre-operational plan for the integration of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension to the current
           Metropolitano BRT system; (ii) optimization of a services plan and scheduling of feeder routes; (iii)
           the development of a personalization module for the Metropolitano BRT integrated smart card
           system; (iv) the provision of a software for bus programming; (v) the development of operational
           performance indicators; (vi) the carrying out of quality of services surveys; and (vii) the provision of
           training, preparation of emergency plans and testing and calibration of the Metropolitano BRT
           operations.

   Component 2. Project management and environmental and social management (Cost at appraisal:
   US$6 million, of which the IBRD commitment was US$1 million and MML’s commitment was US$5 million;
   actual cost was US$12.4 million, of which IBRD loan was US$1.5 million and MML’s actual contribution was
   US$10.9 million). It was to finance:

        a. Project management, including inter alia: (i) institutional/technical strengthening of the Metropolitan
          Municipality of Lima (MML) Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the Technical Coordination Unit
          (TCU); (ii) hiring of Project staff; (iii) carrying out of financial management (including project audits),
          procurement, disbursement, monitoring and evaluation activities; and (iv) carrying out of
          assessments on the project indicators measuring performance and road safety.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



       b. Environmental and social management, including inter alia: (i) implementation of the
          Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) and the management tools and instruments
          referred to therein; (ii) provision of Training to support the implementation of the Environmental and
          Social Standards and on international good practices to mitigate environmental and social risks; and
          (iii) development and implementation of a Gender Action Plan (GAP) for MML with concrete actions
          to address women’s mobility barriers and employment in the Metropolitano BRT.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Costs. The total project cost at appraisal was estimated at US$123 million, and the actual project
   cost was a bit higher - US$123.1 million (ICR, p. 31, Annex 3).

   Financing. The World Bank financed the project with an IBRD loan of US$93 million, and the loan was
   almost entirely disbursed. At the closing, disbursement stood at US$ 92,998,154.78 (ICR, p. i., Datasheet).

   Borrower’s contribution. The Borrower, through MML, was expected to contribute US$30 million. The
   actual contribution was slightly higher - US$30.1 million.

   Dates. The project was approved on January 30, 2020, became effective on June 19, 2020, carried out a
   mid-term review (MTR) on December 7, 2021, and closed on April 30, 2024, which was 15 months later
   than originally planned on January 31, 2023.

   Restructuring. The project with disbursement at 86.88 percent underwent a Level 2 restructuring which
   was approved on January 20, 2023. The restructuring was carried out to extend the closing date of the
   Project by 15 months from January 31, 2023, to April 30, 2024 and align the implementation schedule with
   the new closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and Sector Context at Appraisal. Despite its 49 percent contribution to the national GDP, the
Lima Metropolitan Area (LMA) faced persistent poverty, especially in the northern districts at the time of the
project appraisal. While serving as a hub for commerce, industry, and services, with predominantly informal
economic activities, LMA struggled with inefficient and unaffordable urban public transport services. About
73 percent of the population relied on public transport for their daily commute, which was considered
inefficient and unaffordable and, thus, hindering access of the low-income households living predominantly
in North Lima to social services, jobs and markets in the LMA spatial development zones. Despite 32,000
buses, microbuses, and vans (combis) serving 560 routes and 12.1 million daily trips, urban public transport
still struggled to meet the demand. The Lima BRT reached its capacity limit and was functioning over the
capacity which led to congestions at some stations. The construction of the North Extension became a
priority to improve connectivity and access in low-income districts of the capital, improve the quality of
service for vulnerable populations, including women and persons with disabilities, and strengthen
institutional capacity for the long-term sustainability of Lima’s urban transport system.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



Alignment with the Government Strategies. At the time of appraisal, the PDO was aligned with Peru’s
National Development Plan 2016–21 that included enhancing connectivity, providing opportunities for the
poor, and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions through efficient transport systems, in alignment with
climate change management goals of 30 percent emissions reduction target (2015 Peru’s Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution; ICR, p.2, para 4). At closing, the PDO remained aligned with the Local
Climate Change Plan for Lima province 2021–2030 (PLCC-LIMA), which outlines key initiatives for reducing
GHG emissions in Lima’s transport sector, including enhancing the BRT (ICR, p. 5, para 16). In addition,
the PDO was still aligned with the country’s strategy with the ‘Strategic Plan for National Development to
2050’, Objective 1 “providing the country with quality economic and social infrastructure” and with Lima’s
Metropolitan Development Plan 2040 (PLANMET 2040, developed by the MML and the Ministry of Housing,
Construction and Sanitation; ICR, p. 5, para 14).

Alignment with the Bank Strategies. According to the ICR (p. 5, para 15), the PDO was aligned with the
World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for FY17–FY21 by supporting Pillar I, “Connecting the
Poor to the Services and Markets,” Objective 2.2. “Increase mobility and road network both in urban and
rural areas”. At the time of closing, the PDO remained aligned with the World Bang Group’s Strategy – CPF
for FY23-27 approved on December 22, 2022, particularly, with its high-level outcomes (HLOs) of
“Increased access to quality economic opportunities for workers and entrepreneurs” (HLO1), “Improved
access to quality public services across the territory” (HLO2), and “Increased resilience to shocks” (HLO3).
Furthermore, the PDO was also aligned with (i) the World Bank’s Green, Resilient, and Inclusive
Development (GRID) framework, emphasizing “fostering sustainable development pathways that integrate
environmental considerations and ensure inclusiveness through a safer and more inclusive BRT system for
all, especially women and PWD” (ICR, p. 5, para 15), (ii) World Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan for
2021-2025 through the Project’s efforts to mitigate the impacts of climate change and promote sustainable
urban transport, and (iii) the World Bank’s Peru Country Climate and Development Report (Peru CCDR)
that recommends the expansion of the BRT system in major Peruvian cities, including Lima (ICR, p. 5, para
16).

Previous Sector Experience. The PDO definition and the project design were informed by the previous
engagement which had supported the universal mobility agenda in Lima and the capacity building of the
MML (PAD, p. 16, para 21 (d)). The Recipient-executed trust fund technical assistance “Mainstreaming
Inclusive Design and Universal Mobility in Lima” which was implemented during 2012-2017 helped design
and built a pilot BRT station, Dos de Mayo, with universal mobility/access considerations, specifically to
address the mobility needs of people with disabilities. This station became a model for replication and
lessons learnt were translated into practical recommendations for BRT and Metro projects and for capacity
building in the provision of inclusive urban transport. Peru’s Ministry of Housing, Construction and
Sanitation updated and strengthened its regulations to ensure that urban transport infrastructure designs
included universal mobility/access considerations. As part of this project’s preparations, the World Bank
also carried out a universal access assessment of the designs of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension
and ensured that its relevant recommendations were included in the designs and bidding documents. “That
assessment focused, in particular, on the design of pedestrian crossings, access to stations, elevators for
people with disabilities, pedestrian bridges, appropriate signaling, fare collection infrastructure, and
equipment to support PWD during emergencies” (PAD, p. 16, para 21(d)).

The relevance of the PDO is rated as High. The PDOs were fully aligned with the World Bank and
Country’s strategies both at appraisal and closing of the project. The PDOs were pitched at the outcome-
oriented level of improving urban mobility to address the development problem of inequality in a low-income
area (as discussed in the PAD’s country context) which was exacerbated by inefficient and unaffordable

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 21
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



               public transportation hindering accessibility to socioeconomic opportunities. The PDOs were also
               formulated at the appropriate level given the capacity of the country and implementing agency at the time of
               appraisal.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To improve urban mobility in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension.

                             Rationale
                             The ICR (p.2, figure 2) presented a Theory of Change (ToC) which was used at the time of appraisal and
                             reflected in the PAD (p. 13). The ToC has been reconstructed by the IEG to better clarify the project’s
                             interventions at the start of the results chain as the original ToC in the PAD and ICR limits the interventions to
                             only two activities: design and construction of BRT infrastructure and equipment and plan for the optimization
                             of the BRT operations and services. The ToC for Objective 1 as reconstructed by the IEG is that the project
                             would use the project’s inputs - IBRD loan and MML’s contribution – to finance such activities as to: (i)
                             construct segregated busways, bus terminals, passenger stations, pedestrian crossings and footbridges; (ii)
                             expand the existing bus depot; (iii) install road safety signaling; (iv) upgrade a wastewater treatment plant; (v)
                             install a technified irrigation system; (vi) install equipment and technology to support BRT operations and
                             traffic control; (vii) carry out complementary works to replace water and sanitation mains in some
                             intersections of the extended corridor; (viii) prepare a pre-operational plan for the integration of the
                             Metropolitano BRT North Extension into the existing Metropolitano BRT system; (ix) develop a plan for
                             optimization of the BRT services and scheduling of feeding routes; (x) develop a module for the Metropolitano
                             BRT integrated smart card system; (xi) provide a software for bus programming; (xii) identify operational
                             performance indicators; (xiii) carry out quality of services surveys; and (xiv) provide training, prepare
                             emergency plans, test and calibrate the Metropolitano BRT operations. The activities would lead to such
                             outputs as (i) constructed segregated busways, bus terminals, passenger stations, pedestrian crossings and
                             foot bridges; (ii) expanded bus depot; (iii) installed road safety signaling; (iv) upgraded wastewater treatment
                             plant; (v) installed technified irrigation system; (vi) installed equipment and technology to support BRT
                             operations and traffic control; (vii) replaced water and sanitation mains in some intersections of the extended
                             corridor; (viii) pre-operational plan in place for the integration of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension into
                             the existing Metropolitano BRT system; (ix) plan for optimization of the BRT services and scheduling of
                             feeding routes developed; (x) module for the Metropolitano BRT integrated smart card system developed; (xi)
                             available software for bus programming; (xii) operational performance indicators identified; (xiii) quality of
                             services surveys carried out; and (xiv) training provided, and prepared, tested and calibrated emergency
                             plans for the Metropolitano BRT operation. In terms of outcomes, these outputs were to lead to improved
                             urban mobility in the area of the project influence as measured by: (i) in-vehicle travel time for public transport
                             users between two terminals, (ii) number of passenger trips per day in the project influence area differentiated

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



by levels of income of passengers and gender of passengers, (iii) share of users satisfied with the service in
the northern BRT extension (coverage, reliability, safety, personal security) differentiated by socioeconomic
level and gender, and (iv) change in the share of women passengers satisfied with service in terms of safety,
security.

The main assumptions were that (i) the civil works would progress as per the plan, (ii) the integration of the
new extension into the existing BRT system would be completed on time, (iii) the reorganization of bus routes
would be completed right after the completion of the civil works and bus operators are fully on board with the
reorganization, and (iv) the government authority overseeing the Lima BRT operation would ensure that the
new terminals and bus stations are open for services soon after the completion of the civil works. The ToC as
reconstructed by the IEG had no major logical gaps, and the results are likely attributable to the project
activities.

Outputs

The Project delivered the following outputs:

      100 percent of physical progress in building segregated BRT lanes on the Metropolitano BRT North
         Extension. The target of 100 percent was achieved.
        10.2 km of the road constructed. The target of10.2 km was achieved.
        100 percent of physical progress in constructing passenger stations on the Metropolitano BRT North
         Extension. The target of 100 percent was achieved.
        17 passenger stations were constructed that provide access for people with disabilities. The target of
         17 passenger stations that provide access for people with disabilities was achieved. However, only
         four out of 17 at the ICR submission time were in operation.
        100 percent of physical progress in constructing pedestrian bridges on the Metropolitano BRT North
         Extension. The target of 100 percent was achieved.
        Completed construction of three U-turns on the Metropolitano BRT North extension. The target of 3
         U-turns constructed was achieved.
        100 percent of physical progress of constructing the Chimpu Ocllo bus terminal on the Metropolitano
         BRT North Extension. The target of 100 percent was achieved.
        100 percent of physical progress in expanding a bus depot on the Metropolitano BRT North Extension.
         The target of 100 percent was achieved.
        10.2 km of Carriageway-km was covered by installing infrastructure and/or equipment designed to
         reduce speeds (Kilometers). The target of 10.2 km was achieved.
        Completed integration of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension into the existing BRT system based
         on the preoperational plan. The target (yes) was achieved.
        Harmonized Response Protocol to address cases of sexual harassment in the Metropolitano BRT is
         used by Protransporte. The target (yes) was achieved.
        The capacity of Protransporte's bus scheduling task team was improved. The target (yes) was
         achieved. According to the Bank team’s answer on January 15, 2025, a training on bus scheduling
         was provided by an expert who used to be the ITS Director in the Transmilenio in Bogota, Colombia.
        Diagnosis and improvement of service plans, route scheduling, and bus dispatch services were
         completed. The target (yes) was achieved.
        The state-of-the-art software and methodology for scheduling feeder and trunk services were not
         implemented due to the prevalence of a software concession contract for the BRT with the ATU. The

                                                                                                 Page 6 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



         Bank team clarified to the IEG on January 15, 2025 that this contract is due to expire soon. The target
         of the state-of-the-art software and methodology for scheduling feeder and trunk services
         implemented was not achieved. According to the ICR (footnote 13) and the Bank team (January 15,
         2025), the BRT system uses TRANSCAT software, which is modern, but not a state-of-the-art one, for
         bus programming as of October 2024. The Bank team updated the IEG (January 24, 2025) that the
         ATU budgeted for various upgrades and improvements to its bus scheduling software and other
         related technologies through 2025.
        Enhanced M&E framework for monitoring operational performance indicators was implemented on the
         Metropolitano BRT. The target (Yes) was achieved. The Bank team confirmed on January 15,
         2025)that the new performance indicators to improve the BRT operation had been proposed during
         the project preparation. Those new operational performance indicators had been introduced by the
         Protransporte before they were absorbed by the ATU.
        Operational efficiencies were not implemented. This intermediate indicator was defined in the PAD as
         progress in implementing preoperational and transition activities as described in Project
         Subcomponent 1.b for the integration to the current Metropolitano BRT. The target of 2 operational
         efficiencies implemented was not achieved.
        The feeder-route service plan was updated and upgraded. The target of one (1) feeder-route
         service plan was updated and upgraded was achieved.
        The trunk service plan was updated. The target of one (1) updated trunk service plan was
         achieved.
        The plan for an expanded, integrated and improved fare collection system on the entire Metropolitano
         BRT system was not implemented. The target (yes) was not achieved. This is expected to be
         implemented within 4-6 months after the contract addendum with the concessionaire is signed early
         this year.
        The integration and expansion of the existing Metropolitano BRT fare collection system with the North
         Extension (including feeder routes) was completed. The Target (Yes) was not fully achieved. The
         integration of the fare collection system was only done for the four stations in operation, but not for the
         remaining 13 stations because of the terms and conditions of the current fare collection system
         concession contract. This is subject to the signing of the contract addendum with the fare collection
         concessionaire, which is expected early this year according to the Bank team’s update on February
         10, 2025. Once signed, the installation of fare collection equipment at the 13 stations is expected to be
         completed and operational within 4-6 months.
        12 percent of personalized smart cards of total active smart cards for the Metropolitano BRT system
         was achieved. The target of 25 percent was not achieved.

The Project did not deliver the following outputs by the project closing date:

      The pre-operational plan was finalized with delay after the project closing date;
      The new BRT infrastructure built under the project was not transferred to the ATU;
      13 out of the 17 stations built under the project were not open for the operation. According to the Bank
         team (February 10, 2025), the contract addendum with the fair collection concessionaire is expected
         to be signed early this year and the remaining stations are expected to be opened within 4-6 months
         afterwards.

The ICR also reported on additional outputs not covered by the RF and hence without target values:



                                                                                                      Page 7 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)




      “A GAP (Gender Action Plan) was prepared as part of Subcomponent 1b to guide the implementation
       of the activities. Adhering to violence prevention environmental design criteria, particularly at stations,
       pedestrian bridges, and Terminal Chimpu Ocllo, the Project incorporated features such as closed-
       circuit television (CCTV) systems, glass elevators, and open corridors to ensure safe mobility for
       women” (ICR, p. 10, para 30).
      “in the absence of the new pre-operational plan, the ATU allocated 40 buses from the existing fleet of
       approximately 300 buses operating in the trunk BRT system. This bus redistribution has affected the
       level of service, resulting in longer bus intervals and, consequently, longer waiting times for the routes
       from which the 40 buses were redistributed”(ICR, p. 8, para 20).

Outcomes

The above listed outputs lead to the following outcomes:

      19.75 minutes travel time between Terminal Naranjal and Los Incas bus station, which is three bus
         stops before Terminal Chimpu Occlo (ICR, p. 5, Figure 3). The target of 17 minutes of travel time
         for public transport users between Terminal Chimpu Ocllo and Terminal Naranjal was not achieved
         because Terminal Chimpu Ocllo and 13 other bus stations were not open for operation by the project
         closing date. The target was achieved for 80.35 percent with one terminal and 4 out of 13 bus stations
         opened. The team informed IEG (January 15, 2025) that Terminal Chimpu Ocllo was open on
         December 21, 2024. Please refer to the above paragraph about the anticipated opening of the
         remaining bus stations. The ICR predicts that the situation may worsen as the ATU starts operating
         the rest of the infrastructure if new buses are not added to the fleet. (ICR, p. 8, para 20).
        24,000 passenger trips occur per day in the Metropolitano BRT North Extension. The target of 60,000
         passenger trips per day was not achieved.
        Low-income passengers represent 43 percent of total validations entering the northern terminals of
         the Metropolitano BRT system. The target of 42 percent was slightly exceeded (by 2.38 percent),
         although the data was collected only at four out of the 13 bus stations which were in operation.
        Women passengers represent 48 percent of total validations per day on the Metropolitano BRT North
         Extension (feeder and trunk buses) based on the data collected at the four stations in operation. The
         target of 49 percent was almost achieved.
        3 percent of women passengers of total surveyed women at the four stations in operation reported
         shifting from informal transport modes to the Metropolitano BRT North Extension. The target of 10
         percent was not achieved. The ICR attributes this low achievement in the modal shift for women
         passengers to the low number of stations (only four out of 17) in operation. The ICR, however,
         highlights once the remaining stations become operational, the target could be achieved because the
         measures to promote a modal shift among women passengers (e.g., CCTV cameras, increased
         safety, and time saved) were implemented. “The gender analysis indicated that limited BRT coverage
         was a significant constraint compared to informal modes like combis, which, despite safety issues,
         offered greater coverage and met the unmet demand, particularly for low-income women. Women
         mentioned they would use the BRT more if it had better coverage” (ICR, p. 11, para 30). With the
         opening of the remaining 13 stations, the coverage would significantly expand.
        77 percent of surveyed users expressed their satisfaction with the service in the northern BRT
         extension (coverage, reliability, safety, personal security). The target of 65 percent was exceeded,
         although the data was collected at the four stations in operation.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 21
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)




      20 percent increase in women passengers who expressed their satisfaction with service in terms of
       safety and security. The target of 10 percent was exceeded, although the data was collected at the
       four stations in operation.
      Women employed in the Metropolitano BRT (Percentage). No data was reported in the ICR. The
       target of 20 percent cannot be considered as achieved.

The ICR reported additional results which were not covered by the results framework and hence did not have
target values. Those include the following:

      Currently, passengers spend an average of 32.07 minutes in the BRT. This has increased by 4
         percent to 33.31 minutes for those accessing the system in the North.
        Regarding the waiting time at stations, 53 percent of users surveyed wait between 5 and 15 minutes
         to take the bus, and 44 percent wait more than 15 minutes on average.
        Most BRT users (81 percent of those surveyed) have the perception that the BRT is safe from robbery
         and theft.
        Out of all surveyed women and elderly people, 79 percent of women and 76 percent of the elderly
         have the perception that the BRT is safe from robbery and theft.
        22 percent of women, compared to 12 percent of men, find the service very unsafe regarding
         harassment. Women view aspects such as personal accidents, traffic incidents, and service facilities 2
         to 6 percentage points more negatively than men.
        82 percent of the respondents consider the BRT better or much better than other transport services.

The Efficacy for Objective 1 is rated as Modest. The project did not achieve most of its outcome indicator
targets. While the project exceeded its two outcome targets related to the satisfaction rate and ratio of low-
income passengers, and almost achieved the target of women passengers using the BRT North Extension,
the assessment was done based on the data collected only for less than a quarter of stations in operation. In
the meantime, the key outcomes related to urban mobility – travel time and daily ridership - were not
achieved.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve accessibility to jobs in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension.

Rationale
The TOC for this objective as presented in the PAD (p. 13) and the ICR (p.2, figure 2) is that the activities,
outputs delivered and outcomes achieved under Objective 1 would result into the outcome of improved
accessibility to jobs in the project influence area as measured by the average number of jobs reachable by
public transportation within a 60-minute, one-way commute in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT
North. The assumptions are that no external factors would cause a decline in the availability of job



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 21
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



                            opportunities in the project area and demand for jobs from low-income residents in the Northern Lima would
                            remain at the same level as before the project.

                            Outcome

                                  198,106 jobs on average are reachable by public transportation within a 60-minute, one-way commute
                                     in the area of influence of the Metropolitano BRT North Extension. This indicator measures the access
                                     to jobs by public transport within 60-minute, one-way commute in the area of influence of the whole
                                     Metropolitano BRT North Extension (10.2 km). The target of 165,990 jobs was exceeded by 19
                                     percent. While this indicator was measured based on the data collected at the four BRT stations in
                                     operation because the other 13 stations were not in operation yet, the number of jobs as estimated by
                                     the project team would be around 206,123 once the remaining 13 stations are to become operational.

                            The ICR reported an additional outcome which was not covered by the results framework and hence did not
                            have a target:

                                  51 percent of survey respondents believed that the system would reduce their travel time to regular
                                     destinations such as workplaces, hospitals, clinics, and educational institutions.

                            The Efficacy for Objective 2 is rated as Substantial with moderate shortcomings because the outcome
                            target was exceeded based on the data reported for the four stations only in operation. The indicator was
                            used to monitor access to potential jobs rather than the project’s direct contribution to the creation of jobs.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Objective 1 is rated Modest and Objective 2 is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings, resulting in an
                            Overall Efficacy rating of Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                    Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                     Low achievement


   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   The ICR used the same methodology for a cost-benefit analysis (CBA) to assess the economic efficiency of the
   project at closing as the one used at appraisal. At appraisal, the CBA compared likely outcomes with and

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



without the project and calculated the net present value (NPV) of estimated costs and benefits and the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR). The economic costs included capital costs during the construction phase and
operation and maintenance (O&M) during the operational phase. The project’s quantifiable economic benefits
included travel-time savings; savings in vehicle operating costs (VOC) changing from traditional modes of
transport to BRT buses; and greenhouse gas (GHG) and pollutant emissions reductions. The proposed project
was also expected to yield non-quantified benefits such as reduced accidents and increased accessibility for
users with disabilities. The CBA results produced an NPV of US$75.4 million at a 6 percent discount rate and an
EIRR of 11.52 percent for a 20-year evaluation period. A sensitivity analysis was carried out and considered the
combined impact of lower demand (20 percent decline) and higher investment costs (20 percent increase), and
still produced a positive NPV of US$46.3 million and EIRR of 9.06 percent.

The ex-post CBA showed that the project achieved an EIRR of 18.6 percent and an NPV of US$56 million at a 6
percent discount rate. The ICR explains the changes in NPV and IRR values at completion stage with respect
to appraisal because of an increase in the construction period and actual civil work costs being lower than
estimated at appraisal (given a lower price offered by the contractor). As the number of passengers for the
Extension does not meet the original target (since only four out of 17 stations are in operation), benefits from
passengers changing modes are less than expected, and the main source of benefits is the reduction in public
transit O&M costs given that the overall system is more efficient.

Implementation and Administrative Efficiency

At closing, the project had a minor cost increase – from US$123.0 million to US$123.1 million and was
completed with a 15-month delay. Almost all activities were implemented by the project closing date, except for
the activities (i.e., three activities under Sub-component 1b) which were affected by the terms of the concerned
concession contracts signed before the approval of this project. The project experienced implementation delays
related to the removal of the utilities interferences which resulted in the suspension of civil works and their
subsequent cost increase, though the works were successfully completed by the project closing date. The final
contract price increased by 20 percent, which is by the exact same amount that the contract had been awarded
lower than the price estimate at appraisal. The project also faced delays in financial management activities and
the preparation of the pre-operational plan which was finalized after the closing date. Redistribution of the buses
to accommodate the system extension resulted in longer waiting times and intervals on other BRT routes. 13
stations out of 17 stations were not operational at the project closing time, but are expected to become
operational in the next 4-6 months after the signing of the addendum to the respective concession contract.

The Efficiency is rated as Substantial because the project was completed with efficiency at the EIRR higher
than estimated at appraisal and with some delayed implementation and most of activities, except for the three
ones, completed by the closing date without project cost-overrun.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)

                                                                                                     Page 11 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



                                                                                      82.50
Appraisal                                                  11.50
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      74.00
ICR Estimate                                               18.60
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy is rated as High, Overall
Efficacy is rated as Modest, and Efficiency was rated as Substantial. Overall Outcome is, thus, Moderately
Unsatisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Unsatisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Institutional risk. The lack of effective coordination between the MML and ATU was the main factor
adversely affecting the timely preparation of (i) an operational plan for the integration of the BRT North
Extension into the existing system and (ii) service quality surveys. Due to its low capacity and high staff
turnover, it took the ATU longer than expected to review and approve the terms of refences and
subsequently both ATU and MML took a longer time in the review and approval of the deliverables from
those two activities. According to the ICR (p. 16, para 50), at the time of the project closing, the ATU did not
seem to be well prepared to take over the infrastructure and launch its operation due to the ATU’s frequent
staff turnovers and lack of appreciation of the M&E in informing their decisions about the BRT system
operation. The ATU which had been established right before the project approval was neither the
implementing agency nor a party to the Legal Agreement for this project, which affected its project ownership
and overall interest in the effective communication with the MML and Bank. As the ATU is a new agency
which still experiences frequent staff turnover and disruptions in its capacity building , there may be lapses in
the operation and management of the North Extension.

Technical risk. The ICR highlights that the ATU has presented a plan to improve the BRT system and
update its bus fleet, but is yet to implement this plan. The lack of operational improvements in the BRT
system, timely renewal of the bus fleet and ATU’s limited vehicle purchase capacity are likely to continue to
affect the BRT’s ability to deliver the mobility targets as originally planned in this project.

Contractual risks. The terms of the three current concession contracts which had been signed before the
approval of this project prevented the Borrower to open the remaining 13 stations, upgrade the scheduling
software to the state-of-the-art level and implement the fare collection system in the remaining stations by
the project closing date. The contract addendum with the fare collection concessionaire is expected to be
signed early this year, and the opening of the remaining stations and the installation of fare collection
equipment are expected to be completed and operational at the 13 stations within 4-6 months. The
scheduling methodology and software as part of the fare collection system concession are also under review,

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 21
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



with the potential of the associated contract to be amended as the Bank is supporting the government in
these efforts under the ongoing trust fund activity. Until these concessions are either renegotiated or expire
and new ones are signed, the ATU will not be able to deliver the completion of these three main activities
critical for the full operation of the North Extension and achievement of the targets of the associated
operational indicators.

Ownership risk. There may be some resistance or even protests from informal transport operators, combis,
that provide taxi services in the project influence area, when the remaining stations are open and new bus
routing and schedules are implemented. While the combi services may be cheaper, people prefer to use
feeders that are fare-integrated with the Metropolitano BRT system, as they are safer both in terms of traffic
and personal security. Combis respond to demand, and if the demand is covered by the feeders, they are
likely to take other routes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  While the preparation of detailed engineering designs had been contracted out before the project, the
  project preparation began with significant World Bank support. The Bank allocated considerable
  resources and supported the counterpart in the design of the Project and the delivery of key preparatory
  documents. The Project was prepared in a record time of seven months, including completion of the
  feasibility studies, draft bidding documents for Component 1, and safeguards instruments. The Bank also
  took on board lessons learnt from similar BRT operations in Lima and other cities in the region. Based on
  those previous experiences, the Bank ensured that the project preparation (i) prioritized relocation of
  vendors through participatory approaches, (ii) carried out accessibility and other studies to incorporate
  technical improvements on universal accessibility and gender in the designs, especially for public spaces,
  and (iii) collected data on baseline traffic fatalities and injuries and conducted a road safety assessment
  on the engineering designs to cover the safety of all road users and for the management of temporary
  traffic diversions (ICR, p. 13, para 38). The universal access assessment of the designs of the
  Metropolitano BRT North Extension carried out by the World Bank ensured that its relevant
  recommendations were included in the designs and bidding documents, as the original feasibility studies
  lacked features of comprehensive urban insertion and associated road safety features. Due to the
  assessment’s recommendations, the designs were revised and enhanced with the pedestrian crossings,
  access to stations, elevators for people with disabilities, pedestrian bridges, appropriate signaling, fare
  collection infrastructure, and equipment to support people with disabilities during emergencies.

  However, the Bank did not give sufficient attention to urban integration at appraisal. The infrastructure
  integration in the urban environment was eventually limited, without consideration for nonmotorized
  transport infrastructure. While a preliminary operational assessment was conducted at appraisal, it had
  some deficiencies and underestimated the need for new buses. The Bank also failed to recognize the risk
  of the operating agency not timely delivering the pre-operational plan that adversely affected the
  reorganization of feeder routes and bus scheduling during the first years after the completion of the civil
  works. Because the ATU which was to take over the management of the BRT system after the project
  completion was not involved in the project negotiations and was not part of the Loan Agreement, this later
  created problems during the implementation.


                                                                                                     Page 13 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



  In light of the above discussed major shortcomings during the project preparation which eventually
  affected the achievement of part of the PDO-level outcomes, the Bank’s Quality-at-Entry is rated as
  Moderately Unsatisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 During implementation, the Bank conducted its supervision missions biannually and increased their
 frequency when critical issues emerged. The team also held biweekly meetings on technical issues and
 weekly meetings on safeguards, health and safety issues. The Bank team brought in experience from other
 BRT projects, including expertise in BRT implementation and operation that the Bank had financed,
 facilitated coordination between the government entities albeit facing significant challenges, ensured the
 incorporation of universal accessibility and safety features in the designs through a post-construction safety
 audit, and provided rigorous technical guidance on addressing the social safeguards issues in the
 compliance with the Bank requirements which the MML had previously dealt with in a different manner. The
 Bank enhanced its team with a pavement engineering expert to address the quality issues of the
 construction works and pavement. The Bank also provided Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support
 (HEIS) to assist the TCU with procurement tasks.

 The ICR (p. 19, para 61) refers to the Bank’s lack of proactivity in timely recommendations to the MML and
 ATU in addressing emerging issues. Due to the Bank’s imbalanced attention to Subcomponents 1a and 1b,
 the activities (1b) related to optimization of the Metropolitano BRT operations and services were slipping in
 their implementation and quality assurance. It was observed that the Bank team increased their efforts in
 improving the coordination between MML and the ATU in the second half of project implementation,
 building the ATU’s capacity, and increasing the ATU’s understanding of the M&E role in monitoring the
 project performance.

 The Bank informed IEG on January 15, 2025, that they continued a proactive engagement and support to
 the ATU in resolving the remaining issues which prevented the full operationalization of the North
 Extension, including technical assistance in the management and renegotiations of the terms of the
 associated concessionaire contracts. Before the closure of this project, the Bank mobilized several trust
 fund grants to provide technical assistance to the ATU on (i) fleet management software of the BRT
 system, (ii) integrated evaluation and planning strategy of the BRT system (operator concession, gas
 center concession, and proposals for next steps), (iii) modernizing strategy of the fare collection system
 with PPP (fare collection concession), and (iv) user affordability and subsidy study. As a result, there has
 been some progress in renegotiation of the terms of concessionaire contracts and the addendum with the
 software the signing of the contract addendum with the fare collection concessionaire, which is expected
 early this year. Once signed, the installation of fare collection equipment at the 13 stations and opening of
 the remaining 13 stations are expected to be completed and operational within 4-6 months. The TF-funded
 activities also help the Bank continue a dialogue about the follow-up project which will either support the
 renewal of the bus fleet or acquisition of new ones, or another BRT extension.

 According to the ICR (p. 16, para 51), the Bank team made a significant effort in collecting the updated
 data for the Results Framework at the closing time of the project. Throughout implementation, the Bank

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



 would mainly collect the data updates during its meetings with the ATU and MML as no regular M&E
 updates were submitted in the progress reports.

 The Bank’s supervision is rated as Moderately Satisfactory due to the strong technical and operational
 support provided to the project despite the shortcomings.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory. The Guidance Manual for the IEG
 Validators recommends that the rating for overall Bank performance is determined based on the outcome
 rating when the rating for one dimension is in the satisfactory range (moderately satisfactory or better), and
 the rating for the other dimension is in the unsatisfactory. Hence, overall Bank performance in this
 project is rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory, given the moderately unsatisfactory rating for the
 outcome.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While there are a few redundant intermediate indicators, overall, the results framework had adequate
 indicators to capture the contribution of the project activities and outputs towards the achievement of the
 PDO-level outcomes. The institutional arrangements for the M&E implementation were rather complex with
 several institutions being involved. The MML was designated to collect data with the assistance of
 Municipal Company for the Support of Strategic Projects (Empresa Municipal de Apoyo a Proyectos
 Estratégicos, EMAPE) and Protransporte during construction and operation, respectively. EMAPE and
 Protransporte were expected to collect data on the PDO and intermediate outcome indicators on quarterly,
 semiannually and annually bases from surveys, BRT system operator, supervision firm, Protransporte’s
 own databases (sexual harassment cases and human resource records), and other sources. The PAD did
 not discuss the role of ATU in the monitoring and collecting of the data as the infrastructure was to be
 transferred to the ATU only after the completion of the construction.



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was not revised during implementation or restructuring despite the institutional
  coordination challenges faced and limited information collected on ad hoc basis. Several PDO-level
  results indicators and operational indicators in the Results Framework were not regularly updated during
  project implementation. The TCU, however, regularly collected the data on and updated the intermediate
  results indicators for Subcomponent 1a only. The TCU had an M&E specialist and an occupational health
  and safety specialist to oversee the GRM throughout the Project and report on construction progress.



                                                                                                    Page 15 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



  Most of these indicators could not be reported until the launch of the BRT extension operation. Lack of
  coordination between the ATU and TCU also contributed to the lack of regular data collection, review of
  evaluation methodologies and timely preparation of progress reports. These challenges clearly indicated
  the need for adjustments to improve the M&E system and institutional arrangements, but no changes
  were considered and introduced either during the mid-term review or at restructuring. At closing, the
  limited involvement of the ATU in updating the status of the indicators, in addition to staff turnover at the
  ATU, led to gaps in information. The World Bank had to request information from the ATU on an ad hoc
  basis to update the results.



c. M&E Utilization
  Due to the ad hoc M&E reporting and lack of the Borrower’s understanding of the M&E value in the
  project performance and implementation, the use of M&E was limited and did not seem to play a role in
  informing important decisions about changes in the project activities or restructuring. The restructuring
  missed an opportunity to improve the M&E design and implementation arrangements.

  The M&E quality is rated as Modest because of shortcomings in the M&E design, as well as during
  implementation and utilization.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   All Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs), except ESSs 7 (Indigenous Peoples) and 9 (Financial
   Intermediaries), were considered relevant in this project. The draft ESIA-S was disclosed on the MML’s
   website on July 25, 2019 and on the World Bank’s website on July 27, 2019. The draft Resettlement Action
   Plan (RAP) was disclosed by the Borrower and the World Bank on August 21, 2019; the Labor Management
   Procedure (LMP) on August 6, 2019; the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and Grievance Redress
   Mechanism (GRM) on August 21, 2019.

   The safeguards risk was rated as Substantial during preparation and implementation, except for October
   2023 when it was temporarily upgraded to High because of road incidents occurrence. The following month
   the risk was downgraded back to Substantial after the progress made in the Road Safety Action Plan
   developed by the Technical Coordination Unit (TCU). This rating mainly responded to (a) potential risks and
   impacts across the Project’s direct and indirect area of influence in a highly urbanized area, (b) project
   activities of large scale and with potentially high risks, such as the relocation of more than 3,000 trees, (c)
   socioeconomic impacts on local businesses and people’s livelihoods, and (d) a lack of capacity of the
   borrower to manage environmental and social risks.

   The project safeguards performance was downgraded to Moderately Satisfactory in June 2021, to
   Moderately Unsatisfactory in December 2021, and to Unsatisfactory in June 2023, mainly because of delays
   in addressing the safeguards issues during project implementation. The project had five traffic incidents

                                                                                                     Page 16 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



  since the opening of the auxiliary lanes, two of which resulted in fatalities. All incidents were reported
  following the ESIRT guidelines. The project closed with the Unsatisfactory rating for environmental and
  social safeguards performance on April 30, 2024. After all, but one issue, were satisfactorily addressed, the
  safeguards performance rating was upgraded back to moderately satisfactory in August 2024 after the
  project closing. The World Bank continues closely monitoring the implementation of the actions in the Post-
  Closure Action Plan (PCAP) related to the installation of green areas which is to be completed by December
  2025. There were many safeguards issues that required a lot of internal reporting that at times caused the
  Bank to slow down its implementation support to the implementation agency.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement. Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory during implementation. Procurement
  started immediately after the loan effectiveness on June 19, 2020. Main procurement activities, including
  the tendering of works and supervision for the investment subcomponent (1a), were executed efficiently
  and within short period of times. Civil works under Subcomponent 1a began within less than a year on April
  19, 2021. The TCU, however, experienced frequent turnover of a procurement specialist. The position was
  often filled with temporary staff which required ongoing trainings, especially for procurement under the
  World Bank’s standards. In addition, the TCU’s senior procurement specialist position was never
  adequately filled with qualified staff. Therefore, the project faced a number of challenges: (a) delays in
  timely and adequate document filing within the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP)
  system, which led to occasional gaps in information records, (b) lack of the TCU’s notifications to the World
  Bank about high cost variations in the works and seeking the Bank’s clearances, and (c) lack of following
  World Bank procurement rules for contract awarding in the first years. An example of procurement
  inefficiency is the four-month delay in contracting the supervision team after the start of works. The Bank
  provided Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS) to assist the TCU team in its continued
  efforts of improving its STEP skills, procurement and contract management performance.

  Financial Management. At appraisal, no significant risks were identified in financial management based
  on the assessment of the MML as a PIU with qualified staff and previous experience in World Bank-
  financed projects coordinated with the MEF. In 2023there were delays in the submissions of project reports
  and audit findings after a prolonged vacancy of the senior financial management specialist position in the
  MML, which was unfilled for about 12 months until September 2023. Specifically, the 2022 audit report was
  nine months late, and the audit report due in June 2023 was not delivered until March 2024. During the
  closing mission, the pending audit had been completed. While the financial specialist of the TCU prepared
  financial reports, the PIU did not take responsibility for these reports, as prescribed in the Project
  Operational Manual. The auditor’s opinions on the financial statements were reported as ‘Unqualified’. The
  main recommendations included timely submission of audit reports and interim financial reports to comply
  with the Legal Agreement. Overall, expenditures were consistently tracked within the Designated Account,
  which facilitated the effective monitoring of project’s expenses throughout implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  Road safety improvement. The original designs for the BRT extension that were financed by the
  government counterpart did not include any comprehensive urban insertion, road safety features and NMT

                                                                                                  Page 17 of 21
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



   infrastructure. The designs were eventually revised and improved under the World Bank guidance to
   incorporate needed road safety and urban insertion features (e.g., auxiliary roads, their medians, and
   curbs, ramps, signage, road demarcation, bike lanes, bike stations, and bike racks) to ensure the efficient
   and safe movement of vulnerable road users and improved connectivity with the NMT infrastructure. This
   made an impact on the MML (EMAPE) that has started including these considerations in its plans for future
   improvements of the entire Metropolitano BRT corridor.



d. Other
   Private sector solutions. One of the major impacts that were made by the Project but not reflected in the
   Results Framework was that the ATU and private operators became aware of private sector solutions to
   enhance the sustainability and operation of the BRT system in the long term. Since 2008, Protransporte
   which was absorbed by the ATU had signed six public-private partnership contracts for the BRT: four with
   transport operators, one for the supply of natural gas, and one for the automatic fare collection (AFC)
   system. By the closing of this project, it became clear that it was important for the ATU to improve service
   and system operations when renewing these concession contracts, and increasing and renewing the bus
   fleet to meet the growing demand for the service. As part of the Project, the World Bank supported technical
   assistance activities on business models for electric bus integration, which advised the ATU and private
   operators on commercial financing options to renew their fleet through electric bus procurement. (ICR, p.
   10, para 33).

   Gender Impact. The road user satisfaction survey reported a 20 percent increase in women’s satisfaction
   with safety and security on the BRT North Extension. That is mainly due to the integration in the designs
   and implementation of a number of safety features in the BRT North Extension, such as closed-circuit
   television (CCTV) systems, glass elevators, and open corridors to prevent violence at stations, pedestrian
   bridges and Terminals. Moreover, the ATU approved a new protocol to prevent and respond to sexual
   harassment incidents in the BRT. This achievement is important for the safety and security of female
   passengers. The gender study conducted during project preparation showed that about 30 percent of
   female residents in Lima reported sexual harassment on public transport (ICR, p. 11, footnote 11). The
   same study also found that the limited BRT coverage had been a major constraint for women’s mobility
   compared to informal modes like combis, which, despite safety issues, offered a larger coverage and met
   the unmet demand, particularly for low-income women. Women stated that they would use the BRT more if
   it had a better coverage.

   In addition, the project also implemented measures to address gender-based violence (GBV) and sexual
   harassment during construction. The Project incorporated contractual obligations on sexual exploitation and
   abuse (SEA) mitigation through signing of the Code of Conduct (CoC) by all contractor workers and regular
   training on their obligations under the CoC. The project’s grievance redress mechanism (GRM) offered
   various communication channels for SEA and sexual harassment survivors to report incidents on a
   confidential basis. The PIU and the TCU also received training on the identification and management of
   GBV risks in the Project.



11. Ratings



                                                                                                 Page 18 of 21
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



                                                                                   Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                   Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately             Moderately
Outcome
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
                                Moderately             Moderately
Bank Performance
                                Unsatisfactory         Unsatisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                 Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The following lessons have been derived and summarized from the ICR with a few additions by IEG
following the meeting with the Bank team (January 15, 2025):

      If the operation-related interventions are not built into the design of an infrastructure
       project, the project may not be able to deliver on its outcome targets associated with
       the operation of that infrastructure. The original design of this Lima BRT North Extension
       project did not include activities to improve the auxiliary roads with universal accessibility and
       safety features, support the urban integration and renewal of the bus fleet, which are
       essential for the operation of the newly created BRT infrastructure and mobility of the
       beneficiaries. The North Extension capacity available by the end of the project adversely
       affected the project’s ability to deliver on improved mobility targets.
      If the agency responsible for the operation of the assets is not involved from the start
       of the project, the project may face difficulties in its implementation. The ATU which
       was created before the project approval did not have the adequate capacity to implement the
       project. As a result, the MML was assigned to be an implementing agency and was part of
       the Legal Agreement. As the ATU was not part of the Loan Agreement, had no legal
       responsibilities in this project and experienced frequent staff turnovers, it was challenging for
       the Bank to build a strong coordination and team spirit between the MML and the ATU. While
       in the last year of the project implementation, the ATU finally got more involved, the time was
       missed for the timely delivery of the operational plan and timely decisions about the renewal
       of the bus fleet and other critical operation related activities.
      Lack of financial incentives in the project design to motivate the implementing agency
       to carry out critical institutional reforms (e.g., changes in the management practices)
       may create delays in implementation. There were substantial delays in the implementation
       of studies related to operational activities of the BRT in this project, which were essential for
       the achievement of several operational targets. The ATU was created in 2018 under the
       Ministry and had a national status of the agency to manage and operate the Metropolitano
       BRT system. However, the Protransporte (Instituto Metropolitano ProTransporte de Lima),
       the previous agency which was in charge of the BRT system management and was of the
       municipal status, did not transfer its responsibilities to the ATU until September 2020.
       Because the ATU was not legally part of this project, it also contributed to its lower interest
       and ownership in the implementation of those studies. Either relevant legal covenants or
       performance-based conditions should have been considered in the design of this project to



                                                                                                     Page 19 of 21
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)



         mitigate the risk of delayed operational activities, the recommendations or actions of which
         would have to be implemented by the ATU.
        If critical safeguards activities (e.g., relocation of utilities, businesses or people) are
         not completed by the time of the project site handover to the contractor, this may
         delay the execution of civil works. This is often the case in many infrastructure projects
         where such preparatory or safeguards related activities have not been completed by the time
         of the contract award or site handover. This project again demonstrated the same issue
         where the relocation of utilities was not completed on time it resulted in the suspension of the
         civil works in Subcomponent 1a.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

Overall, the ICR is well written and candid in its discussion of achievements and shortcomings. While the ICR's
ToC included a limited number of activities, it provides a comprehensive and clear logical chain results.. It
presents candid discussions of (i) shortcomings of administrative efficiency of the project, (ii) factors affecting
preparation and implementation, (iii) shortcomings of the Bank’s performance, and (iv) specific and useful
lessons that were drawn from the experience of this project. The discussions of the factors and lessons are
useful not only for an urban transport project in this country but for any infrastructure projects globally.

The ICR has a few minor shortcomings some of which are (i) the same date for the planned and actual dates of
the project closing in the datasheet, while the original project closing date was January 31, 2023, and the actual
date was April 30, 2024; (ii) limited number of inputs/interventions in the ToC; (iii) lack of discussion about the
mid-term review of this project and its role in the decisions about the project’s further implementation, and (iv)
limited explanation about the factors influencing the ATU’s weak involvement in this project during its
implementation, which was better explained by the team during the interview with the IEG. The quality of the
ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 20 of 21
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Lima Metropolitano North Extension (P170595)




                                                                            Page 21 of 21
