     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024407

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157206                                    Land Policy Implementation Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Cote d'Ivoire                              Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                               46,409,146.08

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2018

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Ranga Rajan                 Avjeet Singh               Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 21):

   1. To build the capacities and institutions necessary to support the implementation of the National
   Rural Land Tenure Security Program; and



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



   2. To register customary land rights in selected rural areas.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were four components (PAD, pages 17 - 22).

   1. Strengthening Rural Land Institutions. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$18.2 million. The
   actual cost was US$19.6 million. This component aimed to build the capacity of institutions charged with
   implementing the Land Policy and the 1998 Land Law and establishing a viable Land Information System
   and geodetic network. There were five sub-components:

   a. Support to land policy institutions. Activities in this subcomponent: (i) technical assistance (TA), small-
   scale infrastructure and equipment for capacity building of the national and local institutions in charge of
   implementing the 2017 Land Policy and regulatory reforms for simplifying the existing registration
   procedures and introducing cost-effective systematic procedures; (ii) TA to clarify the rights conferred by
   group and individual land certificates and land use contracts; (iii) TA to ensure that the registration
   procedures are compatible and fed into a single rural Land Information System; (iv) TA for monitoring
   implementing the Land policy through a national M&E system; (vi) training prefects and sub-prefects in rural
   land administration; (vii) support for building a small office building and basic equipment; (viii) support for
   establishing a Land Observatory to conduct research on implementing land policy; and (ix) capacity building
   of civil society organizations (CSOs) involved in the sector.

   b. Support to the Rural Land Tenure Agency. Activities in this sub-component: (i) recruiting qualified
   Rural Land Agency (AFOR) staff in the national office, regions and departments; (ii) renovating existing
   buildings and office equipment for regional and department-level AFOR for implementing local land
   registries at the department level; (iii) support for developing a National Rural Land Security Program
   (PNSFR) implementation plan; and (iv) capacity building of AFOR.

   c. Modernization of the Land Information System. This component planned to develop a modern Web-
   based information system (SIF) to record the boundaries, land ownership and use rights of parcel within the
   National Land Domain. Activities included training AFOR staff on using the system.

   D. Support to establish a national geodetic infrastructure. Activities in this component; (i) installing
   Continuously Operating Reference Stations infrastructure and equipment to establish the geodetic
   infrastructure for accurate and economically feasible Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS); and (ii) TA
   to the National Bureau of Technical and Development Studies of the Geographic and Digital Information
   Center.

   2. Support Implementation of the National Rural Land Tenure Security Program. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$23.3 million. The actual cost was US$28.8 million. This component planned to develop a
   streamlined registration process for providing each landowner/user with a formal document that recognized

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



  their customary land rights: Activities in this component: (i) introducing innovative practices to the formal
  land registration process for safeguarding the rights of all land holders (including migrants and women); (ii)
  raising awareness of the process using gender-sensitive communication methods; (iii) supporting a
  simplified approach to village boundary demarcation using a participatory approach; (iv) support for
  implementing a systematic rural land registration process that incorporates parcel boundaries, land
  ownership and user rights into a digital Land Information System (LIS); and (v) support for recording the
  existing written land sharing agreements in paper-based village department-level registries and the digital
  LIS.

  3. Training for Land Tenure Professionals. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$8.4 million. The
  actual cost was US$3.3 million. This component aimed at supporting the development of human resources
  for implementing national land policy: Activities in this component: (i) TA to the Graduate School of
  Agronomy (ESA) for establishing a multidisciplinary Rural Land Tenure Master's Degree program; (ii) TA to
  the National Institute of Agricultural Vocational Training to develop a one-year multidisciplinary Rural Land
  Tenure Diploma Program for preparing graduates to serve as field technicians for land registration
  operations: and (iii) support for developing non-degree learning opportunities for land sector professionals,
  such as civil society organization (CSO) representatives and magistrates.

  4. Program Coordination, Monitoring and Knowledge Management. The estimated cost at appraisal
  was US$4.0 million. The actual cost was US$5.1 million. This component planned to finance AFOR's
  investment and recurrent costs of project preparation, management and audits, fiduciary management,
  safeguards compliance and monitoring and evaluation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$54.0 million. The actual cost was US$46.4 million.

  Financing. The Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Credit of
  US$50.00 million. The amount disbursed was US$46.4 million.

  Counterpart funding. Counterpart funding of US$4.00 million was planned at appraisal. Their actual
  contribution was more than planned at US$7.6 million (ICR, para 53).

  Dates. The project was approved on March 28, 2018, became effective on August 16, 2018 and was to
  close on September 1, 2023. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) was held on June 1, 2021. The project closed
  on June 30, 2024.

  Changes. There were three level 2 restructurings.

  The following changes were made with the first restructuring was on May 12, 2022:

        As the original targets were based on secondary data, some PDO indicators were updated to reflect
         field realities. The targets were modified due to the higher than estimated demand for individual
         (versus collective) land certificates and lower than expected demand for the newly created Land Use
         Contracts (LUC).
        Seven PDO sub-indicators were added to closely monitor the outcomes for female beneficiaries.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



   The project closing date was extended by ten months to June 30, 2024, at government request, for
   completing the ongoing activities through the second restructuring on June 13, 2023.

   The following change was made with the third restructuring on January 12, 2024.

         The results framework was modified to include additional intermediate indicators.

   Split rating. This review is not based on the split rating methodology, since none of the restructurings made
   significant changes to the scope, ambition, or beneficiary impact of the project.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Despite economic achievements before appraisal, poverty in rural areas
remained an issue. The Government enacted a Rural Land Law in 1998 to register customary rural land
ownership rights. The implementation of this law was complicated by the complex registration process and
inadequate institutional arrangements. The process which required over 20 manual steps across various
institutions was costly. The land information system relied on outdated technologies and the Village Land
Tenure Committees (CVGFR) were inadequately trained for adjudicating land rights. Rural land rights
remained unclear. There was no provision to recognize the land rights of migrant farmers. Only 5,671 land
certificates were issued from 1998 to 2018, out of 1.5 million rural plots. Although Cote d'Ivoire had no legal
restrictions on women's ability to own land and female heirs had equal rights to inheritance, restrictive social
norms and women's limited control over economic assets restricted them from owning land independently.

Government strategy at appraisal. The National Development Plan for 2016 -2020, articulated the need
for achieving strong and inclusive growth through structural transformation. The plan noted that for
achieving this goal, the Government had to address the underlying drivers of conflict and provide an
enabling environment for agriculture-led growth through reforming the land sector.

Current Government strategy. The objectives of securing rural land tenure and strengthening the
institutional framework, sector governance and business enabling environment remain highly relevant to the
Government's National Agriculture Investment Program (NAIP). Project investments in land registration and
village boundary demarcation, including along boundaries with classified forests and protected areas, were
directly relevant to Cote d'Ivoire's 2019 Forestry Strategy. Finally, the PDO was consistent with the WB
Western and Central Africa Region Priorities (2021 -2025) of investments in land registration.

World Bank (WB) strategy at appraisal. The WB's 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) identified
land reform as a key prerequisite for progress in all areas aimed at fostering sustainable and inclusive
growth and gender equity. The Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2016-2019 highlighted land rights
as necessary for agricultural sector modernization. The CPF also highlighted the need for clear land rights
and informed land transactions for private sector led growth. The project was directly relevant to Objective 4
of Focus Area One: accelerating sustainable private sector-led growth.

Current WB strategy. The PDO continues to be aligned with the Bank's current CPF for 2023 - 2027. The
CPF reiterated the need for promoting private investment for economic transformation through investments

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



               in registering customary land rights in selected areas, strengthening land registration institutions and
               building land sector capacity.

               Project scope. This project represented the first stage in a planned series of two operations of the second
               generation of the National Agricultural Investment Program, aimed at land tenure security in selected rural
               areas. The first phase of the operation was to lay the foundation for future investments by strengthening
               land registration institutions, develop professional capacities and digital technologies and pilot simplified
               procedures and the second stage was to support nationwide land registration.

               Relevance of the PDO. The project was expected to benefit the rural population with secure land tenure
               and provide public and private sector professionals with the skills needed to support rural land
               administration. In the longer term, over the course of the two-phased program, citizens, private investors
               and the country were expected to benefit from secure land tenure rights, which would help in providing an
               enabling environment for private sector investments in agriculture.

               The PDO responded to a critical development challenge in the country context and was well-aligned with
               the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for Cote d'Ivoire. The PDO was pitched at an
               appropriate level. Therefore, the relevance of PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To build the capacities and institutions necessary to support the implementation of the National Rural Land
                             Tenure Security Program.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of change. The project activities aimed to strengthen the capacities of rural land institutions. The
                             outputs of activities such as capacity building of institutions in charge of land policy reform (including the
                             Rural Land Tenure agency), modernizing the land information system through developing a Web-based Land
                             Information System and supporting the establishment of a national geodetic framework, were likely to help in
                             improving implementation of land sector laws and regulations. The outputs of activities such as developing a
                             Rural Land Tenure Master's Degree Program, a Land Tenure Diploma and vocational training for land
                             technicians, were likely to aid in implementing land registration and certification at scale. The causal links
                             between project activities, outputs and the intended outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were
                             monitorable.

                             Outputs.


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)




      The project aided in recruiting 93.5% of the staff of the Rural Land Agency (AFOR), slightly short of
         the target of 95%. The delivery time for providing Land Certificates (LCs) decreased by 63% from two
         years to nine months and cost of delivering LCs decreased by 53%.
        68% of land certificates (LCs) were recorded in the digital Land Information System (SIF), short of the
         target of 80%.
        608 of land use contracts were recorded in the Land Information System, significantly short of the
         target of 85,440. The ICR notes that this shortfall was due to: (i) longer than expected LIS
         development process: and (ii) prioritizing delivery of new contracts as compared to scanning of
         historical land use contracts. The ICR noted that before this project, the LC application required 31
         paper forms. When the project closed, the new LC applications were digitized.
        The project aided in supporting 83% of the local land institutions with physical land registry books,
         exceeding the target of 80%. The ICR noted that the paper registry books are important tools for
         recording land transactions at the village level with limited internet access.
        100% of the land certificates delivered by the project were attached to the new national geodetic
         network, exceeding the target of 80%.
        30 policy workshops on rural land tenure were provided under the project, exceeding the target of
         20. 11, 259 land sector professionals were trained under the project, exceeding the target of 10, 616.
        24 masters level classes were provided for land sector professionals under the project, exceeding the
         target of 20.

Outcomes. The outputs described above were expected to contribute to these outcomes: (i) increase the
number of Village Land Tenure Committees (CVGFR) established/reestablished under the project: and (ii) the
number of land sector professionals trained by the project.

      377 Village Land Tenure Committees were established/reestablished across the six regions supported
       by the project, slightly short of the target of 400. The Impact Evaluation (IE) indicated that the share of
       villages whose CVGFR received support from the government was 37% higher in the sub-prefectures
       supported by the project, while the share of delimited villages was 27 percentage points higher. This
       suggests that the project enabled the AFOR and CVGFRs to more effectively deliver village land
       delimitation.
      11, 259 land sector professionals were trained by the project, exceeding the target of 10, 616.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial with moderate shortcomings, as the outcomes were realized for
the most part except for the indicator on land use contracts recorded in the Land Information System.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To register customary land rights in selected rural areas.

Rationale


                                                                                                    Page 6 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



                            Theory of change. The project activities aimed to register customary land rights in selected rural areas. The
                            outputs of technical assistance activities such as clarifying the existing rights of stakeholders through raising
                            awareness of the land registration process, capacity building of Village Land Tenure Committees (CVGFRs),
                            training archivists to sketch village boundaries for village boundary demarcation, support for certifying
                            collective and individual land rights and formalizing land use agreements, were likely to help in
                            implementation of land certification in selected rural areas. The causal links between project activities, outputs
                            and the intended outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

                            Outputs.

                                  51, 265 land parcels with use or ownership rights were recorded, as compared to the target of 53,
                                   400. The Impact Evaluation (IE) noted that beneficiary households reported a 71% increase in their
                                   number of LCs over the control mean.
                                  36% of land parcels with ownership rights in the name of one or more females, exceeding the target of
                                   30%. The IE results confirmed that the project had a significant but small (one percentage point)
                                   increase in women's ownership and a significant 55 percentage point decrease in their five year risk of
                                   land loss.
                                  The IE reported that the project aided in reducing landowner-land user conflicts by 8.5 percentage
                                   points as compared to the control group.

                            Outcomes. The outputs described above, were expected to contribute to the following outcomes: (i) target
                            population with use or ownership rights recorded as a result of the project; (ii) Land parcels with use or
                            ownership rights recorded as a result of the project; and (iii) Share of population in targeted villages with a
                            satisfactory rating.

                                  145, 452 people had ownership rights recorded as a result of the project, short of the revised target of
                                   158,587.
                                  51, 265 land parcels with ownership rights were recorded as a result of the project, slightly short of the
                                   target of 53,400.
                                  99% of the population (including 99% women and 99% men) in the targeted villages expressed
                                   satisfaction with the land registration process, exceeding the target of 90%.

                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, given that most of the outcomes were realized.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as substantial, given that the outcomes of both the PDOs, were realized.



                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analysis was conducted both at appraisal and at closure. The economic
benefits of the project were assumed to come from improvement in land yields, because landholders with
formally registered rights can shift from investments in establishing or protecting their rights (for example, land
clearing or land dispute resolution) to more sustainable and productivity-enhancing investments (such as tree
planting and adopting more perennial crops).

The Net Present Value (NPV) at 10% discount rate at appraisal was estimated at US$97.34 million, as
compared to the NPV of US$104.4 million at project closure. The ex post Economic Internal Rate of Return
(EIRR) was 35.3% as compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 34% and the Cost-Benefit Ratio at project closure was
3.5 as compared to the Cost-Benefit ratio of 3.08 at appraisal.

An estimation of the project impact on social cohesion showed important return on investment. According to the
2018 United Nations - WB Joint report Pathways to Peace, peacebuilding activities generate two types of
benefits: (i) cost savings due to prevention activities (financial gain) and (ii) avoidance of economic losses due to
conflict mitigation through peacebuilding activities (economic gain). The Project, by resolving land disputes and
contributing to tenure security, had a direct impact on peacebuilding and social cohesion. Using the evidence
generated by the project, the cost benefit were estimated. The financial savings and economic gains due to the
project amounted to a NPV of US$309.9 million, with the EIRR reaching 82%.

Administrative Issues during implementation. There were no cost overruns and the project closed with an
extension of only ten months of the originally scheduled closing date, despite the delays experience in the wake
of the COVID-19 pandemic.

Overall efficiency is rated as substantial, in view of the economic justification for the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?               Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                    35.30
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                 34.00
                                                                                          Not Applicable

                                                                                                        Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)




* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO is rated as High, as the project responded to a critical development challenge in the
country context and the PDO is well-aligned with the Government and the current Bank strategy. Overall
efficacy is rated as substantial, as most of the outcomes were realized. Efficiency is rated as Substantial, given
the economic justification for the project. Taking these ratings into account, outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment/ ownership. The ICR (para 68) noted that the risk to development outcome is
low as the government adopted key reforms. The government paid over 75% of the costs for AFOR's full
time headquarters staff and 63 decentralized staff by providing more than planned counterpart funding for
the project. Further, the Government is expected to provide US$40.00 million for the ongoing Bank-financed
land administration project aimed at land registration nationally.

Technical risk. The ICR noted that the project procured technology, including a web based LIS with digitized
LCs and digital applications for LC delivery and quality control is further expected to increase efficiency of
land administration.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project's analytical base was robust and based on the WB's 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic
  (SCD). The Bank prepared this project based on lessons from previous Bank-financed projects in Cote
  d'Ivoire and the region. Lessons incorporated included: (i) Since rural land tenure in Cote d'Ivoire is
  largely governed by customary practices that varied across the country, the Bank prepared this project
  based on participatory land registration process using simple and affordable technology to local
  landholders; (ii) The design supported development of a systematic land registration process that used
  best practice for cost effective digital technologies for mapping and registering land rights; (iii) Given that
  women and migrants faced difficulties in acquiring land rights, the design included targeted citizen
  engagement and communication activities to raise awareness among women and migrants; and (iv)
  Given that land policy measures had stalled regionally due to limited implementation capacity, the design
  included substantial training activities) to build a new generation of professionals from technicians to
  engineers.



                                                                                                       Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



  The Bank prepared this project in collaboration with other development partners (the European Union
  (EU), the French Development Agency (AFD) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) financing
  complementary activities. The design included a Project Preparatory Advance (PPA) for financing
  preparatory studies before project effectiveness.

  The project was implemented by a single implementing agency - the Rural Land Agency (AFOR) - that
  was responsible for the entire land registration process. This arrangement was as compared to having a
  stand-alone Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that was disconnected from the government program.
  This arrangement proved to be adequate for implementing the project.

  The preparation team identified several risks at appraisal including High risks with macroeconomic
  environment, technical design, weak implementation capacity and substantial risks with governance,
  environmental and social risk and stakeholder risk. The design incorporated several mitigation measures.
  Even with mitigation measures, the overall project risk was rated as High at appraisal (PAD, para 50).
  The mitigation measures were adequate, as project performance was not undermined with the risks
  identified at appraisal. The arrangements made at appraisal for safeguards and fiduciary compliance
  were appropriate (discussed in section 10).

  Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Fourteen ISRs were filed over an implementation period of seven years (implying on average twice a year
 supervision missions) during the project lifetime of seven years. There was continuity of leadership, with
 two task leaders (TTLs) from appraisal to closing (one of the TTL led the preceding analytics. The
 supervision team provided proactive support for supporting the critical reforms. The support provided by
 the team aided in M&E, safeguards and fiduciary compliance. The Bank responded to the realities on the
 ground, by restructuring the project when needed.

 Bank supervision is rated as satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The theory of change was clear and the key outcome indicators were appropriate for monitoring project
 performance (discussed in section four). The key outcome indicators were appropriately gender-
 disaggregated, with measurement methodologies that captured the Project's key results. The project
 envisioned an Impact Evaluation (IE) with randomized control to measure the outcomes that could be
 attributed to the project. The Rural Land Agency was overall in charge of M&E. The WB's Gender
 Innovation Laboratory was responsible for designing and implementing an Impact Evaluation of the land
 registration activities (component two activities).



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 57) noted that the M&E reports were delivered in a timely fashion to inform the six-monthly
  mission reviews. The WB supervision team provided feedback of the M&E reports to improve project
  monitoring. In close coordination with the WB, AFOR managed the baseline and midline survey
  implementation for the IE.

  The ICR (para 57) noted that the PDO targets could have been further revised to better align realities on
  the ground.




c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was used for identifying and addressing implementation bottlenecks and making timely
  course corrections.

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a Category A (full assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
   Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page 4): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

   Environmental Assessment, Physical Cultural Resources and Involuntary Resettlement. The adverse
   environmental effects were expected to be minor and reversible. The safeguards on Physical Cultural
   Resources was triggered to address "chance finds ". An Environmental and Social Management Framework

                                                                                                  Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)



   (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to
   address the issues pertaining to the safeguards triggered at appraisal.

   The ICR (para 62) noted that safeguards compliance was sound throughout the project. The Project notified
   all incidents and accidents to the WB within the required timeline and these were resolved before the project
   closed. The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was functional. Of the 169 outstanding complaints at
   closing, 138 pertained to the northern highway public utility declaration and are expected to be resolved
   following clarification that it precludes only titling not certification.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management (FM). The Bank conducted a FM assessment at appraisal. The FM risk was rated
   as substantial at appraisal, given that AFOR had only two staff. The ICR (para 64) noted that the Project
   complied with the Project's FM manual. Good quality interim reports were submitted in a timely fashion.
   The audits were unqualified. The FM rating was Satisfactory at project closing.

   Procurement Management. The Bank conducted a procurement assessment at appraisal. AFOR
   procurement specialists were acquainted with WB procedures and were further trained during
   implementation. The ICR (para 63) noted that procurement compliance was strong. There were no
   reported case of mis-procurement. The procurement rating was Satisfactory at project closing.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons


                                                                                                  Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)




The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Sustained high level commitment and support from the WB and the government may raise
the potential for success in land administration projects. This project was designed as the first
in a series of projects to implement the Government's reform agenda by concurrently establishing
the institutional, capacity, legal, procedural and technological foundation for nationwide land
registration. The project benefitted greatly from consistent and high level backing from the WB and
the Government.

2. Investment in Impact Evaluation analysis may help in demonstrating early results in land
administration projects. Broader impacts, such as increased investment, productivity and access
to finance in land administration projects, take time to materialize following land registration and may
depend on complementary reforms. However, the additional time, funding and coordination invested
in implementing the Impact Evaluation may be worthwhile for demonstrating early results.

3. Digitization and streamlining of rural land registration procedures may raise the potential
for success in land administration projects. A digital and systematic approach to land registration
in this project, supported by counterpart financing, allowed the Project to significantly accelerate
delivery of land certificates.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change provided in the text articulates the clear causal links
between activities (inputs), outputs and intended outcomes. The quality of evidence provided in the text
(including the findings of the Impact Evaluation) is adequate for assessing project performance.

Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated as Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 14
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Land Policy Implementation Project (P157206)




                                                                            Page 14 of 14
