     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024320

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P152799                                   Health System Strengthening & Support

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Turkiye                                   Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85310                                31-May-2020                                        130,674,647.12

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 21-Sep-2015                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          134,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                           134,300,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                       130,674,647.12                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original objectives of the project were to improve primary and secondary prevention of selected NCDs,
   increase the efficiency of hospital management, and enhance the evidence-based policy-making capacity of
   the MOH (Loan Agreement. September 30, 2015, Schedule 1, p. 5).

   Explanatory notes on the PDO statement:

           NCDs: Non-communicable diseases.

                                                                                                 Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



         MOH: Ministry of Health.
         Primary prevention aims to prevent a disease from occurring.
         Secondary prevention aims to detect and treat a disease at an early stage.

   Revisions of project objectives and key associated outcome targets:

        1. During implementation, the project scope expanded with the introduction of a new objective introduced
           in 2020 to respond to COVID-19, further revised in 2023 to respond to the February 2023 earthquake
           near the border with Syria (ICR, p. 6): (i) in 2020, the statement of objectives was revised as follows:
           “to improve primary and secondary prevention of selected NCDs, increase the efficiency of hospital
           management, enhance the capacity of the MOH for evidence-based policy making, and strengthen
           MOH capacity to control and fight the threat posed by COVID-19 ” (Restructuring Paper, RES41157,
           May 5, 2020, para. 13); and (ii) in 2023, the statement of objectives was revised as follows: “to
           improve primary and secondary prevention of selected NCDs, increase the efficiency of hospital
           management, enhance the evidence-based policy-making capacity of the MOH, and strengthen the
           government’s capacity to respond to emergencies” (Fourth Amendment to the Loan Agreement, May
           24, 2023, p. 1).
        2. In terms of associated outcome targets, these were revised upward in line with the extension of the
           project’s closing date, except for one downward revision of a target related to a sub-indicator on the
           early detection of breast cancers. The revision was introduced to align with the targets of a new MOH
           Strategic Plan (2019-2023) and its calculation formulas, and the revision was not related to ambition-
           related reasons.

   Therefore, given the expanded scope of the project and the increase in the majority of associated outcome
   targets, this ICR Review does not apply a split rating, and will assess the project based on the revised
   objectives (encompassing both original and additional objectives).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  21-May-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   At entry, the project had three components as follows:

   I. Primary and Secondary Prevention (Appraisal: US$44.2 million; Actual: US$29.8 million)




                                                                                                     Page 2 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



The main aim of the component was to raise awareness among both the population and health care
providers on risk factors related to NCDs and to promote healthy lifestyles and behavior change through the
following activities:

Subcomponent 1.1: (i) Developing public outreach materials and methodologies to raise population
awareness about NCDs and the importance of healthy living; (ii) promoting physical activity in Healthy
Living Centers (HLCs), including rehabilitating community health centers to reconfigure physical activity;
and (iii) implementing a nationwide campaign on substance addiction and strengthening the infrastructure of
the treatment and research centers for adults and children suffering from alcoholism and substance
addiction.

Subcomponent 1.2: (i) Improving the capacity of cancer screening; (ii) introducing and maintaining a
national cancer registry software, and provision of training to health workers on the software; and (iii)
developing guidelines, standards, and training modules for palliative care.

Subcomponent 1.3: (i) Strengthening the Family Physician Training Program, including through expanding
the infrastructure and hardware of the distance learning system to nationwide coverage; and (ii) improving
service delivery and the quality of care provided by family physicians through the analysis of current
workload practices and procedures.

II. Increasing Efficiency of Public Hospital Management and Operations (Appraisal: US$46.6 million;
Actual: US$30.5 million). This component aimed at strengthening hospital management and operations
through technical assistance and implementation support, and by supporting a health investments program
through capacity building of MOH’s General Directorate of Health Investments and the Public Hospitals
Institution for improving human and physical resources.

Subcomponent 2.1: Provision of technical assistance, consulting services, equipment, and training to
increase public hospital efficiency through interventions in four areas: (i) clinical engineering; (ii) drug and
medical supply management; (iii) clinical care processes; and (iv) administrative and financial information
systems. In each of these areas, MOH planned to provide training to public hospital staff, develop national
guidelines and classifications, support public hospital teams to implement guidelines and standards, and
strengthen information systems.

Subcomponent 2.2: Developing and implementing architectural and technical standards for health facilities.

Subcomponent 2.3: Strengthening the capacity of the General Directorate of Health Investments in
managing public-private partnership (PPP) transactions notably in the administration of contracts with
stakeholders, including the Undersecretariat of the Treasury and the Ministry of Development, and service
performance management. This would involve the development of in-house capacity in legal, financial,
operational, and structural aspects of contract management.

III. Improving the Effectiveness of Overall Health Sector Administration (Appraisal: US$43.6 million;
Actual: US$43.9 million). This component would facilitate the first two project components and would build
on earlier World Bank-assisted Adaptable Program Loans (APLs) that had supported the country’s Health
Transformation Program (see section 3) to institutionalize a better system of collecting, processing,
validating, and using information for policy decisions. As such, the component would support the
development of evidence-based policy-making capacity of MOH, while concurrently improving M&E
capacity.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



  Subcomponent 3.1 would be focused on developing an integrated Health Management Information System
  (HMIS) that supports the enhancement of evidence-based policy and decision-making capacity of MOH.
  Key activities were to include: (i) institutionalizing health sector performance assessments and harmonizing
  health sector data in line with international standards; (ii) developing and adopting national e-health
  standards and legislation to improve the quality of health data and ensure the interoperability of HMIS’s
  nationwide and internationally; (iii) developing and implementing a computerized decision support system
  for decision makers at various levels, based on the integration of reliable and consolidated data from
  existing information systems; and (iv) enhancing the technical audit capacity and widening the use of
  evidence-based medical practice at the primary and secondary levels to improve the quality of health
  service provision.

  Subcomponent 3.2: Developing a model for sharing health sector experiences and disseminating products
  of the Health Transformation Program.

  Subcomponent 3.3: Building capacity in Health Technology Assessment (HTA), including the preparation of
  an HTA strategy and related legislative documents.

  Subcomponent 3.4: Supporting the Project Management and Support Unit (PMSU) in project
  implementation, including in the areas of financial management, procurement, disbursement, monitoring
  and evaluation.

  Addition of a fourth component during implementation

  On May 1, 2020, the project added a fourth component to respond to COVID-19 by using an unallocated
  category of expenditures resulting from savings generated by the Euro appreciation against the Turkish Lira
  (see restructurings below). The initial allocation for Component IV was reported at EUR 27 million
  (Restructuring paper for the Second Restructuring of May 1, 2020). This component would finance
  procurement activities for:

       i.   pharmaceuticals and equipment necessary for COVID-19 treatment;
      ii.   specific equipment for the vaccine production center of MoH’s Public Health General Directorate;
     iii.   recruitment of individual consultants; and
     iv.    Bio Safety Level 4 training activities for the vaccine production personnel.

  The component’s scope was further expanded during the fourth restructuring of May 29, 2023, to include
  the emergency response to the earthquake. The total actual cost of Component 4 was US$30.3 million. The
  Project Task Team clarified on November 5, 2024, that, within the component, the actual cost for COVID-19
  expenditures was equivalent to EUR 1.1 million or about 4 percent of Component 4, while the majority of
  component expenditures pertained to the earthquake response. Further details about component
  adjustments are discussed with project restructurings in section 2e, below.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost and financing: At appraisal, the project cost under the World Bank Loan was estimated at US$134.3
  million (EUR 120 million). The Borrower contributions were sizeable but not specified, as they extended
  over a broad set of themes within the health sector under ongoing health reforms. In fact, a Program for
  Results (PforR) was initially considered, but the government decided in favor of an Investment Project

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Financing modality, as the determination of PforR boundaries was difficult given the breadth and size of the
overall reform and the relatively small amount of Bank support (PAD, p. 24). The actual cost of the World
Bank Loan was US$130.7 million. The small difference between the actual cost reported in the World
Bank’s portal and that of the ICR’s Annex 3 (ICR, p. 37) was related to exchange rates, as explained by the
Task Team on November 5, 2024.

Dates: The project was approved on May 28, 2015, and became effective on December 1, 2015. A Mid-
Term Review was carried out in February 2023. The original closing date was May 31, 2020. Pursuant to
closing date extensions aggregating at a total of 3 years and 7 months, the project closed on December 31,
2023.

The project underwent four restructurings (ICR, p, 8 and p. 11) as follows:

First restructuring, April 23, 2019: A new Strategic Plan (2019-2023) was approved in 2019 and triggered
the need to align project activities and the results framework with the updated strategic directions of the
health sector.

      Under Component 1 (Primary and Secondary Prevention), activities related to palliative care were
       dropped from the project, and the financing of their implementation was transferred to the national
       budget.
      Under Component 2 (Increasing Efficiency of Public Hospital Management and Operations), the
       investments in training centers on clinical engineering and the development of architectural and
       technical standards for health facilities were dropped in line with MOH changing priorities. New
       activities consisted of the establishment of simulation-assisted training centers (SEUMs) to increase
       health workforce specialization, and the establishment of a PPP monitoring and evaluation system.
      Under Component 3 (Improving the Effectiveness of Overall Health Sector Administration), a
       process mapping of all MOH units was added to help MOH in its organizational restructurings.
      As savings were generated by the Euro appreciation against the Turkish Lira, the government
       expressed its interest in using project savings to expand the scope of the project mainly to support
       research and development in the health sector. However, since legal arrangements for such support
       were not yet in place, an unallocated category of EUR 22.6 million was created in anticipation of a
       second restructuring, when potential new activities would be concretized.

Second Restructuring, May 1, 2020: The restructuring was triggered by the coronavirus pandemic. It
revised the PDOs by adding a new objective (to strengthen the government’s capacity to respond to
COVID-19) and introduced a fourth component on strengthening capacity to respond to COVID-19 with an
allocation of EUR 27 million (mainly from the savings noted above under the first restructuring). Activities
included the procurement of pharmaceuticals and equipment necessary for COVID-19 treatment,
procurement of equipment for the Vaccine Production Center, and training in Bio Safety Level 4.

Third restructuring, December 1, 2021: The restructuring extended the closing date by 24 months in view
of the challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The results framework was revised, including by
increasing target values to reflect the extension of the closing date.

Fourth restructuring, May 29, 2023: In response to the earthquake of February 2023, the restructuring
expanded the scope of Component 4 (response to COVID-19) in line with the new PDO statement (to
strengthen the government’s capacity to respond to emergencies), as noted in section 1a. The PPP
Monitoring and Evaluation Automation System was dropped to facilitate reallocations of funds to the

                                                                                                 Page 5 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



   earthquake response, and the financing of equipment for the Ankara Vaccine Production Center was also
   dropped, as there was an intention to finance related equipment through another project (see section 4,
   Objective 4).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Türkiye is an upper-middle-income country, ranked as the 18th-largest economy in the world. Its
development over the past decade is a story of notable turnaround facilitated by structural reforms and
sound macroeconomic management (PAD, p. 12). During the past decade preceding appraisal, the country
underwent significant improvements in the supply of and demand for health services under a major
productive health reform known as the Health Transformation Program that was supported by the World
Bank during the period 2003-2015. Improvements were reflected in health outcomes, trends in health
financing, and health utilization, including the achievement of universal health coverage. Among the key
elements of the reform was the introduction of the family medicine system that provided primary care
through community health centers and family medicine centers. The unification of public hospitals
transferred managerial responsibility of the Social Insurance Institution hospitals to MOH structures,
bringing all public hospitals under one umbrella (PAD, p. 12). The amended Social Security and Universal
Health Insurance Law was adopted in 2008, and Universal Health Insurance unified the previously
fragmented enrollees (active, self-employes, or retired in both the public and private sectors). Health
services were accessible to all, using a single package of benefits. A single purchaser model was created in
which the Social Security Institution assumed responsibility for all health financing functions of revenue
collection, pooling, and purchasing.

Looking forward, it became increasingly clear that among the evolving challenges was the high burden of
the rising non-communicable diseases (NCDs). NCDs were responsible for more than 80 percent of the
disease and mortality burden. Ill health due to cardiovascular disease was prevalent, and the reported
mortality from coronary heart disease among Turkish women was the highest in Europe (WHO 2014). The
prevalence of type-2 diabetes doubled over the past decade and is the fourth most significant cause of ill
health in the country. Clinically significant hypertension exists in at least a third of the Turkish population,
and the majority are not aware of their condition or taking appropriate care. Several cancers, including lung,
breast, and colorectal cancers, were among the top 25 causes of ill health. The Turkish population is also
aging, with the number of people over 65 expected to reach 8.6 million by 2023, which would further
exacerbate the challenge of NCDs. Tackling NCDs also needs a multi-sectoral approach, and MOH has
been working in close cooperation with line ministries (sports, education, transportation), local
administrations, local and international institutions, academics, private sector associations, and consumer
groups (PAD, p. 15). Substance addiction was another emerging agenda, and the Institute for Health
Metrics and Evaluation found that the death rate from drug use disorders increased almost threefold
between 1990 and 2010 for both sexes and all ages.

Another challenge was that of hospital efficiency. Although efficiency improved during the implementation of
the Health Transformation Program, the latest available hospital efficiency index was 74 percent, indicating
that about 26 percent of hospital inputs (e.g., beds, staff, and budgets) were not contributing to the
production of any output (PAD, p. 17).


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 25
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



               Monitoring the impact of the reforms was a priority for MOH, which had already started focusing on health
               system evaluation and supporting various studies. These include the World Bank-OECD Health Systems
               Review, the World Bank-WHO Health System Performance Assessment (HSPA), and MOH’s Lancet
               Turkey Special Edition. MOH intended to sustain such rigorous evaluations to improve its evidence-based
               policy and decision-making. These necessitated a fully functional and integrated health management
               information system based on reliable and consolidated data, generating health statistics based on
               international standards, and employing an efficient audit and monitoring system.

               Responding to the above priorities was consistent with MOH 2013-2017 Strategic Plan and the
               government’s vision for a Healthy Living Action Plan, including for fostering healthy lifestyles, providing
               effective and efficient health services, better responding to the health needs and expectations, and
               developing the health system as a means of contributing to the economic and social development of the
               country and to global health. Objectives also responded to a strategic focus of health investments through
               PPPs (Note: PPP was highlighted because the country was pursuing an ambitious PPP investment
               program valued at TL 20 billion, PAD, p. 30).

               The objectives and the scope of the project were appropriate for the stage of development of the sector in
               the country (ICR, p. 25) and were in line with the long-standing engagement of the World Bank in the health
               sector.

               The restructurings allowed the project and its objectives to remain aligned with MOH new Strategic Plan
               (2019-2023) and with Türkiye’s 11th Development Plan for 2019-2023, and allowed the project to respond
               to COVID-19 and the earthquake. The objectives remained in line with Objective 6 of the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) for fiscal year FY18-23 on strengthened performance of the education and
               health sectors.

               At project completion, objectives remained consistent with the World Bank’s current CPF FY24-28,
               specifically with Objective 2 on inclusive services, and with Objective 5 on reducing disparities in health and
               education access and quality. Objectives also remained aligned with Türkiye’s 12th Development Plan for
               2024-2028, specifically Goal 3: Qualified human, strong family, and healthy society.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve primary and secondary prevention of selected NCDs

                             Rationale


                                                                                                                       Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



The theory of change envisaged that promoting healthy living behavior, improving knowledge about NCDs
risk factors, improving cancer screening, raising awareness and capacities to tackle substance addiction, and
strengthening and modernizing training for family physicians would result in improved knowledge about risk
factors, behavior change, improved coverage, access and utilization of counselling services, and increased
detection of cancers. All of the above would collectively and plausibly contribute to improved primary and
secondary prevention of NCDs.

Main outputs were related to increasing population and health workers’ awareness about NCDs and related
risk factors such as tobacco use, unhealthy diet, physical inactivity and substance abuse, Behavior change
interventions and promotion of healthy lifestyle in HLCs, improving screening for the early detection of cancer,
improving evidence on the prevalence of NCDs and related risk factors among the population, developing the
family physician training programs and ensuring nationwide coverage of physicians with distance learning
(ICR, p. 12)

The project provided training to health personnel on cancer screening and post-screening diagnosis, and a
cancer registry was established based on modern standards, with specialists trained on its use. The project
strengthened medical education programs for family medicine and provided distance learning training
programs to improve the competence of PHC health staff in primary and secondary prevention of NCDs and
their management.

Over 6,390 PHC staff satisfactorily completed standardized face-to-face training modules, surpassing the
target of 5,366 staff. The project developed 141 on-line training programs in family medicine and software for
nine distance training modules. The development and expansion of distance learning training programs
allowed MOH to train 560,124 health personnel, overcoming obstacles created by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The population share covered by screening for cancers substantially increased as follows: for cervical cancer,
coverage reached 51.4 percent, surpassing the target of 28.3 percent; for breast cancer, the coverage
reached 26.7 percent, surpassing the target of 12.3 percent; and for colorectal cancer, coverage reached 17
percent, surpassing the target of 5.1 percent.

The project increased the provision and utilization of primary and secondary prevention services. The
percentage of households that received counselling or education on healthy living from health workers
increased from a baseline of 10 percent in 2012 to 47 percent of the overall population in 2023, slightly short
of the target of 50 percent, but essentially meeting it. The share of male population increased from 7 percent
to 45.3 percent, exceeding the target of 40 percent for males; and the share of females increased from 13
percent to 48.6 percent, short of the target of 60 percent for females.

The project improved the general population’s awareness about negative health impact of NCD risk factors
and substance use. The share of the population who could state two or more negative health impacts of risk
factors and substance use reached 13.6 percent of the general population (including 15.9 percent for males
and 11.7 for females), surpassing the target of 4 percent.

The project supported the establishment of HLCs that represented a new model for delivery of preventive
services, seeking to trigger sustained behavior change by creating opportunities to learn about healthy living
practices. Initially, the project design envisaged the establishment of eight HLCs for piloting this delivery
model, however, the intervention was scaled up after the 2019 restructuring for nationwide implementation,
and the project supported the establishment of 261 HLCs in all 81 provinces of the country, including through
enhancement in multi-disciplinary human resource capacity and infrastructure. The project provided imaging

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



equipment, including 30 mammographs, and renovated premises for physical exercises. Training was
instrumental in establishing multi-disciplinary teams encompassing physicians, dieticians, nurses, midwives,
social workers, and psychologists. The project engaged consultants to fill gaps in some clinical specialties.
These multi-disciplinary teams provided people-centered services, notably through lifestyle advice, cancer
screening and primary prevention of priority NCDs. Service examples included counselling on healthy
nutrition, physical activity, NCD management, healthy aging, reproductive and mental health, child and
adolescent health, smoking cessation, counselling for drug users, social work and support. A survey of HLC
users showed that the share of users satisfied with HLC services was 83.4 percent, surpassing the target of
70 percent.

Also, the project supported skills development and infrastructure improvement in ‘Substance Use Treatment
Centers’ in 12 provinces aiming at enhancing effective coverage of patients. A total of 22,614 visitors received
services at these centers as compared with 90 persons in 2015, meeting the target of 22,209 visitors.

The share of cervical cancer cases detected at early stages increased from 39.2 percent in 2014 to 70
percent in 2023, surpassing the target of 63.6 percent.

Early detection of breast cancer increased from 48.7 percent in 2014 to 50.4 percent in 2023, short of the
target of 52.5 percent, but with a trajectory reflecting progress.

Comparison of NCD risk factors prevalence and public awareness between 2017 and 2023.
Improvements related to the prevention of NCDs in the country were further confirmed by the results of the
2023 second household survey based on WHO STEPS Approach to Surveillance, given its robust
methodology, and whose results were compared with the findings of the previous STEPS survey conducted in
2017. The following table shows the positive changes observed in relation to selected risk factors between
2017 and 2023.

Indicators                                            Year      Both sexes      Men       Women
Respondents who always or often added salt or salty 2017        28.1            29.3      26.8
sauce to their food                                   2023      20.9            21.8      20.1
Respondents with insufficient physical activity (less 2017      43.6            33.1      53.9
than 150 minutes of moderate intensity per week) (%) 2023       32.1            25.9      38.4
Median time spent in physical activity on average per 2017      30.0            51.4      17.1
day (Interquartile range) (minutes)                   2023      47.1            64.3      34.3
Respondents (%) with ≥ 3 risk factors, aged 18-69     2017      51.0            51.5      50.5
years                                                 2023      43.2            44.8      41.6
Adults (%) who can state ≥ 2 negative health effects 2017       76.2            77.0      75.5
of
                                                      2023      84.0            85.6      82.5
smoking tobacco
Adults (%) who can state ≥ 2 negative health effects 2017       33.2            32.8      33.6
of
                                                      2023      36.7            38.1      35.4
low consumption of fruits and/or vegetables
Adults (%) who can state ≥ 2 negative health effects 2017       58.3            59.6      57.1
of                                                    2023      59.3            59.4      59.2

physical inactivity
                                                                                                  Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)




Adults (%) who can state ≥ 2 negative health effects 2017       73.4           75.5       71.4
of
                                                     2023       82.4           84.4       80.4
substance abuse



The results of the STEPS surveys also confirmed improvements in outcomes by comparing results
between 2017 and 2023 for early screening and management of hypertension and diabetes. The ICR
(p. 14) noted that, in addition to the project interventions, the government efforts, beyond its project
resources, have likely contributed to the observed positive trends shown below:

Early screening and management of hypertension and diabetes in 2017 and 2023:

Indicators                                               Year     Both sexes   Men        Women
                                                         2017     28.8         21.6       35.9
Obese respondents (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2) (%)
                                                         2023     25.4         20.0       30.8
Respondents with raised blood pressure (SBP ≥ 140        2017     57.1         64.7       50.5
and/or DBP ≥ 90 mmHg) not on medication (%)              2023     44.2         51.9       37.2
Proportion of all hypertensive people with controlled    2017     23.8         18.5       28.4
blood pressure in the population (%)                     2023     30.8         29.1       32.5
Respondents with impaired fasting glycaemia (plasma      2017     7.9          8.1        7.7
venous value ≥ 110 mg/dl and < 126 mg/dl                 2023     4.6          3.5        5.7




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase the efficiency of hospital management

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged that training hospital staff in better management of public hospital
resources, standardizing architectural and technical standards for the design of hospitals, and strengthening
MOH’s institutional capacity for PPP transactions management would increase the capacity for efficient
management of hospital resources, and improved institutional capacity for structuring and managing PPP
transactions, thus plausibly contributing to uncreased efficiency of public hospital management.




                                                                                                 Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Initially, the planned activities included technical assistance and training in four areas: (i) clinical engineering,
(ii) drug and medical supplies management, (iii) clinical care processes, and (iv) administrative and financial
information systems (ICR, p. 15). This component also intended to standardize the design of hospitals.

Due to reorganizations at MOH and subsequent changes in priorities, main activities were dropped and
substituted by an activity for establishing Simulation-Assisted Training and Implementation Centers (SEUMs).
The project established and equipped two SEUMs in Izmir, and the share of health professionals who had
simulation-assisted training reached 23.68 percent, exceeding the target of 10 percent. But training activities
provided by the Centers were only partly related to improving the efficiency of hospital management, as the
training was mainly focused on improving clinical competencies of physicians and enhancing the provision of
specialized health care in public hospitals.

The plan for establishing an M&E system for Public-Private Partnership (PPP) hospitals was not implemented
due to constant changes in design and failure to organize a tender in compliance with World Bank
procurement guidelines (ICR, p. 15).




Rating
Negligible


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Enhance the capacity of MOH for evidence-based policy making

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged that monitoring health sector performance, harmonizing health sector data
in line with international standards, developing and adopting national e health standards and legislation,
ensuring the interoperability of HMIS’s nationwide, and widening the use of health technology assessments
(HTAs) would lead to improved availability of comprehensive and reliable health data for decision making and
to increased use of HMIS by policy and decision makers. These outputs would plausibly result in enhanced
evidence-based policy making capacity of MOH.

The project supported the development and implementation of an integrated HMIS by supporting its design,
integration strategy, and implementation roadmap, along with the harmonization and standardization of data
as discussed below.

Note: Prior to the project, the Health Management Information System (HMIS) involved 20 central and
separate systems that collected various sets of clinical, demographic, and administrative data which were not
harmonized (PAD, p. 18 and ICR, p. 2).

As a result, administrative and clinical data generated by health providers operating at primary, secondary,
and tertiary levels were consolidated and managed under the umbrella of one integrated information system.
By the end of the project, all public hospitals and family medicine centers, and 80 percent of private hospitals,
shared data through HMIS based on modern and up-to-date information standards. Gender-disaggregated

                                                                                                      Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



data were collected at all levels of health care delivery, and a gender-based analysis was mainstreamed in
the data management systems. The integration of health information of different actors helped more effective
planning and monitoring, and quicker response disposition to emerging needs and threats, while also
enabling electronic data exchange between health care providers.

The project supported the development and adaptation of national e-health standards and legislation to
improve the quality of health data and ensure the interoperability of HMIS nationwide and internationally. The
project contributed to ensuring compliance of the country’s health statistics with international standards. A
robust model for data definitions, collection, storage, and analysis was established. This resulted in almost all
health indicators (95.5 percent) within the database of MOH meeting international standards. A number of
health surveys (Obesity, Tobacco, STEPS) conducted based on the methodologies provided by
internationally recognized organizations (WHO, OECD, EUROSTAT) also helped to consolidate reliable data
used for national decision-making and for international comparisons.

The project supported the improvement and use of the Health Statistic and Causal Analysis system (SINA)
which is one of the major decision support system platforms of MOH. Enhancing SINA aimed at facilitating
effective management of institutional resources and prompt decision making. SİNA is used by both the central
administration and provincial, district, and hospital managers and physicians countrywide. As a business
intelligence platform, SINA allows live monitoring and reporting of digital records of all healthcare service
providers and helps in identifying health management data for better decision making. As an example (also
pertinent to Objective 4 on COVID-19), SINA was used during the COVID-19 pandemic along with the
national E-Pulse platform to identify the need for intensive care beds and manage free beds effectively. Real-
time information about the situation in intensive care wards across hospitals in the country helped improve the
referral of emergency cases and informed hospitals to prepare themselves for upcoming patients.

The project strengthened the capacity of the ‘Health Information Systems General Directorate’ of MOH
through the development and utilization of modern ICT management tools aiming to improve in-house
management of the Directorate’s activities, and these included a road map for software development, testing,
maintenance and repair, and tools for managing help desks, among others. The digital transformation also
resulted in increased MOH capacity for M&E and for monitoring the implementation of MOH Strategic Plan
(2019-2023).

The project developed a specific "Project Management System Software" that was used by the Project
Management Support Unit (PMSU) for monitoring project disbursements, activity status, tender and
procurement processes, and payments. The software was also used by other MOH units, and whose staff
were trained for its use.

The operation supported the development of MOH Strategic Plan (2019-2023) and an HTA strategy. Nine
reports on prioritized topics were prepared and published in line with the new HTA strategy that helped in
making evidence-based policy decisions regarding the use of new and expensive medical technologies, thus
contributing to the institutionalization HTA.

The project helped improve internal administrative processes at MOH by conducting process mapping of all
its units. Process flow charts were prepared and used by MOH high-level management to improve
organizational structures.




                                                                                                   Page 12 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



The proportion of policy and decision makers who used HMIS regularly reached 90 percent, achieving the
target. The above results and the development change that was realized indicate that the project fully
achieved this objective.




Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
Strengthen MOH capacity to control and fight the threat posed by COVID-19

Rationale
The theory of change as illustrated in the ICR (p. 3) envisaged that the procurement of pharmaceuticals and
equipment for COVID-19 treatment would improve the capacity of hospitals and other health facilities to
provide care to patients with COVID-19.

This ICR Review notes that the provision of medicines and equipment as a contribution to the response does
not fully capture the objective, as stated. Also, the project’s contribution constituted a complement to the
government’s larger response to COVID-19 and to the World Bank-assisted Emergency COVID-19 Health
Project, P173988 (ICR, p. 17).

The ICR provided cursory information about this objective, while also noting (p. 17) that the provision of
medications and medical devices necessary to treat COVID-19 patients helped to organize the effective
treatment of patients, shorten the treatment period, and decrease disease complications.

Initially, the project also envisaged to procure equipment for the Vaccine Production Center in Ankara and to
provide training in Bio Safety Level 4 training, but these activities were dropped (ICR, p. 6), as they were to
be supported by the World Bank-financed Preparedness for Public Health Emergencies Project (P180781).
However, the situation and needs analysis for the Vaccine Production Center was prepared with project
support and this analysis was expected to benefit the new operation.

In recognition of the project contribution to the COVID emergency response through the reported provision of
urgently needed pharmaceuticals and medical equipment, the objective is assessed as substantially
achieved.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 5
Objective

                                                                                                  Page 13 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Strengthen the government’s capacity to respond to emergencies

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged that supporting emergency health needs after the earthquake with supplies
for water sanitation, materials for infection prevention and control, medical goods to support surgical
interventions, hospital equipment, as well as the restoring access to essential and quality health services and
providing additional capacities in facilities to which patients are transferred, would collectively result in
improved capacity of hospitals and other health facilities to provide emergency care to people injured by the
earthquake.

The February 2023 earthquake(s) directly affected 11 provinces in the southeastern region of the country:
Kahramanmaraş, Adana, Adıyaman, Diyarbakır, Elazığ, Gaziantep, Hatay, Kilis, Malatya, Osmaniye, and
Şanlıurfa. These provinces were home to 14 million people (16.4 percent of the country’s population). The
earthquake caused massive loss of life, injuries, and very significant damages in and around the southeastern
region, resulting in over 50,000 casualties, 107,000 people injured, 3.3 million people displaced, and almost 2
million people living in camps and container settlements. Around 31 percent of all hospitals in the region were
severely damaged, at least 448 health workers died and 528 were injured, while many more were unable to
resume work due to loss of homes or deaths in their families. Patient care had to be provided in newly
established field emergency care hospitals, as well as in hospitals in non-affected cities. Thousands of
patients were transferred to hospitals in other cities. The earthquake destroyed or caused major damage to
numerous primary and secondary health care facilities and caused significant service disruptions. It also
resulted in the destruction of clean water and sewage systems and significantly increased the risk of
infectious disease outbreaks.

The project supported the procurement of medical goods, supplies, and equipment for hospitals and primary
health care facilities. Specifically, it financed: (i) supplies for water sanitation, such as chlorine and water
purification devices; (ii) supplies for infection prevention and control, such as sterilization units, tissue storage
cabinets, autoclaves, and insecticides; (iii) medical goods to support surgical interventions for the injured; and
(iv) hospital equipment to provide and maintain access to critical health services, such as X-ray machines,
neonatal ventilators, hemodialysis devices, incubators, tomography devices, beds and stretchers. The project
contributed to improving related capacities in 207 health facilities, exceeding the target of 15 health facilities.
The total number of patients cared for by project-supported hospitals under the earthquake emergency was
621, 811 persons, slightly exceeding the target of 611, 383 people.

The ICR (p. 17) noted that the project helped fill emergency health needs in affected areas, and established
additional capacity in other cities responding to the increased number of patients transferred to their health
facilities. The project supported the restoration of access to essential and quality health services in public
hospitals and primary health care facilities. The project provided due attention to supporting the restoration of
access to essential health services for women of reproductive age and children, such as antenatal care and
child immunization. Concurrently, the project helped improve capacity to prevent and control the
dissemination of infectious diseases.




Rating


                                                                                                      Page 14 of 25
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



                            High


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to improve primary and secondary prevention of selected NCDs was almost fully achieved and
                            rated Substantial. The objective to increase the efficiency of hospital management was barely achieved and
                            rated Negligible. The objective to enhance evidence-based policy-making capacity was fully achieved and
                            rated High. The objective to strengthen the government’s capacity to respond to COVID-19 was almost fully
                            achieved and rated Substantial. The objective to strengthen the government’s capacity to respond to
                            emergencies (assessed in the context of the earthquake in this case), was fully achieved and rated High. The
                            project provided due attention to gender aspects, and gender-disaggregated data were collected at all levels
                            of health care delivery. Females constituted 66.3 percent of direct project beneficiaries. The aggregation of
                            achievements is consistent with a Substantial rating for overall efficacy.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   The PAD’s economic analysis discussed the rationale for public involvement, development impact in terms of
   benefits and costs, the World Bank’s contribution to the project, and the project’s fiscal impact and sustainability.
   The analysis noted that preventing and delaying the onset of NCDs, and effectively managing them, can lead to
   savings in health expenditures, including a reduction in the intangible costs for those suffering from NCDs. It
   concluded that increased spending on health care at this stage of the country’s demographic and
   epidemiological development can help keep future public expenditures at bay by avoiding much more expensive
   late-stage treatment and co-morbidities.

   The ICR carried out a cost-benefit analysis and estimated costs and benefits for the 2015–2035 period. The
   main direct benefits were derived from the benefits arising from the prevention of NCDs, in addition to benefits
   from investing in the response to COVID-19 and the earthquake. The analysis used the economic value of
   averted disability-adjusted life years (DALYs). Baseline DALYs were calculated for various NCDs based on
   estimates of the Global Burden of Disease 2019 study for Türkiye, adjusted for the population size covered
   under the project interventions. These included the forward projections of DALYs averted (healthy life years
   gained) from 2015 to 2035. DALY’s saved were valued at three times per capita income, in line with cost-
   effectiveness references of the second edition of the Disease Control Priorities (DCP-2) and Copenhagen
   Consensus guidelines. The analysis used the standard 3 percent discount rate (and a 5 percent rate for the
   sensitivity analysis). The benefits resulting from the project were estimated at US$1.8 billion, and the overall



                                                                                                                            Page 15 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Internal Rate of Return was calculated at 309 percent with a Net Present Value of US$1.2 billion. The benefit-
cost ratio was estimated at 11.65, underscoring the overall high value for money of project interventions.

In terms of implementation efficiency, substantial issues were observed. The ICR (p. 21) reported that the
project experienced significant delays caused by frequent changes in leadership at the upper and middle
management levels of MOH, such as General Directors and Heads of Departments of implementing units, and
with four different Ministers of Health and two Project Directors. The turn-over disrupted continuity in decision-
making, and the responsible units could obtain neither timely nor sufficient managerial support. Also, the
organizational structure of MOH was significantly changed in August 2017, triggering a reshuffle of technical
staff and responsibilities for project activities. This also affected procurement and disbursement activities, as
responsibility was also transferred several times among MOH Directorates.

Further contributing factors were the complex institutional arrangements involving 11 Directorates, contributing
to the dilution of responsibilities and to additional challenges in project monitoring. The preparation of the new
MOH Strategic Plan was also delayed due to the above frequent changes, and this also contributed to slowing
project implementation, as MOH units were required to realign the targets of individual activities with the new
Strategic Plan. The above challenges were understandably compounded by the disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 and 2021, including the reassignment of staff to fulfill urgent COVID-19 related
activities.

Upon balancing the high cost-effectiveness of interventions with shortcomings observed in implementation and
administrative efficiency, this ICR Review concluded that the overall efficiency rating was Substantial, further
supported by the completion of implementation plans and all procurement activities by project closing, and
facilitated by MOH ownership of the health reform agenda. The extension of the project closing date allowed the
completion of activities and the attainment of most intended outcomes. In addition to pursuing its original
objectives, the project also responded to two major emergencies beyond its original scope. Project funds were
fully disbursed by December 31, 2023. Overall, efficiency was reflective of what would be expected in the
operation’s sector.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                                0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.




                                                                                                      Page 16 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives was rated High, as objectives were fully aligned with national and sectoral development
plans and with the Country Partnership Framework at project closing. Objectives were also responsive to the
COVID-19 and the earthquake emergencies. Efficacy was rated Substantial, as aggregated objectives were
almost fully achieved. Efficiency was rated Substantial and reflected what would be expected in the operation’s
sector.

Given the negligible achievement of one of the objectives used in the assessment of overall efficacy, the overall
outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

No risks of significance were identified, and several factors suggest that development outcomes are likely to
be maintained. First, institutional strengthening at MOH was substantial in terms of overall capacity,
stewardship, M&E, and policy formulation and implementation. A new Strategic Plan for the health sector
was developed and implemented. The project helped institutionalize a new model for preventive health
services through HLCs to sustain behavior change. The project strengthened the capacity for HTA and
promoted the integration of information systems. Second, and according to the ICR (p. 26), political risks
appear to be low, as government ownership and commitment to sustaining project gains remain high. Third,
partnership with the World Bank is also being maintained and promoted, including through the Earthquake
Recovery and Reconstruction Project (P180849) and the Preparedness for Public Health Emergencies
Project (P180781) that was under preparation at the time of the ICR.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The World Bank Team worked closely with national stakeholders in project preparation which was
  facilitated by the long-standing engagement of the World Bank with the health sector. Preparation
  benefited from prior analytical work and experience of past operations. Project preparation built on the
  results of two APLs that supported and advanced the implementation of the country’s Health
  Transformation Program over the period 2003-2015 (see section 3) and on findings related to public
  hospital reform, health financing, pharmaceuticals policy, and the political economy. It benefited from the
  2013 analysis of the burden of NCDs in Türkiye, the Global Adult Tobacco Survey, the Nutrition Survey,
  the Health Behavior in School-Aged Children Survey, the Salt Consumption Survey, and the 2014 World
  Bank analytical work on NCD risk factors in the country. The analysis of the first round of Health System


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Performance Assessment, conducted between 2009 and 2011 highlighted the need for designing a new
and efficient health information infrastructure at the national level. The World Bank experience in tackling
NCDs burden in a variety of countries was extensively analyzed, and brought insights from global
expertise, best practices, and innovative solutions into project preparation.

The PAD (p. 25) underlined lessons learned that were reflected in the project design, including the merits
of further enhancing commitment and ownership in complex reforms, keeping all stakeholders informed
and engaged, the critical role of timely and quality information to support informed decision-making, and
the centrality of focusing on the primary care level, where NCDs can be most effectively addressed. The
PAD (p. 26) reported that, during preparation, there was continued and close coordination with
international partners working on the health sector, particularly WHO, in the areas of reforming the health
sector and addressing NCDs.

According to the ICR (p. 21), complex institutional arrangements with the involvement of 11 MOH
Directorates diluted responsibilities for project implementation, subsequently causing difficulties with
monitoring project progress and delays in procurement and disbursement. The PMSU that was
established under the Health Transformation Program was maintained, as it continued to support other
Bank-assisted operations. The PMSU was responsible for coordinating and facilitating day-to-day
activities and fiduciary responsibilities. The PMSU was to ensure the continuity of adequate staffing in the
areas of procurement, financial management, and M&E. It would provide technical support and certify
compliance with World Bank requirements, auditing and reporting. Its functioning would be overseen by
the Deputy Undersecretary for Health, to whom the PMSU Director would report. The Operational Manual
was finalized before effectiveness. Financial management arrangements would build upon those
developed under the “Project in Support of Restructuring the Health Sector (PSRHS, P102172)” that was
ongoing at the time of appraisal.

The ICR (p. 20) reported that the design was developed based on a bottom-up approach. MOH
requested all Directorates to submit proposals that could contribute to the implementation of MOH
Strategic Plan. About 50 sub-project proposals were submitted. The selected sub-projects were then
grouped to establish the three original objectives and components. This approach was noteworthy in
promoting participation and overall ownership, but it had a downside as it resulted in fragmentation of
project activities (ICR, p. 26).

Shortcomings in M&E design were identified (ICR, p. 22) and included difficulties in measuring the
indicators with the available data; (b) absence of a clear methodology for measuring and monitoring three
PDO indicators; and (c) absence of a monitoring system to report on two PDO indicators.

Key risks were identified, and the overall risk was rated moderate, with governance and fiduciary risks
rated substantial. Risks were adequately mitigated (PAD, p. 28 and pp. 30-31), although the ICR
questioned if procurement mitigation measures were sufficient to prevent procurement delays for large
and complex packages. While the PMSU had adequate capacities and experience, the delegation of
responsibilities for procurement to the Directorates created challenges as these units had different levels
of capacity in dealing with high-value Quality and Cost-Based Selection (QCBS) within the framework of
international competitive bidding (ICB). Risk mitigation measures for procurement included the following
(PAD, p. 31): (a) ensuring regular support/advice by PMSU to the implementing units; (b) starting the
preparation of standard bidding document/request for proposal documents for high-value QCBS and ICB
contracts in the first year; (c) updating procurement plans on a semi-annual basis and combining similar
activities to reduce the number of procurement transactions; (d) extending the existing reporting tool used


                                                                                                  Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



  by PMSU to produce regular procurement-related reporting and recordkeeping; (e) clarifying the
  supporting activities of PMSU in the Project Operation Manual, (f) using individual consultant contracts
  that allow longer-term services; and (g) providing continuous hands-on support from the Bank through
  supervisory missions and training activities when needed. Also, PMSU prepared a procurement plan
  covering the first 18 months of implementation.

  Initially the project was assigned an Environmental Assessment (EA) Category C that was subsequently
  raised to Category B at the May 2020 restructuring upon the introduction of Component 4 related to
  COVID-19. MOH developed new regulations on biosafety level 4 for laboratories in line with WHO
  laboratory biosafety manual. The project prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) and a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) and disclosed them. A standalone SEP under the
  expanded project scope to finance the earthquake response activities was also prepared in 2023. Citizen
  engagement aspects, including a Grievance Redress mechanism, are discussed in section 10.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 According to the ICR (p. 25), the project was adequately supervised and monitored with sufficient budget
 allocations and staff. Supervision and implementation support activities were regular and provided
 appropriate and well-targeted advice and observations. The aide memoires provided evidence of the
 professional advice provided by World Bank staff. The Implementation Status & Results Reports and the
 Mid-Term Review realistically rated the performance of the project both in terms of achievement of
 development objectives and project implementation.

 The Bank was responsive to client needs and demonstrated flexibility in adapting to evolving priorities
 within the parameters of the PDOs. The Task Team was proactive and conducted four project
 restructurings in 2019, 2020, 2021 and 2023 to adjust to evolving needs and to support the response to
 COVID-19 and the earthquake. The ICR (p. 25) reported that the Bank Team was diligent in its
 communication with the government, providing up-to-date information and analysis on the status and
 impact of project activities, issues encountered, and suggested measures and options to overcome arising
 challenges. According to the ICR, the feedback received by the ICR mission during its interviews with
 stakeholders clearly showed the government’s appreciation of the technical skills and advice provided by
 the World Bank’s experts.

 The large number of MOH General Directorates involved in project implementation (11 Directorates) and
 the changes in priorities required close coordination, intensified supervision and monitoring,
 posing additional challenges to the World Bank Team. MOH and the Bank Team took important steps to
 consolidate supervision and coordination, including: (i) cancellation of secondary activities and retaining the
 critical ones and those that were already underway, thus reducing the number of Directorates directly
 involved in implementation and streamlining coordination with PMSU; and (ii) enhancing supervision,
 implementation support, and Directorates’ accountability by setting clear deliverables, expenditure
 projections, and timelines for implementation.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



 The ICR (p. 22) reported that the Bank’s flexibility and responsiveness at various stages of implementation
 allowed adjustments to respond effectively to evolving needs, including timely response to emergencies,
 and to closely align the project with the overall reform agenda. Bank support facilitated the full utilization of
 project funds.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The original objectives were clearly stated, and the results framework included five PDO indicators and 16
 intermediate results indicators. Shortcomings in the results framework were discussed in section 8. There
 were difficulties in measuring and monitoring some of the indicators with the available data, and the project
 intended to strengthen the monitoring systems during implementation.

 M&E functions would be supported by MOH structural units, i.e., the General Directorates and affiliated
 institutions involved in project implementation. M&E responsibilities for the project mirrored those reflected
 in MOH Strategic Plan, thus complementing the monitoring of MOH’s strategic objectives to which the
 project would contribute (PAD, p. 26). Hands-on support and guidance to M&E functions would be provided
 by experienced M&E staff at PMSU, and would be strengthened through in-service training and capacity-
 building activities supported by Subcomponent 3.4 on project management. The PMSU would be
 responsible for data aggregation and reporting. In addition to data available in the information systems and
 administrative records, information would be supplemented by household and thematic surveys such as the
 Household Health Survey, Chronic Diseases and Risk Factors Survey, Diabetes Study, Nutrition Survey,
 Salt Consumption Survey, National Study of Child-Age Obesity, National Study of Health Behavior in
 School-aged Children, Survey of Healthy Living Centers, and other health research studies.




b. M&E Implementation
  Significant progress was achieved by MOH and PMSU in improving the collection of data. Also, in the
  context of digital transformation, the project enhanced the institutional capacity for M&E at MOH. The
  development of an integrated HMIS substantially improved monitoring and reporting of digital records of
  all health care providers. MOH conducted a number of national surveys to collect data related to project
  indicators, including household health surveys and a patient satisfaction survey. In addition, and beyond
  core data, the project introduced a special software “Project Management System” that was developed




                                                                                                       Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



  and used by PMSU for effective monitoring of project disbursements, activity status, tender and
  procurement processes, and payments by all MOH units (ICR, p. 16).

  Beyond corrective revisions of the results framework that compensated for the original flaws at the design
  stage, the ICR noted an important shortcoming that was associated with measuring efficiency of hospital
  management. The original PDO indicator and another intermediate results indicator were dropped in
  2019 with the approval of a new Strategic Plan, and the newly added indicators measured improvement
  of health professionals’ skills and competences rather than efficiency of hospital management. Although
  such skills are associated with clinical care processes that influence efficiency, the usefulness of the new
  indicators was limited.



c. M&E Utilization
  Apart from the use of M&E findings for regular project monitoring, there were noteworthy M&E utilization
  and development aspects that influenced the sector at large and would likely influence future operations:

        The project’s M&E and its findings were used to monitor and evaluate the implementation of the
         MOH Strategic Plan (2019-2023).
        The project management software was used by other units at MOH Directorates, and their staff
         was trained accordingly.
        The integrated HMIS significantly improved MOH’s institutional capacity and helped establish a
         robust M&E system to monitor performance at all levels of care. Gender-disaggregated data
         were collected at all levels of health care delivery, and a gender-based analysis was
         mainstreamed in data management.
        The project supported the development and adaptation of national e-health standards and
         legislation to improve the quality and harmonization of health data and ensure the interoperability
         of HMIS nationwide and internationally. It ensured compliance of the country’s health statistics
         and MOH database with international standards. It developed a robust and sustainable model for
         data definitions, collection, storage, and analysis. The use of Health Statistic and Causal
         Analysis supported decision making. In addition, a number of health surveys, such as for obesity,
         tobacco, and STEPS which used internationally endorsed methodologies also helped consolidate
         reliable data for use both for national and international comparisons.

  On balance, taking into account design shortcomings, some of which persisted during implementation,
  and noteworthy M&E utilization aspects, overall M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Initially, and as noted in section 8a, the project was classified under Category C for Environmental
   Assessment. Upon the introduction of COVID-19 related activities, the safeguards EA category was

                                                                                                    Page 21 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



  changed to B. MOH developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Stakeholder
  Engagement Plan (SEP), and new biosafety regulations for ABSL 4 laboratories. In 2021, following the
  MOH decision to change the site selection for the Ankara Vaccine Production Center, the safeguard policy
  OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement was triggered to mitigate any potential impacts that may occur if
  additional land for the Center was needed. Also, safeguard policy OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats was
  triggered as a precaution given the location of the site near the surface water at Ankara Çubuk stream.
  While the financing of equipment for the Center was dropped in 2023, some related activities were retained
  to maintain flexibility for the possible use of World Bank resources under the new Preparedness for Public
  Health Emergencies Project (P180781), and MOH revised the ESMF and SEP. The project financed
  technical assistance for the preparation of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment studies (ESIA)
  for Ankara Vaccine Production Center, and invited a biosafety specialist to support other revisions. The
  ESIA would be part of the tender documents for the construction of the Center, to be implemented by the
  government outside the scope of this project.

  Although the ICR (p. 23) reported that the environmental and social aspects of the project were in full
  compliance with the requirements of the World Bank safeguard policies, the overall safeguards rating
  was Moderately Satisfactory throughout the applicable implementation period, including in the last ISR, as
  recorded in the Operations Portal.

  With regard to Citizen Engagement, the ICR (p. 24) reported that a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP) for
  COVID-19 operations was included under the project's ESMF. Also, PMSU prepared and disclosed a
  standalone SEP for the changed scope of the project to finance earthquake response activities. Special
  arrangements for patient/citizen feedback and/or complaints were also established at HLCs, and
  patient/citizen satisfaction with the services at the centers were regularly monitored through this
  mechanism. MOH established a robust Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and made it operational for
  addressing grievances both for this project and the Emergency COVID-19 Health Project (P173988).
  Through integration with national GRMs, all relevant stakeholders were reached. Project-related complaints
  were filtered in national systems and conveyed to the project-specific GRM. The integrated national
  systems consisted of the MOH Communication Center (SABIM) and Health Meeting Point (SBN) for health
  workers.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The ICR (p. 24) reported that financial management performance ratings were
  consistently assessed at levels ranging from moderately satisfactory to fully satisfactory. No major issues
  in financial management were identified. The financial management arrangements at PMSU, including
  planning and budgeting, accounting, financial reporting, funds flow, internal control, external audits, and
  staffing were satisfactory and acceptable to the World Bank. The interim financial reports were prepared
  and submitted in a timely manner, providing reliable financial information. The financial statements were
  regularly audited by independent auditors with unqualified opinions. The PMSU had appropriate skills and
  ability to manage project finances and disbursements in a timely manner.

  Procurement: Procurement activities were carried out by MOH through its PMSU and 11 implementing
  units at MOH. The PMSU supported these units as needed. Procurement performance was rated

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 25
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



   Moderately Satisfactory from the beginning of project implementation till May 2021, when performance was
   downgraded to Moderately Unsatisfactory due to delays in major and complex procurement contracts for
   activities related to SEUM and the PPP Central Monitoring and Evaluation Automation System (MIDOS). In
   September 2022, a case of procurement noncompliance pertaining to a US$6.5 million procurement
   package for the MIDOS was identified. A corrective timebound action plan was introduced and
   implemented.

   Shortcomings in procurement performance included: technical capacity limitations and frequent staff
   turnover, unfamiliarity of the other MOH implementing units with World Bank procedures, especially with
   regards to handling large and complex procurement packages, and insufficient coordination between the
   implementing units and PMSU. According to the ICR, the World Bank worked closely with MOH to address
   procurement challenges through focused implementation support and capacity building efforts. The Bank’s
   procurement team organized several procurement trainings for MOH staff to explain procurement rules and
   procedures to be applied, including training on the Bank’s Procurement Framework and Systemic Tracking
   of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). Following the fourth restructuring in 2023, the project completed the
   procurement of all planned activities by the closing date, and procurement performance was upgraded to a
   satisfactory rating.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                   Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
                                                                                    Shortcomings at entry, including
                                                                                    M&E design deficiencies,
                                                                                    fragmentation of project
                                                                                    activities, and complex
                                                                                    institutional arrangements with
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                    dilution of implementation
                                                                                    responsibilities, subsequently
                                                                                    causing challenges in project
                                                                                    monitoring and implementation
                                                                                    delays.
Quality of M&E                    Substantial             Substantial

                                                                                                      Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



Quality of ICR                   ---                     High


12. Lessons

The ICR (p. 26) offered several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons,
restated by IEG Review:

A bottom-up approach to project design enhances ownership, but it may also lead to
fragmentation of project activities and responsibilities. Under this project, various MOH
Directorates submitted more than 50 sub-project proposals at the design stage, resulting in a degree
of fragmentation. The lesson was supplemented by a recommendation noting that a unifying
framework with strong justifications for activities can ensure full coherence and complementarity of
design under future similar operations.

The ability to mount an effective response to unforeseen emergencies is facilitated by the
flexibility of the project and the adaptability of its management. This was demonstrated by the
project’s ability to quickly reallocate resources, adjust priorities, and launch new interventions in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the earthquake.

Continuity of health care and resilience to emergencies are facilitated by a strong focus on
primary health care. Under the project, a patient-centered primary health care was instrumental for
delivering responses to COVID-19 and earthquake emergencies and for restoring access to
essential services while concurrently contributing to the resilience of the health system.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of project performance. The narrative supported the theory of change,
available evidence, and the ratings. The ICR was in general alignment with the stated objectives. It was results-
oriented and candid. The ICR triangulated data to further confirm its findings and conclusions on progress
made in NCD prevention. The quality of evidence ranged between adequate and high, and the overall quality of
the analysis was high. Some of the evidence gaps were rooted in the project and not in the ICR, which aptly
identified them. The ICR's clear analysis of M&E aspects was noteworthy. Its lessons were specific and directly
derived from project experience. The ICR was concise, internally consistent, and aligned with the guidelines.




                                                                                                   Page 24 of 25
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Health System Strengthening & Support (P152799)



a. Quality of ICR Rating
   High




                                                                                 Page 25 of 25
