     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



                                                                                    Report Number: ICRR0024298

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                   Project Name
 P126579                                      Eastern Electricity Highway Project

 Country                                      Practice Area(Lead)
 Eastern and Southern Africa                  Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-51480,IDA-51490                         30-Jun-2019                                        500,959,006.53

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 12-Jul-2012                                 31-Jan-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            684,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                             586,384,213.47                                              0.00

 Actual                                         500,959,006.53                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Dileep M. Wagle              Peter Nigel Freeman          Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The original project development objective (PDO), as in the Project Information Document (2012), the ICR
   (p.2) as well as the PAD (p.v), was “(a) to increase the volume and reduce the cost of electricity supply in
   Kenya, and (b) to provide revenues to Ethiopia through the export of electricity from Ethiopia to Kenya”. (The
   EEP Project Agreement, 2015, did not however provide any details of the PDO).

   It should be mentioned that the project constituted the first phase of the regional integration program for
   power systems in East Africa (APL1). The broader objectives of the Program, supporting the mission of the

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



   East Africa Power Pool (EAPP), were to help integrate the power systems of EAPP member countries
   including Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda.

   Although the project’s indicators were modified during the final restructuring that took place in September
   2023, the project was 92 percent disbursed by then; hence, no split evaluation will be applied in estimating
   overall outcome since it will not have implications on the overall rating.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Sep-2023

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component A1: Transmission Line (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$308.1 million; Actual cost at
   closing: US$261.9 million). The component included design, construction and commissioning of 1,043 km
   of bipolar 500 kV HVDC overhead transmission line to connect the power network in Ethiopia, at
   Wolayta/Sodo substation, with the Kenya network, at the Suswa substation. A total length of 440 km of the
   line was in Ethiopia and 612 km in Kenya. The lines were funded by AfDB and the French Development
   Agency, AFD (Agence Française de Développement).

   Component A2: Converter Substations (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$628.8 million; Actual cost at
   closing: US$ 443.4 million). This component, financed by IDA, comprised the design, construction and
   commissioning of one converter substation at Sodo in Ethiopia and one at Suswa in Kenya. The
   substations were intended to convert alternating current (AC) power into direct current (DC) in Ethiopia and
   DC power into AC in Kenya (and vice-versa, as needed).

   Component A3: Environmental and Social Management (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$30 million;
   Actual cost at closing: US$34 million). This component, financed by Ethiopian Electric Power (EEP) and
   Kenya Electricity Transmission Company (KETRACO), provided for implementation of Environmental and
   Social Management Plans (ESMPs), the Resettlement Policy Framework in Ethiopia and Resettlement
   Action Plans (RAPs) in both countries.

   Component A4: System Reinforcement in Kenya (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$87 million; Actual
   cost at closing: US$39.1 million). This component, IDA and KETRACO-financed, comprised
   reinforcement of substations and other parts of the network. This included upgrading of the Isinya
   substation to operate at 400/220 kV, the addition of a 220/66 kV, 90 MVA transformer at Nairobi North
   substation, and 220 kV, 200 megavolts amps reactive (MVAr) capacitors at the Athi River substation.



                                                                                                   Page 2 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



  Component B1: Project Management and Supervision (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$45 million;
  Actual cost at closing: US$23.6 million). The component included a supervision and management
  consultant firm (AfDB-financed) to supervise Components A1 and A2 in both countries, a consultant firm
  (IDA and KETRACO-financed) to supervise Component A4, short-term consultants, and operating costs for
  KETRACO’s Project Management Unit.

  Component B2: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance (Estimated cost at appraisal: US$10 million;
  Actual cost at closing: US$20.5 million): The component – which was AfDB-financed in Ethiopia, and
  AfDB, AFD and IDA-financed in Kenya – included planning and engineering studies, capacity building on
  HVDC operation and maintenance (O&M), power trading, power management, procurement and financial
  management (FM), and environmental and social management. In Ethiopia, it included an EEP cost-
  minimization and revenue maximization study, fixed asset inventory and valuation for EEP, preparation of
  interim financial reports (IFRs) for EEP and EEU, design and implementation of EEP’s quality management
  system, and advisory support for tariff-setting and financial sustainability assessment.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost and Financing

  The cost of the project was initially estimated at US$1,262 million, based on IDA loans of US$684 million,
  AFD and Govt. of France (MOFA) loans of US$578.5 million, and US$106.2 million equivalent of Borrower
  contribution. This was revised downwards to US$1,164 million on account of project cost savings. Actual
  disbursements by project closing amounted to a further reduced total of US$826.89 million.

  The project experienced significant cost savings on account of competitive procurement under Component
  A. These savings were deployed in Ethiopia to help strengthen its transmission networks and EEP
  corporate management. These investments included the Butajira-Worabe 132 kV transmission line and
  substations to expand the network, purchase of 15 kV and 33 kV switchgears, optical ground wire cables,
  protection refurbishment for 68 substations to strengthen the network and restore war-damaged sections of
  the networks, and three-phase smart meters. In Kenya, the savings of US$96.3 million were cancelled
  under the project and re-committed under the Kenya Green and Resilient Expansion of Energy Program
  (GREEN 2), approved December 2023, for financing Static Synchronous Compensators (STATCOMS),
  aimed at strengthening the Kenya network to enable transfer of higher volumes. (This equipment could
  have been included in the project, but their design was not finalized to allow for their installation before the
  project closed).

  Borrower contribution

  Borrowers' contributions (from Ethiopia and Kenya) of US$106.2 million equivalent was envisaged at
  appraisal, as part of the project’s financing. Actual amounts disbursed by closing were much lower - at
  US$34.9 million equivalent.

  Dates




                                                                                                     Page 3 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



   The project was approved on July 12, 2012, becoming effective on December 5, 2013. A Mid-Term Review
   was held on May 29, 2015. The original closing date of June 30, 2019 was extended several times for a
   total of four-and-a half years, through seven restructurings, aimed at extending the closing date.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Regional and Sector Context

Regional integration has been critical to East Africa’s transformation for greater economic
opportunities. The region, with 270 million people, had an economic growth averaging 6 percent per annum
between 2003-2008, and 5 percent between 2009-2010. However, since all countries in the region were
low-income at the time, with per capita incomes of less than US$1,000, indicating that a still higher rate of
growth was essential to achieve a substantial reduction of poverty. Since the high cost of infrastructure,
especially in smaller countries, had been a barrier to development, the World Bank’s strategy for Africa
(2011) had emphasized a regional approach to infrastructure development, thereby lowering capital and
operational costs for smaller countries, and providing greater access to more efficient technologies and
scale economies.

East Africa had huge energy resources but these were concentrated in a relatively small number of
countries, with Ethiopia and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) together accounting for over 60
percent of Sub-Saharan Africa’s hydropower potential. Despite energy abundance at the regional level,
East African countries had the lowest rates of household electricity access and per capita electricity
consumption. Against this background, regional integration provided the best way forward to enable large-
scale development of the region’s cost-effective and clean energy sources.

In principle, the economic benefits of integration in East Africa outweighed political concerns about reliance
on power imports from neighboring countries. Importing low-cost electricity from neighbors made
considerable economic sense for countries facing shortages in supply and load shedding, such as Burundi,
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, and especially for those depending heavily upon imported
petroleum for power generation (e.g. Djibouti and Sudan). Exports would, at the same time, provide
energy-rich countries with the opportunity to monetize their surplus capacity; the hard-currency revenues
resulting helping them achieve a better macro-economic balance.

Power trade favored the introduction of more efficient institutional models in the electricity sectors of
participating countries. Countries entering into trade would have to advance institutional and regulatory
capacity development of their respective electricity sectors to achieve financial sustainability. The necessity
of adopting commercial practices would complement on-going reforms in these sectors. Regional
integration would also require strong interaction between energy sector institutions across borders, leading
to valuable transfer of knowledge and practices.

For Kenya, by the time of appraisal in 2012, it was apparent that an interconnector to transfer power
between Ethiopia and Kenya and other neighboring countries would, by making available low-cost power
supply from Ethiopia, have a transformative effect on the Eastern Africa region. This was consistent with the
approach advocated by the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), adopted by Heads of

                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



State in Lusaka in 2001 to enhance East Africa’s growth and participation in the global economy. NEPAD
anchored the Eastern Africa Power Pool (EAPP) that was created in 2005 and adopted by the Common
Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) as the institution for coordinating regional power system
integration. The Kenya-Ethiopia interconnector had a strategic importance, as it was considered to be the
lynchpin on which all other projects identified in the EAPP Master Plan would depend, and – if implemented
successfully – could unlock a fully integrated power market in east Africa. Its commercial viability was
confirmed with a 25-year power purchase agreement (PPA), and simulations determined – based on
electricity revenue projections for Ethiopia and power supply cost savings for Kenya - that it would be viable
on its own, even if other countries were not connected to it. The interconnector was also a critical first part
of the backbone of the Eastern Africa Electricity Highway, running from Egypt to South Africa.

Against this background, the APL Program as a whole (of which the project was the first phase) supported
the integration of power system of five countries (Kenya, Tanzania, Ethiopia, Uganda and Rwanda) with a
combined population of 212 million and GDP of US$107 billion. The EAPP Master Plan designated the
transmission interconnections among these countries as priorities for the development of the East African
power market. These interconnections would create the transmission backbone for the region, with Kenya
as the central node, and Ethiopia initially supplying much of the electricity traded in this network. Over the
longer term, once the planned Tanzania-Zambia interconnection was built, the EAPP power systems would
be linked to the South African Power Pool.

Alignment with Country Strategies

The Project’s development objectives were consistent with those of the World Bank Group (WBG)’s Africa
Regional Strategy (2011), which included improving critical infrastructure services, especially cross-border,
so as to increase household electrification rates by supporting construction/rehabilitation of additional
transmission lines, interconnection of national grids and creating additional power generation capacity. The
project was similarly consistent with the Africa Regional Integration and Cooperation Assistance Strategy
(2018), Pillar 1 of which focused on Regional Connectivity, including Energy Access and Markets, placing
priority on expansion of regional energy transmission networks, increasing power trade between
neighboring countries and via regional power pools. The Kenya Country Partnership Framework (2023-
2028) included a significant increase in the number of electricity grid and off-grid connections in its priority
objectives, to be achieved through the then-ongoing Eastern Electricity Highway project and two other
operations. Similarly, under Objective 1.2 of the Ethiopia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2018-
2022, the Government of Ethiopia was focused on leveraging the electricity sector for economic
growth. Under this Objective, increasing access to reliable energy supply was prioritized, with support to
the export of geothermal energy to neighboring regional markets and increasing power sector revenues as
one of the World Bank’s priorities in this regard.

Based on the above, Relevance is rated High.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)


                                                                                                      Page 5 of 17
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               “To increase the volume and reduce the cost of electricity supply in Kenya”

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC)

               The design of the operation was fairly straightforward. Key activities included the construction of a 1,043 km-
               long transmission line between Ethiopia and Kenya, coupled with converter substations in both countries,
               system reinforcement in Kenya and capacity building/technical assistance to project management units in
               both countries. Causal linkages between the project’s activities and planned outcomes were fairly
               straightforward. The activities were expected to lead directly to the expected outcomes of increased volumes
               of electricity exported from Ethiopia to Kenya, while enabling regional trade with third-party countries, cost
               savings to Kenya on electricity imported from Ethiopia, and correspondingly, to increased revenues to
               Ethiopia from these exports. Finally, to improved flexibility and stability of Kenya’s electricity network.

               Indicators used to measure the achievement of objectives were similarly straightforward. Achievement of
               project outcomes for PDO1 was measured by indicators measuring the amount of electricity exported from
               Ethiopia to Kenya each year (GWh) and savings to Kenya on electricity supply costs (US$/kWh). For PDO2,
               it was measured in terms of revenues to Ethiopia from these electricity exports (US$/year). The project also
               had a core outcome indicator: namely, the number of indirect project beneficiaries in Kenya, measured by the
               number of people in Kenya with an electricity connection provided by the Kenya Power & Lighting Company
               (KPLC).

               Key assumptions underlying the TOC (provided subsequently by the team) included the following: (a) that a
               legally binding power purchase agreement (PPA) would be negotiated between EEP and KPLC, that would
               be endorsed by the governments of Ethiopia and Kenya, (b) the negotiated price in the PPA would be
               appreciably less than the average cost of generation in Kenya, (c) that neighboring countries subsequently
               would sign PPAs with Ethiopia that would utilize the interconnector for the purchase of power, and (d)
               complementary network investments (including cross-border lines) would be completed, removing any
               physical constraints to wheeling power.

               The financial benefits of imports to Kenya in displacing more expensive generation lay in a reduction in the
               tariff burden on electricity customers, while revenues to Ethiopia from electricity exports underpinned the
               development of the country’s hydropower assets. The project was the first phase of the Adjustable Program
               Loan (APL), mentioned in Section 3 earlier, which identified a number of priority investments to realize the
               EAPP, including the Kenya-Tanzania double-circuit 400 kV line in Phase 2 of the Program and the Tanzania-
               Rwanda and Tanzania-Uganda 200 kV lines in Phase 3. As the lynchpin project of the EAPP, the Kenya-
               Ethiopia interconnector would make available lower-cost electricity to countries in the Pool, thereby
               supporting their electricity access goals. Although countries in the Pool may have had abundant renewable
               energy resources, they faced high capital costs in developing their power systems. Electricity trade allowed
               importing countries to offset large lumpy investments in domestic generation, reducing capital costs and
               easing the fiscal burden of power sector development.




                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



Outputs

- Construction of the Sodo converter station was completed in April, 2020, and the Suswa converter station in
January, 2021 – fully achieving the target.

- Interconnector availability of 99.89 percent was achieved by closing (target was 99 percent).

- 1043 km of transmission lines were constructed under the project by closing (target was 1000 km). The
High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) transmission interconnection between Ethiopia and Kenya was
completed in monopolar mode in December 2022, and partial operational acceptance issued, allowing
electricity exports to commence. Full operational acceptance was expected in August 2024 (after the ICR
was prepared).

- Commissioning and operational acceptance of the system reinforcement under Component A4 (Isinya,
Kimuka and Nairobi North substations) were achieved on different dates in 2021. Three substations were
successfully reinforced, against a target of 2. These reinforcements were intended to enable operation of the
Nairobi Ring and the Nairobi-Mombasa line at 400 kV, thereby ensuring greater stability of the network in
Kenya.

- Under Project Management and Capacity Building, the appointment of a supervision consultant took place
on schedule, by project closing. In addition, 121 KETRACO staff underwent training during this period (target:
150) and 210 staff benefited from knowledge transfer (target: 200) by January 2024.

Outcomes

Achievement of the objective of increasing the volume and reducing cost of electricity supply in Kenya was
measured by two indicators; (a) the amount of electricity exported from Ethiopia to Kenya each year, and (b)
the savings to Kenya on electricity supply costs. In addition, a third indicator measuring the number of project
beneficiaries – namely all KPLC residential consumers (comprising all household members) - was included.

(a) Based on the PPA signed in 2012, the target value of the amount of electricity exported from Ethiopia to
Kenya per year was 2,978 GWh, three years after commissioning (in FY20, per the original schedule). Actual
achievement was 1,008 GWh in FY24 (the first complete year of exports after commissioning), with transfers
on the line being restricted to 200 MW (equivalent to 1,445 GWh) until after installation of STATCOMS at
Raba and Suswa substations in mid-2026. Thereafter, 400 MW of transfer would become possible (consistent
with revised PPA terms). On the basis, exports were projected to reach 2,467 GWh/year in FY27, five years
after commissioning, and 2,889 GWh/year by FY30.

(b) The savings to Kenya on electricity supply costs were estimated on the basis of the difference in cost of
electricity supply in the country, with and without imports (i.e. had the interconnector not been built), times the
amount of electricity imported from Ethiopia. The value of the indicator is calculated by applying a ratio of
US$0.013 (see ICR, para 29) to the volume of exports – which indicates estimated savings to Kenya of
US$15.6 million by January 2024, increasing to US$32 million by FY27 (or 5 years after commissioning of the
interconnector).

(c) Kenya carried out an ambitious campaign to add a million new connections per year between 2015 and
2019. This resulted in a more-than-doubling of KPLC’s residential customers by project closing. As such,
beneficiaries of lower-cost imports from Ethiopia reached over 8.6 million residential customers by June 2023,

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



equivalent (on an average household size of 5 persons per household) to an aggregate number of some 43
million beneficiaries. This was well in excess of the target of 15.7 million beneficiaries (from a baseline of
13.9 million).

In terms of overall efficacy of PDO1, the objective was mostly achieved. The successful construction of the
transmission line was a significant achievement with a potential transformative impact on the
region. However, the timetable for exports to ramp up became stretched on account of delays arising for a
variety of reasons – such as challenges (including court injunctions) to land acquisition for the transmission
line, along with compensation to project-affected persons (PAPs) in Kenya, and the impact of Covid-19
restrictions, which affected contractors and the pace of construction. Taking this into account, efficacy of this
objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
“To provide revenues to Ethiopia through the export of electricity from Ethiopia to Kenya”

Rationale
The Theory of Change for PDO1 was the same as for PDO1. The objective of increasing revenues to
Ethiopia via the sale of electricity to Kenya was directly correlated to the objective of increasing the volume of
electricity supplied to Kenya from these exports. The relevant outcome indicators assigned to this objective
were (a) the volume of electricity exported from Ethiopia (in GWh), and (b) the quantum of revenues accruing
to Ethiopia on account of its exports to Kenya.

Outputs

Outputs for PDO1 were equally applicable to PDO2.

Outcomes

Achievement of outcomes was as follows: (a) The volume of electricity exported from Ethiopia reached 1,203
GWh by FY25 (projected), against a target of 732 GWh. As mentioned earlier – under PDO1, these exports
were projected to reach 2,467 Gwh by FY27. (b) Revenues to Ethiopia (estimated by applying the price
defined in the PPA) to the volume of exports) reached US$78 million by January 2024, against a target of
US$$47.5 million, and were projected to reach US$161 million by FY27 (i.e. five years after commissioning
the interconnector).

Based on the above, efficacy for this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The project contributed substantially to the achievement of the development objectives by helping to increase
                            the volume of electric power availability, at lower cost, in Kenya, whilst providing enhanced revenues to
                            Ethiopia, which was exporting this power. Though the ramp-up in power delivery and export was slower than
                            planned for (five years versus three), it should be borne in mind that the project is expected to contribute to
                            Kenya’s power needs for the next 30 years or so. From that perspective, it is likely to have a transformative
                            impact through improved energy security utilizing renewable electricity generation. From a longer-term
                            perspective, both Kenya and Ethiopia have been able to strengthen their transmission networks, improving
                            service reliability, and their transmission system operations.

                            Based on this, the project’s overall efficacy is rated Substantial.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency

   Economic evaluation was conducted at both appraisal and at project closing (by the ICR). Since the benefits
   (revenue to Ethiopia and cost-savings to Kenya) moved in lockstep with the volume of exports to Kenya, the
   economic internal rates of return (EIRR) and net present value (NPV) estimates were directly proportional to
   exports.

   On this basis, the ex-ante EIRR was estimated at an average of 24.1percent (21.8 percent for Ethiopia and 25.5
   percent for Kenya), with an NPV of US$1,059 million (the sum of US$320 million for Ethiopia and US$739
   million for Kenya). Competitive bids for the construction of the converter station and transmission line lots
   resulted in a cost savings of about 20 percent relative to appraisal estimates, resulting in a lower investment
   cost, which should have boosted its economic return. Notwithstanding this, the EIRR at project closing was
   estimated at a much lower 13.3 percent (average of 11.1 percent for Ethiopia and 14.1 percent for Kenya), and
   the NPV at a similarly lower US$68 million ( -US$16 million for Ethiopia and US$84 million for Kenya), mostly on
   account of significant delays impacting the construction and acceptance of the facilities, offsetting the reduction
   in costs.

   Operational/Administrative Efficiency

   The construction and acceptance of the facilities took approximately an additional five years compared to the
   original implementation schedule, necessitating multiple restructurings to extend the project’s closing date by a
   cumulative 4.5 years. According to the ICR (Annex 7, p.38, para 3), the original project schedule was over-
   optimistic on two key counts: the length of time it would take to identify and compensate PAPs in Kenya, and the

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



amount of time needed to finalize the bidding documents and procure contractors for the main contract. There
were additional constraints that arose, unanticipated. These included constraints in the high voltage
transmission network which affected the design configuration of the converter station in Suswa and its ability
and capacity to safely manage the quantity of imports (ICR, p.39, para 5), challenges to land acquisition for the
transmission line, KETRACO’s delay in settling invoices, and vandalism of ground electrode and theft of copper,
including insulator and conductors, all of which had to be replaced and changes made to the configuration of the
towers to better protect them against repeat attempts. All of this had a negative impact on the project’s
administrative and operational efficiency.

Taking account of the sub-par performance of both economic and operational & administrative efficiency, the
project’s overall efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
 Appraisal                                                 24.10
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     0
 ICR Estimate                                              13.30
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The project’s development objectives were highly relevant not only to the electricity sectors of Ethiopia and
Kenya, but also to the development of the EAPP. The project successfully laid the foundation for development
of the other transmission infrastructure projects that will enable power trade in the EAPP, and in the long run to
the potential integration of the EAPP and SAPP (Southern African Power Pool). The project’s efficacy was
rated Substantial because the ramp-up in power delivery and export fell significantly behind schedule, delaying
the benefits of the investments. Project efficiency was rated Modest for economic, as well as administrative &
operational, efficiency. As such, project’s Overall Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome


                                                                                                    Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



The overall risk of the project was underpinned by the sustainability of the PPA – the 25-year tripartite
agreement signed in July 2022, between EEP, KETRACO and KPLC, and later approved by regulators in
both countries. The PPA stipulated the maximum daily power transfer for the first seven years (to be
renegotiated by the concerned parties for the subsequent phase). It was complemented by a legal
agreement on system operations, a technical agreement on operational guidelines, and an administrative
agreement on coordination and management. KPLC, in Kenya, has had an excellent record for honoring
PPAs, and the Government has always supported it. From this perspective, the sustainability risk is
low. However, it will be essential for high-level leadership in both countries to continue to be committed to
meeting whatever challenges may arise in the future regarding the challenges that may arise over the long-
term operation of the line.

Other, technical, risks, which – on the face of it appear to be manageable – include (a) the need to establish
O&M protocols (ancillary to the PPA); (b) the need to sustain the training of engineers manning the facility on
O&M, given the specialized nature of the plant. This would include the need to continue exchange visits by
staff of EEP and KETRACO, and cooperation program between KETRACO and PowerGrid of India; (c) the
need for both utilities to allocate adequate resources for inspection and maintenance of the line – especially
in remote areas where theft and vandalism had been issues; (d) installation of STATCOMS at Rabai and
Suswa will be critical for operation of the line after 2025. Kenya will be exposed to payment of compensation
to Ethiopia if the Kenyan system is unable to offtake 400 MW in November 2025.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  According to the ICR (p.17), the World Bank’s approach to the design of the operation recognized that
  the construction of an interconnector entailed both high risks and high rewards in terms of transformative
  impact on the region. The project’s PDOs reflected the priorities of the EAPP development as well as the
  key strategies for development of the sector in the two countries. Social and environmental risks were
  analyzed in the PAD, along with technical, financial and economic aspects. Required safeguards
  documents were prepared and disclosed prior to commencement of the project. The project’s
  procurement strategy for the engineering, procurement and construction (EPC) contracts took into
  account the need to ensure competition, while setting clear technical and financial eligibility requirements
  for potential bidders. As indicated earlier, this did result in significant savings of IDA proceeds, which
  could be deployed for acquisition of additional transmission equipment in Ethiopia.

  One shortcoming arising was that the project timeline prepared at appraisal underestimated the time
  required for construction. This included the time involved in providing compensation to PAPs and for
  ramping up exports, post-construction. This underestimation led to in the multiple restructurings that
  followed and the need to extend the project’s closing date by several years. The project’s implementation
  arrangements relied on the PIUs housed within the two utilities. However, the PIUs were dependent on
  allocation of funds in annual government budget cycles – which were often less than adequate. To
  provide a degree of independence, the project design could usefully have explored better alternatives; for
  instance, the use of a two-country Special Purpose Vehicle (given that the Interconnector was revenue
  generating), which utilized a portion of the revenues generated.



                                                                                                    Page 11 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



  Overall, the project’s quality at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project was adequately supervised, the Bank team undertaking 20 supervision missions over the
 nearly 11-year implementation period. According to the ICR (pg.18), the Bank team was proactive in
 addressing challenges to achievement of the project’s development objectives. The team was prompt in
 identifying and effectively dealing with issues as they emerged (e.g. land acquisition issues, challenges to
 KETRACO in dealing with grievances and delays in budget made available by the Kenya National
 Treasury). The Bank team also carried out intensive supervision of RAP and ESMP implementation, and
 developed excellent working arrangements with the other co-financiers. Since the Bank was the lead
 agency in implementing this large project, it undertook to ensure consensus with AfDB and AFD, who were
 financing discrete components of the operation, conducting joint implementation support missions and
 agreed-on findings, reported back via joint aide memoires (information provided subsequently by the team).

 Based on this, quality of supervision is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) plan for tracking the achievement of outcome and intermediate
 indicators was largely in keeping with standard World Bank practice. PDO outcome indicators were to a
 large extent dependent upon the successful and timely construction of the facilities, as well as an active
 PPA, but also by external factors such as electricity demand in Kenya (which had actually decelerated and
 had an impact on the quantum of imports it could offtake). That said, outcome indicators remained valid as
 they reflected the stated objectives and the causal links were direct between project outputs (construction
 of facilities) and achievement of outcomes.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR indicates (para 60) that M&E reporting was negatively affected by the withdrawal of the
  Supervising Consultant during the Covid-19 pandemic period, but that KETRACO was able to take over

                                                                                                 Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



  that role adequately. However, the ICR is silent on such issues as the extent to which indicators in the
  results framework were actually measured and reported, whether the data were of reliable and of good
  quality, and whether M&E functions and processes were likely to be sustained after project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  According to the ICR (para 61), project-generated data, tracking the progress of works across various
  contracts, was more than sufficient to keep stakeholders, including financiers, up-to-date on the
  challenges encountered. However, financiers themselves did note that there was little coordination and
  information exchange between the EEP and KETRACO project implementation units (PIUs), who were
  hence not always abreast of each other’s challenges.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The ICR did not clarify the project’s environmental & safeguards rating. However, as per the PAD, it is
   noted that the project was classified as Category A – Full Assessment, due to “potentially significant
   environmental and social impacts”. The following safeguards were triggered under the Bank’s Safeguards
   Policy: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous
   Peoples), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). Their
   application and impact varied for the two countries.

   As such, in Ethiopia, an Environmental and Social Management Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement
   Action Plan (RAP) were prepared in 2012, at inception. These were updated and prepared to include the
   convertor station and Ground Electrode + High Voltage Transmission Line (TML) in 2016. These also
   identified E&S risks and impacts of the project. All E&S instruments were disclosed at EEP’s website and
   the World Bank’s Info Shop/External Website. Supervision by the co-financiers identified shortcomings in
   good industry practices and safeguards requirements at some of the workers’ camps, which needed to be
   addressed by the contractor in 2017. Additionally, theft of materials posed a safety concern. Remedial
   actions included heightened surveillance and a change in design of the towers to include a barrier to deter
   thieves from climbing the towers.

   As regards compliance with RAP implementation in Ethiopia, the project paid compensation for loss of
   assets and property at full replacement cost and effectuated prior to commencement of the construction
   activities. Project-affected persons (PAPs) were adequately consulted and informed about the potential
   adverse impacts of the project, available options, mitigation measures and their rights to receive
   compensation. The construction and commissioning of the Livestock Feed Processing Plant (LFPP), though
   delayed, was eventually completed and PAPs were organizing themselves into cooperatives to manage the
   scheme, which would benefit about 200 families who lost their communal grazing land to the project.




                                                                                                  Page 13 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



  Regarding Kenya, compliance in Kenya, a total of 2,638 PAPs were affected there, 983 of which had their
  structures identified for compensation. Some 2,313 had their crops or trees damaged. The compensation
  process did not go smoothly, encountering many challenges, including slow and inadequate provision of
  budget by the National Treasury to KETRACO for compensation. The process was complicated by difficulty
  in locating and contacting PAPs and confirming ownership through searches in the lands department. In
  2017, due to encroachment on some sections, about 85 km of the line had to be rerouted. Other problems
  included unclear modality for compensation for community-owned land (held in trust for the respective
  communities by county governments). Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) were encountered in one of the lots
  and provided with in-kind compensation through which community sub-projects of their choice were
  constructed. Although the project triggered Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Physical Cultural Resources
  (OP 4.11), they were not encountered during implementation.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The ICR reports (para 69) that – as regards financial management (FM) in Kenya – project audit reports
  were submitted on timely basis. Audit opinions on financial statements were unqualified over the project’s
  life and the Management Letter did not identify internal control weaknesses. The quality and timeliness of
  quarterly IFRs however did fluctuate on account of changes in staffing and system updates. Further,
  oversight by EEP’s internal audit team was less than adequate and delays were experienced in utilizing
  funds advanced to the project’s designated account (DA), as a result of which the DA remained inactive
  over the last two years of project implementation – leaving an undocumented DA balance which would be
  refunded to IDA.

  The Bank team did follow up on entity FM issues during implementation, supporting EEP in improving its in
  improving its FM arrangements in terms of adoption of IFRs, asset valuations, installation of smart meters,
  etc. EEP was able to take steps to clear its entity audit backlog, address audit findings and internal control
  weaknesses identified, and obtain clean audit opinion on its entity financial statements for the past five
  years. Overall FM performance has been rated Moderately Satisfactory since FY20.

  The ICR also reports (para 70) that – as regards Ethiopia – the project’s annual reports were submitted on
  timely basis, with unqualified audit opinions on its financial statements over the project life. The
  Management Letter did not contain any internal control weaknesses. As in Kenya, the quality and
  timeliness of quarterly IFRs did suffer fluctuations due to changes in staffing and system updates. Also,
  oversight by the internal audit team of EEP was similarly less than adequate, with delays occurring in
  utilization of funds advanced to the project DA, resulting in an undocumented DA balance at project
  closing, which would be refunded back to IDA. The Bank team’s response was similar to that in Kenya,
  assisting EEP to clear its entity audit backlog and other steps. Overall FM performance was similarly rated
  Moderately Satisfactory since FY20.

  The project’s procurement performance was assessed by the ICR (para 68) as Moderately Satisfactory,
  reflecting overall compliance with procurement procedures and arrangements. However, it is noted that
  over the project cycle staff capacity limitations, institutional weaknesses and contract management
  challenges results in contract time overruns, delayed payments to contractors and service providers,
  leading to significant implementation delays. The Bank team provided continuous advice and guidance to
  the implementing agencies on procurement issues, reviewing procurement plans and recommending


                                                                                                   Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



   actions to improve procurement processes, governance, decision-making and institutional strengthening of
   the PIUs.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The OPGW (Optical Ground Wire), which combined grounding (including protection from lightning strikes)
   and communications features, has generated additional revenues for EEP and KETRACO from telecom
   companies that had contracted capacity (ICR, para 50).



d. Other
   Though the project did not have any specific gender-focused interventions, the ICR notes (para 46) that
   KETRACO is implementing gender equality work plans, and EEP is also addressing gender disparity issues
   through complementary energy projects.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                  IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory        Moderately Satisfactory   Efficiency is rated Modest

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory        Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial         Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                 Modest


12. Lessons

IEG derives the following lessons from the ICR:

1. In a complex cross-border project, sequencing of construction contracts calls for close
oversight: As demonstrated by the project, sequencing the completion of construction contracts in
parallel and co-dependent on each other proved to be hugely challenging, making the role of an
oversight body critical. Despite the project having elaborate arrangements for project oversight,
including a Joint Project Coordination Unit, a Joint Steering Committee and a Joint Ministerial
Commission, the arrangements were never fully realized. In practice, pressing issues that surfaced
during the co-financiers’ implementation support missions requiring higher-level interventions were
brought piecemeal to the utility CEOs and relevant ministers by them, and not fully resolved. Going
forward, it will be important to ensure that participant countries trading power on the interconnector
establish problem-solving arrangements at the appropriate levels when the co-financiers have ended
their implementation support.


                                                                                                  Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)



2. In infrastructure projects involving land acquisition with large numbers of PAPs, it is
prudent to delay the launch of bidding on construction contracts until PAPs have assented to
the wayleave and/or payment of compensation for PAPs has commenced: The project
experienced several years of delay in identifying and seeking the assent of PAPs in Kenya, which
led to multiple collateral impacts. Works projects already completed were vandalized, and
contractors had to be remobilized to remedy the damage. An inadequate budget provided by the
Government to KETRACO led to delayed compensation payments to PAPs and late payments to
contractors, prompting more contractor claims, and the cycle continued. Contractors making bids on
such projects typically factor in the likelihood of delays based on the experience of past projects, so
bids might not be as competitive as they might otherwise have been.

3. For a complex project involving two or more countries, use of a special purpose vehicle
(SPV) can offer advantages over reliance on PIUs: The project showed that PIUs in both
countries were dependent upon allocation of funds (which were sometimes inadequate) in the
annual government budget cycles. The Kenya-Ethiopia interconnector was however revenue-
generating, and an SPV structure would have enabled a portion of the revenue to be retained and
utilized for managing consultants, paying compensation to PAPs and financing training courses and
other activities. This would have allowed the supervision of construction and mobilization of
technical consultancy resources to have been handled more effectively than arrangements that
relied upon PIUs housed within the two utilities.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is generally well written, concise and internally consistent. Useful information is provided and
discussed on the activities and implementation of the project, as well as the efficacy of its objectives and
environmental and fiduciary compliance. However, there are also some shortcomings: For instance, the theory
of change, which is presented diagrammatically, could usefully have provided some detail on the causal
linkages and the critical assumptions underpinning the success of the interventions. The discussion on
relevance of project objectives would similarly have benefited from more specificity on the consistency of
project objectives with the country and regional strategies of the World Bank Group. The analysis of project
efficiency would have benefited from inclusion of a discussion on operational & administrative efficiency, as the
overall analysis significantly underplayed the impact of the project’s delays. Finally, the analysis of the M&E
framework provided little information on M&E implementation, including on the extent to which indicators in the
results framework were actually measured and reported.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 17
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Eastern Electricity Highway Project (P126579)




                                                                             Page 17 of 17
