     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



                                                                                   Report Number: ICRR0024437

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P148591                                     Second Agricultural Growth Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Ethiopia                                    Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                 514,502,556.35

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Mar-2015

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           430,000,000.00                                   105,597,006.68

 Revised Commitment                            430,000,000.00                                   105,597,006.68

 Actual                                        413,759,983.66                                   105,597,006.68




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Fernando Manibog            Avjeet Singh                     IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization of
   smallholder farmers targeted by the project.

   For this review, the PDO is parsed into two subobjectives:

   Subobjective one: to increase agricultural productivity of smallholder farmers targeted by the project


                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



   Subobjective two: to increase commercialization of smallholder farmers targeted by the project



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Activity 1: Agricultural Public Support Services (Appraised: US$129 million of which IDA: US$98.26
   million; Actual: US$129 million)

   The component aimed to increase access to agricultural public services for smallholder farmers. The
   activities included: i) identification of local priorities for public services through the establishment of
   Agricultural Development Partners Linkage Advisory Councils (ADPLACs); ii) strengthening of public
   service delivery, including through construction and rehabilitation of public facilities;, and iii) scaling up of
   “best” practices of agricultural technologies and management practices.

   Activity 2: Agricultural Research (Appraised: US$51.4 million of which IDA: US$49.92 million;
   Actual: US$51.4 million)

   The component aimed to increase the supply of demand-driven agricultural technologies. The activities
   included: i) identification of prioritized technologies and their release to the agricultural extension system; ii)
   supporting the adaptation and generation of proven agricultural technologies; iii) production of source
   technologies, such as breeder and pre-basic seeds of major crops; and iv) capacity development in
   agricultural research systems.

   Activity 3: Small Scale Irrigation Schemes (Appraised: US$218.6 million of which IDA: US$158.36
   million; Actual: US$279.43 million)

   This component aimed to increase access to and efficient utilization of irrigation water by smallholder
   farmers. The activities included: i) rehabilitation of existing and establishment of new Small-Scale Irrigation
   (SSI) systems; and ii) establishment and/or strengthening of Irrigation Water User Associations (IWUAs)

   Activity 4: Agriculture Marketing and Value Chains (Appraised: US$120 million of which IDA:
   US$15.46 million; Actual: US$135.07 million)

   This component aimed to commercialize smallholder farmers through increased access to input and output
   markets. The activities included: i) promotion and distribution of agricultural inputs; ii) strengthening of input
   and output market regulations; iii) support to farmer organizations to prepare and implement business
   plans; iv) strengthening of selected livestock and crop value chains; and iv) market infrastructure
   development and management.

   Activity 5: Project Management, Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning
   (Appraised: US$62.8 million of which IDA: US$28 million; Actual: US$71.9 million)



                                                                                                          Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



  This component supported project implementation, monitoring and evaluation of results and capacity
  development.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

  The project was appraised at US$551.09 million. The amount was revised down to US$535.59 million, and
  the actual cost was US$519.35 million.

  Financing

  The financing package included an IDA grant of US$350 million, a Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) grant of
  US$100.6 million, a grant of US$27 million from Global Agricultural and Food Security Program (GAFSP),
  and US$60 million from USAID.

  Borrower contribution

  Beneficiaries (communities) were expected to contribute US$15.5 million, and they contributed US$3.55
  million (based on an exchange with the project team on March 7, 2025).

  Dates

  The project was approved in March 25, 2015 and became effective in August 31, 2015. The Mid-Term
  Review was held in October 29, 2018. The project was originally scheduled to close in October 10, 2020;
  and it closed 44 months later in July 7, 2024.

  Restructurings

  The project underwent six level II restructurings:

  April 21, 2017: to include Agricultural Transformation Agency and the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries as
  implementing agencies (IAs)

  March 22, 2018: to include multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) as a financing source

  June 17, 2020: to extend the project closing date by 15 months from October 10, 2020 to January 10, 2022.

  September 15, 2020: to extend the closing date from January 10, 2022 to June 15, 2023

  June 25, 2021: additional financing (AF) from Global Agricultural and Food Security Program (GAFSP)

  June 15, 2023: to extend project closing date from June 15, 2023 to July 7, 2024.

  Changes to RF

  PDO indicators and targets were revised as follows:


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 18
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



      The aggregate indicators that measured changes in yields and commercialization of livestock
       products (milk, eggs and honey) were replaced by product specific indicators.
      The indicator for commercialization “Proportion of production sold by targeted beneficiaries for
       selected crops and livestock products” was changed to “Percentage increase in real revenue from
       selected crops and livestock products.”
      Baseline values of indicators that measured percentage changes was set at zero.
      Three intermediate indicators were introduced to measure performance of safeguards.
      The targets for increase in yields of vegetables/fruits were revised upwards. The targets set for
       increase in yields of individual livestock products were also significantly higher than the target of the
       discontinued aggregate indicate. Changes to indicators and targets are summarized below.

Summary of changes to indicators and targets (Targets are disaggregated by total households (THH) and
female-headed households (FHH). FHH are in parenthesis.)

                                                                     Targets
Indicator
                                                                     Original     Revised
Percentage increase in yields of vegetables/fruits disaggregated
                                                                     28.6 (30.6) 48.6 (55.0)
by total households
Percentage increase in yield for selected livestock products in
                                                                     21.8 (22.9) Deleted
targeted households (aggregated)
Percentage in increase in yield for selected livestock product
                                                                                  41.24 (10.52)
in targeted households - milk
Percentage in increase in yield for selected livestock product
                                                                                  45.50 (85.25)
in targeted households – egg
Percentage in increase in yield for selected livestock product
                                                                                  85.75 (285.81)
in targeted households – honey
Proportion of production sold by targeted household for selected     26.55
                                                                                  Deleted
crops - cereals/pulses                                               (25.49)
Percentage increase in real revenues from selected crops –
                                                                                  128 (54.00)
cereals/pulses
Proportion of production sold by targeted household for selected     44.49
                                                                                  Deleted
crops - vegetables/fruits                                            (39.97)
Percentage increase in real revenues from selected crops –
                                                                                  90 (29)
vegetables/fruits
Proportion of animal production sold by targeted beneficiaries for   34.67
                                                                                  Deleted
selected products                                                    (35.30)
Percentage increase in real revenue from livestock products in
                                                                                  214 (348)
targeted households – Milk
Percentage increase in real revenue from livestock products in
                                                                                  54 (35)
targeted households – eggs
Percentage increase in real revenue from livestock products in
                                                                                  44 (49.2)
targeted households – honey




                                                                                                   Page 4 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

In the decade before the project was appraised, Ethiopia had experienced strong economic growth,
averaging over 10.7 percent annually between 2003/04 and 2011/12. The growth had enabled the country
to reduce poverty in both rural and urban areas; since 2005, it had lifted 2.5 million people out of poverty,
reducing the incidence from 38.7 percent in 2004/05 to 29.6 percent in 2020/11. The agricultural sector –
which accounted for 45 percent of GDP, employed 78 percent of the workforce, and was the source of 80
percent of exports – also grew rapidly, averaging 7 percent per year over the prior 15 years (ICR, para 2).

Expansion of the cultivation area and productivity improvements from public investments in agricultural
extension, rural roads, and tenure security had driven sector growth. However, the capacity to identify and
develop productivity-enhancing technologies and disseminate them was still weak, the weakness being
particularly severe in the livestock sector (ICR, para 3). With only 16 percent of the land under irrigation,
developing irrigation was also necessary to enable farmers to diversify, increase productivity, and raise
more than one crop annually.

Country strategy

The PDO aligned with the ambitious Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) the Government of Ethiopia
(GoE) was implementing with the long-term plan of becoming a middle-income country by 2026, growing by
at least 11.2 percent per year with agriculture and industry as sources of growth (ICR, para 2). The PDO
remains relevant as the Ten-Year Development Plan (2021-203) in which one of the objectives of
agricultural development is to raise the incomes and livelihoods of farmers and pastoralist and end poverty
by making agriculture more productive and competitive. The PDO is also relevant to the country’s National
Nutritional Policy (NNP) which emphasizes the need for nutrition sensitive agriculture growth and promoting
nutrient rich food diversification.

World Bank Strategy

The PDO was relevant to the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS, FY13-16) of the World Bank which aimed
to help GoE address structural transformation and assist in the implementation of GTP (PAD, para 6). The
PDO remains relevant to World bank’s strategies as it aligns with the Country Partnership Framework’s
(2018-2022 – extended to 2025) pillar 1 to promote structural transformation through increased productivity,
revenue generation, export promotion, import substitution, and employment creation (ICR, para 19).

The World Bank, in collaboration with other development partners, supported a similar project implemented
from 2011 to 2017. This project was to scale up the interventions from 83 woredas in four regions to 167
woredas.

The level at which PDO is pitched




                                                                                                    Page 5 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



               The PDO to increase productivity and commercialization in smallholder agriculture is pitched at an outcome
               level, the achievement of which directly contributes to GoE’s strategy to sustain high levels of growth in the
               agricultural sector.

               The PDO to increase productivity and commercialization in smallholder agriculture was highly relevant to
               the country’s strategy to achieve growth of the economy and the agriculture sector, and the Bank’s strategy
               to promote structural transformation. Thus, the PDO relevance is rated high.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase agricultural productivity of smallholder farmers targeted by the project

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC)

                             The retrospectively articulated ToC in the ICR (para 5 and Figure 1) states that project inputs/activities that i)
                             increase access to public agricultural services, ii) increase the supply of demand-driven agricultural
                             technologies, iii) improve small farmer access to irrigation and its utilization, and iv) promote
                             commercialization among smallholders, would lead to outputs, such as collaborative research sub-projects
                             implemented, number of technologies promoted, number of farmers supplied with irrigation services, and
                             increase the volume of seed supplied, which in turn could be expected to enable farmers to improve crop and
                             livestock productivity and commercialize their operations as the final development outcome.

                             The ToC was plausible. The project outcomes could be expected to directly contribute to outcomes if some of
                             the assumptions held true: i) the activities to develop demand-driven technologies resulted in superior
                             technologies that appealed to farmers, and ii) input/output price relationships were favorable to encourage
                             smallholder farmers to adopt the improved technologies to diversify, increase productivity, and increase their
                             participation in output markets. The latter assumption captures some of the extraneous factors that can affect
                             agricultural production and marketing, such as disruptions to input and output markets and climatic events.

                             Outputs

                             Technology Development

                                        1,490 collaborative research sub-projects of Farmer Research and Extension Group (FREGs) were
                                          completed, exceeding the target of 700 (of them, 55 collaborative research sub-projects of women
                                          FREGs were completed, falling short of the target of 280)

                                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)




      45,464.50 metric tons (MT) of breeder seeds and pre-basic seeds were produced by research
       centers, exceeding the target of 6,290 MT
      912 demand-driven improved agricultural technologies were under research, exceeding the target of
       140 (of them, 113 were gender sensitive, exceeding the target of 40; 203 were nutrition smart,
       exceeding the target of 40; and 370 were climate-smart, exceeding the target of 40)

Technology dissemination

      83.40 percent of male farmers used public agricultural services, exceeding the target of 50.56 percent,
      84.45 percent of female farmers used public agricultural services, exceeding the target of 40.56
       percent
      525 technologies were promoted to public extension services, exceeding the target of 280 (of them,
       117 were climate smart technologies, exceeding the target of 20; 124 were smart nutrition
       technologies, exceeding the target of 80; and 102 were gender sensitive technologies, exceeding the
       target of 101)
      Crop diversity in targeted households increased by 65.01 percent, exceeding the target of 39.75
      1,636,674 clients adopted an improved technology promoted by the project, exceeding the target of
       1,530,000 (of them, 578,750 were female clients, falling short of the target of 608,800)
      428 gender sensitive technologies were demonstrated in the project area, exceeding the target of 101

Small scale irrigation development

      188,509 water users were provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services, nearly
       meeting the target of 190,000 (of them, 37,790 were female water users, falling short of the target of
       78,000)
      69 percent of the water user associations were effectively managing irrigation and drainage
       infrastructure, nearly meeting the target of 70 percent
      62,228 hectares (ha) were provided with irrigation and drainage services, exceeding the target of
       55,000 ha (of them, 13,010 ha were from new schemes, falling short of the target of 15,238 ha; 30,019
       ha were from improved schemes, falling short of the target of 31,184.50 ha and 19,199 ha were from
       micro and HH schemes, exceeding the target of 6,693 ha)

Outcomes

      24.53 percent increase in the yields of selected cereals and pulses in targeted Total Households
       (TTH), exceeding the target of 21.80 percent (25.27 percent increase in targeted Female Households
       (FHH), exceeding the target of 22.90 percent)
      45.09 percent increase in the yields of selected vegetables and fruits in targeted TTH, falling short of
       target of 48.60 percent (59.04 percent increase in FHH, exceeding the target of 55.00 percent)
      209.80 percent increase in the yields of livestock products (milk production by day) in targeted TTH,
       exceeding the target of 41.24 percent (183.80 percent increase in FHH, exceeding the target of 10.52
       percent)
      3.3 percent increase in the yields of livestock products (eggs per week per chicken) in targeted TTH,
       falling short of the target 45.50 percent (3.4 percent decrease in targeted FHH, falling short of the
       target of 85.25 percent)


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)




      13.84 percent increase in the yields of livestock products (kg per beehive per year of honey) in
       targeted TTH, falling short of the target 85.75 percent (14.31 percent decrease targeted FHH, falling
       short of the target of 285.81 percent)

The key indicator by which the achievement of this objective is assessed is the percentage increase in yields,
the targets for which were set differently for all or Total Households (TTH) and Female headed households
(FHH). Different targets (usually higher) were set to bring the yields of FHH on par with the rest and to reflect
the efforts the project was making to reduce gender imbalances through the introduction of gender-sensitive
technologies and nutrition related interventions (based on information submitted by the project team on March
19, 2025).

The project succeeded in increasing the yields of selected cereals/pulses, vegetables/fruits, and milk yields of
cows. It failed to increase the other livestock yields, weekly egg production by chickens and annual honey
production per beehive. Aggregate crop yields, weighted by crop shares in the total cropped area changed
by 29.01 percent (between 2017 and 2024). The yields of vegetables/fruits increased to a greater extent; the
aggregate yields of cereals and pulses increased by 24.53 percent while that vegetables and fruits changed
by 45.09 percent (ICR, Annex 4, Table 4.1).

Surveys conducted in March 2017 and May 2024 which examined the changes in project and control areas
showed that aggregate crop yields of project households increased to a greater extent than those of non-
project households (29.01% vs. 20.99). The difference in yield increase was larger for fruits and vegetables;
the yields of project households changed by 45.09 percent while those of the on-project households changed
by only 2.64 percent.

The performance of livestock yields was mixed. Milk yields of project households increased by 207.4 percent
but those of non-project households increased by even more (266.6%) (ICR, Annex 4, Table 4.2). In the case
of both egg and honey production the changes were below targets in both project and non-project areas.

The surveys that compared project and non-project areas lacked a genuine control group because two-thirds
of the woredas that benefited from the previous stage of the project were included in the control group. And
non-project woredas, many of which were sampled from woredas adjacent to project woredas, also benefited
from the project-type of interventions through other programs of the government and donors (ICR, para 23).

Crop yield improvements are likely to have resulted from project activities related to technology development
and their dissemination and irrigation development. The project exceeded many of the targets by a large
margin. According to an exchange with the project team on March 19, 2025 the demand driven approach
taken to developing technologies and disseminating them resulted in delivery of project outputs to a far
greater extent than planned. It supported collaborative research sub-projects to identify and develop demand
driven technologies and the production of breeder and pre-basic seeds that made improved varieties widely
available. The project supported the establishment of farmer training centers that organized farm
demonstrations and fields days and exposed nearly 1.28 million farmers to new technologies. The project
brought the planned additional area under irrigation. Nearly 1.64 million farmers adopted improved
technologies promoted by the project and they diversified their cropping to a greater degree than expected.

The remarkable increase in milk yield is attributed to the supply of artificial insemination services, better
access to livestock health services, and the supply of improved breeds and free medicines (ICR, para 28).
The poor performance of poultry is attributed to limited attention to poultry under AGP 2, conflict in key
producing regions Oromia ad Amhara, frequent outbreak of poultry disease and inadequate veterinary

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



services for poultry (ICR, para 26); and of honey to the failure of modern beekeeping initiative and conflict in
some of the areas in which honey is produced (ICR, para 27). In the additional information that the project
team supplied on March 19, 2025, the project team noted that the project prioritized cattle over poultry
because of its greater role in the livelihoods of farmers and poultry and honey production are seen as
supplementary to the agricultural system.

The project increased yields of cereals/pulses, vegetables/fruits, and of milk. It failed to increase egg and
honey yields. Crop and milk yield improvements can be attributed to project activities. The efficacy with which
this objective is achieved is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase commercialization of smallholder farmers targeted by the project

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC)

The ToC offered for the achievement of objective one applies here.

Outputs

      63 percent of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) undertook a viable business activity, nearly meeting
       the target of 65 percent (59 percent of youth CIGs undertook a viable business activity, exceeding the
       target of 50 percent)
      The percentage increase in volume of seeds supplied through diversified channels increased by 11.95
       percent, falling short of the target of 15 percent (supplied through private agents increased by 11.50
       percent, falling short of the target of 15 percent; supplied through farmer groups increased by 9.85
       percent, falling short of the target of 15 percent; and supplied through cooperatives increased by
       14.50 percent, falling short of the target of 15 percent)
      47 commercial partnerships or market contracts were signed between producer groups or
       cooperatives supported by the project and domestic/international agribusiness actors, exceeding the
       target of 45.

Outcomes

      Real revenues from cereals/pulses in THH increased by 148 percent, exceeding the target of 128
       percent (increased by 135 percent in FHH, exceeding the target of 54 percent)
      Real revenues from vegetables and fruits in THH increased by 96 percent, exceeding the target of 90
       percent (increased by 66 percent in FHH, exceeding the target of 29 percent)
      Real revenues from milk in THH increased by 117 percent, falling short of the target of 214 percent
       (increased by 82 percent in FHH, falling short of the target of 348 percent0

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)




                                  Real revenues from honey in THH increased by 40 percent, falling short of the target of 54 percent
                                  Real revenues from eggs in THH increased by 33 percent, falling short target of the target of 44.4
                                   percent (increased by 11 percent in FHH, falling short target of 49.2 percent)

                            The achievement of the objective of increasing commercialization is measured by percent increase in real
                            revenues from the marketing of selected commodities. The project exceeded the targets for cereals/pulses
                            and vegetables/fruits. The increase in real revenues from livestock products did not meet the targets,
                            including that of milk, the productivity and production of which increased significantly (ICR, para 29). The
                            reasons offered for the paradoxical outcome is that increased production may have been consumed by the
                            households, milk may have been used to make other products and that there may have been conflict related
                            disruptions to collecting milk. However, in all cases, the increases in real revenues are higher than 33 percent
                            even if below the targets.

                            Comparing increase in revenues between households in and out of the project area, the results are mixed.
                            The revenues from both crop and livestock products of project households increased more than in the case of
                            non-project households (60% vs. 45%). However, when only revenues from crops were considered, non-
                            project households did better (126 percent change compared to 86 percent for project households (ICR,
                            Annex 4, Table 4.5).

                            The project’s support to developing market infrastructure (roads, market centers and storage facilities) and
                            the strengthening of farmers organization and helping farmer groups develop links with input suppliers and
                            agro-processors are likely to have contributed to increased market performance. More than one-half of the
                            CIGs that the project supported undertook viable business activities and more than the targeted number of
                            producer groups entered into contract with agri-business actors. However, crop-livestock breakdown of these
                            project activities is not available to explain the stark differences between crop and livestock
                            commercialization, although the ICR notes that many egg production initiatives implemented by women and
                            youth faced significant challenges and were mostly unsuccessful (Para 26)

                            The project achieved increased commercialization of crops but not of livestock. The efficacy with which the
                            objective has been achieved is substantial but with shortcomings in not increasing the commercialization of
                            livestock products and for lack of strong evidence for attributing crop commercialization to project activities.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The activities to achieve the objective were guided by the Toc that increasing access to public services
                            including the supply of demand driven technologies, making irrigation more accessible and effective, and
                            supporting farmers to develop links with traders would help farmers increase productivity and production and
                            better access markets to earn more revenues. The project increased the productivity of cereals/pulses and
                            fruits/vegetables. Only the milk yield was increased among livestock products, which included eggs and

                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



  honey. The yield increases could be attributed to project activities which supplied appropriate crop
  technologies and improved access to livestock services, including artificial insemination. The efficacy in
  achieving the first objective was rated Substantial with moderate shortcoming in not increasing egg and
  honey yields. The second objective of increasing commercialization was also achieved partially; the real
  revenues from all selected crops increased but not of livestock outputs, including that of milk which had
  experienced significant yield improvement. The efficacy in achieving the second objective was also rated
  Substantial with shortcomings related to the failure to improve commercialization of livestock products and
  weak evidence for attributing crop commercialization to project activities. The overall efficacy is also rated
  substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ex-ante analysis, which considered anticipated benefits from increased crop production and value added at
the producers’ level and increased livestock production and productivity estimated that the Economic Internal
Rate of Returns (EIRR) would be 18 percent, and that Net Present Value (NPV) would be US$191 million at a
10 percent discount rate, excluding the component 4 costs (ICR, para 35 and PAD, para 63). Considering all the
costs, the EIRR was 14 percent. The EIRR was 11 percent and 12 percent when benefits were reduced by 30
percent or lagged by two years.

The ex-post analysis, using the same set of crop models that were used in the ex-ante analysis and incremental
income from jobs created, which was not included in the ex-ante estimate (ICR, Annex 5, para 32), generated
an estimated EIRR of 25.8 percent (ICR, para 36). Excluding the incremental incomes from employment, the
EIRR was reduced to 14 percent (based on information from an exchange with the project team on March 7,
2025). The NPV of US$27.13 million was much lower than forecasted by ex-ante analysis. Sensitivity analysis
showed that the EIRR would fall to 12.9 percent even with a 50 percent decrease in benefits (ICR, Annex 5,
para 33).

Delays in implementation and other external factors that influenced productivity and project costs accounted for
lower NPV ex-post (ICR, para 34). For example, inflation that averaged 20 to 25 percent during the life of the
project, peaking to 34 to 40 percent in two years, increased project costs.

Several factors influenced implementation of the project.

Conflicts, natural disasters, the COVID-19 pandemic, and economic and political instability impeded
implementation (ICR, para 45). Conflict and violence in Tigray, Oromia, and Amhara regions led to destruction of
vital project infrastructure, such as farmers training and market centers and irrigation channels. The internal
displacements made it difficult to carry out project activities. The pandemic, locust infestations, and droughts
disrupted activities and affected productivity. Political instability and security concerns made the environment for
investments uncertain and contributed to bureaucratic inertia.




                                                                                                     Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



The economic conditions, debt crisis, and currency devaluation also played a role. The shortage of foreign
currency, for example, hindered the import of irrigation equipment (ICR, para 46). Extreme price escalations,
without appropriate contractual mechanism to adjust for inflation, lead to budget overruns, compromised quality
of work, contractual disputes and reduced scope of work.

Weak infrastructure and supply chains also hampered progress. The lack of dedicated power supply limited the
operation of pump-based irrigation systems, and the shortage and unavailability of critical construction materials
cement and steel delayed construction.

Weak institutional capacity and limited competence of employees, contractors, and consultants added to the
other difficulties the project faced. The closing date was extended from October 2020 to June 2023 because of
delays in implementing SSI sub-projects.

Using similar methodologies, the ex-ante and ex-post EIRR are similar, but because of considerable delay in
implementing the project with nearly 15 percent increase in project management, the efficiency with which the
project is implemented is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     100.00
 Appraisal                                                 14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
 ICR Estimate                                              14.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO to increase productivity and commercialization of selected crop and livestock outputs was highly
relevant to Ethiopia’s strategy seeking growth and transformation of its economy and the Bank’s strategy to
assist the country in transforming its economy. The efficacy with which the objective was achieved was rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of the shortcomings in increasing the productivity of two of
three livestock products and improving the commercialization of all livestock; and limited evidence to attribute
changes to livestock products to project activities. The efficiency with which the objective was achieved was
rated modest. The estimated ex-post EIRR estimate was similar to the ex-ante estimate, but the project was
implemented with a nearly four-year delay and fifteen percent higher management costs. The outcome is rated
Moderately Satisfactory.



                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

There are several risks to development outcomes.

Climate and land degradation risks: Likely increase in the occurrence of droughts from climate change
poses a risk to sustaining project outcomes. A severe drought in 2020 revealed the project’s vulnerabilities
(ICR, para 58). Fertility losses from land degradation also put the achievements at risk.

Conflict and insecurity risks: The prospect of continued conflict and insecurity poses risk to sustaining
outcomes as they disrupt normal activities and prevent the delivery of essential agricultural services (ICR,
para 59).

Institutional risks: Potential decline in the functioning of farmer institutions, such as CIGs and WUAs,
because of declining support poses risk to maintaining outcomes.

Infrastructure risks: Inadequate maintenance of physical structure because of limited financing and
management capacity and high turnover within sector institutions could also put the outcomes at risk.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed to meet a strategic objective of the country to improve productivity and
  commercialization in smallholder agriculture to achieve growth in the sector. The design included
  activities – demand driven technology development, the dissemination of technologies, increased
  irrigation, and support for commercialization – which had proven to be effective in achieving the objective
  in a similar project implemented earlier (ICR, para 43).

  The M&E was inadequate to monitor progress and test the links in the ToC as the project sought to
  improve productivity and commercialization of three distinct categories of products, cereals/pulses,
  vegetable/fruits, and livestock, which required different types on interventions. While the framework was
  designed to assess whether the project achieved gender equitable outcomes – through gender
  disaggregated targets and indicator – it could have benefited from disaggregating by category the key
  outputs, such as development and dissemination of technologies and support to CIGs to be able to better
  explain differences in performance.

  The project was also designed to leverage resources of many development partners and offer
  opportunities to complement the project activities.




                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



  The quality at entry is rated satisfactory with a minor shortcoming as the project was based on a design
  proven to be effective but lacked an M&E that enabled better attribution of outcomes to project outputs.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted regular supervision missions, 16 in all. The team was able to offer continuous
 support to the Ministry of Agriculture and the Federal Project Coordination Unit (FPCU) as most members
 of the team and the task team leaders were based in the country (ICR, para 56). The team sought out
 expertise where beneficial; for example, it collaborated with the Water Global Practice to implement
 irrigation activities. The team also demonstrated flexibility in responding to the challenges by restructuring
 the project as needed (ICR, para 56).

 Quality of supervision is rated satisfactory as the team based in the country offered continuous support with
 regular missions and responded to challenges faced in implementation by restructuring the project.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 While adequate to measure outcomes, the M&E design was inadequate to monitor and test the links in the
 ToC.

 The PDO indicators, which measured percentage changes in yields and commercialization, were
 appropriate to measure the outcomes and they were measurable. The targets were set differently for all
 households and female headed households, to encourage project to make efforts to narrow the gap
 between male-headed and female-headed households.

 The design included fourteen intermediate indicators to measure project outputs and intermediate
 outcomes in technology development, dissemination of technologies, irrigation and development and
 support for commercialization. Eight of them related to intermediate outcomes. Many of the indicators were
 gender disaggregated. But the output and intermediate outcome indicators were not disaggregated to
 suggest how they contributed differently to crop and livestock outcomes. For example, the report notes



                                                                                                     Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



 that artificial insemination was one of the reasons for significant increase in milk yields and the neglect of
 poultry was the reason for poor performance of poultry. These differences were not captured by the IRIs.

 The system was multi-tiered involving federal, regional, woreda, and kebele levels with dedicated officers at
 each level responsible for data collection, analysis and reporting (ICR, para 47). The design also permitted
 participatory M&E by farmers on a pilot basis.

 The design included baseline, midline and endline surveys.



b. M&E Implementation
  The project’s M&E activities were guided by a comprehensive plan, supported by regular capacity
  building efforts to standardize planning, reporting and process across levels (para 48). The project used
  geo-enabling tools, such as kobo toolbox to monitor infrastructure works in conflict areas and during the
  pandemic. The project also implemented the baseline, midline and endline surveys as planned but the
  surveys lacked genuine control groups.



c. M&E Utilization
  The data were used to guide project implementation, management, and decision making. Disbursement
  and activity performance data were used to identify major bottlenecks. Midterm survey findings were
  used to revise the PDO and intermediate indicators in the RF. M&E reports shaped the agendas for joint
  review and support missions. The endline informed the ICR. The project produced and shared case
  studies, success stories, videos, and blogs (ICR, para 48).

  The M&E quality is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings because the IRIs were inadequately
  disaggregated to link project activities to project outcomes and the surveys were conducted without a
  genuine control group.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental

   The project, classified as environmental Category B, triggered (a) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
   4.01), (b) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), (c) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), (d) Physical Cultural
   Resources (OP/BP 4.11), (e) Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and (f) Projects on International Waterways
   (OP/BP 7.50). The project implemented the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs),
   addressing potential environmental risks associated with activities, such as groundwater development,
   small scale irrigation, and the construction of feeder roads, by regularly monitoring and reporting to ensure

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



  compliance with safeguard policies. This included tracking the implementation of mitigation measures and
  assessing their effectiveness, appropriately addressing any deviations from the original plans. Continuous
  consultation with affected communities and stakeholders was maintained throughout the project. This
  ensured that their concerns were addressed, and any issues were promptly managed. Independent
  evaluations and audits were conducted to verify compliance with environmental safeguards. These
  evaluations assessed the effectiveness of the ESMPs, the adequacy of mitigation measures, and the overall
  environmental performance of the project.

  Although the project commendably managed the environmental risks, it fell short in managing Environment,
  Health, and Safety (EHS) risks in its research component. For example, the Ethiopian Institute of
  Agricultural Research (EIAR) did not adequately document and report on EHS screenings. Environmental
  safeguards performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory.

  Social

  The project triggered policies relating to Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and Indigenous Peoples
  (OP/BP 4.10). The project implemented security management plans (SMPs), addressing potential impacts
  on vulnerable groups from land acquisitions. The SMPs included measures for fair compensation, livelihood
  restoration, and support for affected individuals. The project consulted extensively with affected
  communities to ensure that their concerns were addressed. The project ensured that all relevant
  documents, including the Resettlement Policy Framework and Social Assessment, were disclosed publicly.
  This transparency helped in maintaining accountability and trust with the affected communities. Social
  safeguards performance was rated as Satisfactory.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Procurement

  The project maintained the required procurement arrangements and staffing at both federal and regional
  levels throughout implementation. The procurement relied significantly on competitive bidding, accounting
  for approximately 70 percent of the activity. Security issues and market disruptions, including shortages of
  key construction inputs, as well as price surges caused delays, cost overruns, and termination of several
  contracts, involving works, such as dam construction. The integrity of procurement processes was
  maintained with no major cases of noncompliance, mis-procurement, or fraudulent activities reported to the
  World Bank. However, updating procurement information in the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
  Procurement (STEP) remained a concern. Even after project closure, numerous activities still appear as
  pending or under process in STEP. The FPCU was urged to coordinate with regional offices to ensure that
  all procurement information is finalized and uploaded. Procurement was rated Moderately Satisfactory.

  Financial Management (FM)

  The project followed the Government’s accounting policies and procedures. In addition, the FM manual,
  which incorporated specific accounting and internal control procedures for the project, was prepared and
  disseminated to all implementing entities, and the required training was provided for the staff. The
  Government made timely submissions of interim financial reports. The audit reports were clean except for
  some internal control weaknesses, which were followed up routinely. The FPCU oversaw and coordinated

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



   the project, conducting quarterly evaluations and organizing annual review meetings. At the regional levels,
   however, gaps remained in ownership of the process. FM was rated as Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

Adopting holistic approaches that simultaneously address various aspect of agricultural
development can improve the chances of achieving sustainable outcomes (ICR, para 61). An
integrated approach that included aspects of development and dissemination of technologies,
infrastructure development, and the building links between value chain actors proved to be more
effective than making isolated interventions. This was operationalized by demand led processes that
resulted in convergence of project interventions at decentralized levels.

Adopting a demand driven approach by involving local communities in problem
identification, planning, implementation, and monitoring can improve the effectiveness of
interventions (ICR, para 61). The inclusive strategy adopted by the project ensured that the
solutions identified (acid-tolerant crop varieties, for example) were tailored to the needs of the
communities and fostered a sense of ownership among the beneficiaries.

A series of projects strategically designed to complement each other by incorporating
lessons learned can offer a platform for the World Bank to offer governments continuous and
systematic support (ICR, para 63). The trio of first and second Agricultural Growth Projects and
the Food Systems Resilience Project provided a strategic platform for the World Bank to support
agriculture development in Ethiopia while assisting, refining, and strengthening the Government’s
long-term development approach for greater impact.




                                                                                                     Page 17 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR comprehensively presents the required information on project implementation and the outcomes,
presenting them in considerable details in annexures. Nearly all the sections offer considerable information
including sections, such as “M&E utilization,” on which many ICRs offer little information. The report uses
information from both M&E and the endline survey with a control group to argue that project outcomes were
reached using a reasonable approach. The writing is clear.

However, there were shortcomings. The ICR does not adequately explain the large deviations in output delivery
from the targets, in many cases overperformance, and differential outcomes of crop and livestock products.

Overall, the Quality of ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 18 of 18
