     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0024322

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Program Name
 P160331                                     Odisha Higher Education Program

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                       Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)             Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-87820                                  30-Nov-2022                                         69,526,297.74

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 31-Aug-2017                                 31-Mar-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            119,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                              69,620,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                          69,526,297.74                                              0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Sarveshwari Singh            Judyth L. Twigg              Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Program Development Objectives (PDOs) as stated in the Financing Agreement and in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) were “to improve the quality of and students’ equitable access to selected
   institutions and enhance governance of the higher education system in Odisha.”

   This ICR Review assesses achievement of three objectives:

           PDO 1: To improve the quality of selected institutions

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



          PDO 2: To improve students' equitable access to selected institutions
          PDO 3: To enhance governance of the higher education system in Odisha

   The ICR used a split rating. During a January 2021 restructuring, the original PDO 1 indicator was dropped
   and a new PDO 1 indicator introduced; PDO 2 targets were reduced; and a new PDO 3 indicator was added.
   At the time of that restructuring, US$53.18 million, or 76.5 percent of total Bank financing, had been
   disbursed. This Review concurs with the ICR's approach and uses a split rating methodology for all three
   objectives.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  28-Jan-2021

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The project design included two components.



   Component 1: PforR program (Appraisal: US$165 million; Actual: US$68.45 million) covered two
   results areas.

   Results area 1: Improving quality of and students’ equitable access to selected institutions. This
   results area had two main activities.

   1.1 Institutional Development Plan (IDP) Grants

   Institutional Development Grants (IDGs) would be provided to colleges and universities selected
   competitively based on independent evaluation of IDPs. The aim of the IDPs was to increase the capacity of
   Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) in Odisha to deliver quality education matched to the needs of their
   students. Results indicators included improved HEI performance on accreditation and on-time graduation
   rates. IDGs could also be used for infrastructure, capital assets, and equipment.

   1.2 State-level initiatives for quality improvement and learning




                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



  State-level initiatives would be undertaken by the Higher Education Department (HED) to improve the
  quality of teaching and learning in the colleges, including short-term faculty training to improve knowledge
  and skills, an online feedback system on faculty performance, and skills development initiatives.

  Results area 2: Enhancing governance of the higher education system. This results area also had two
  main activities.

  2.1 Strengthening Governing Boards in all government-aided and block grant colleges

  The HED would develop and issue a regulation for the composition of Governing Boards and their
  functioning for all government-aided non-autonomous colleges.

  A governance benchmarking exercise for selected colleges would be undertaken in selected institutions to
  provide a comprehensive assessment of their governance practices to allow monitoring of their progress
  and to compare themselves with other institutions.

  A management information system (MIS) would be developed by the HED for program management and for
  monitoring performance indicators and annual disbursement to the colleges.

  2.2 Improvement of financial and procurement management and accounting in all government and
  government-aided colleges

  The HED would develop a strategy for the effective implementation of an online financial management (FM)
  system for all government-aided colleges. Procurement management was to be strengthened at the
  colleges through capacity-building efforts.



  Component 2: Technical Assistance for the PforR (Appraisal: US$5 million; Actual: US$1.17 million)

  The Technical Assistance component followed Investment Project Financing policies and aimed to support
  program implementation, coordination, capacity building, stakeholder consultations, monitoring and
  evaluation (M&E), and communication and outreach.



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Costs and Financing: The total program cost at appraisal was US$170 million. Of this amount, US$119
  million was to be financed by an IBRD loan. Actual IBRD financing was US$69.5 million (ICR, p. iii), as
  US$49.4 million was canceled during restructurings. At appraisal, the Borrower contribution was US$51
  million, and actual contribution was US$23.5 million. Total Bank disbursements were US$69.5 million.

  Dates: The program was approved on August 31, 2017, and became effective on October 31, 2017. A Mid-
  Term Review was conducted on November 17, 2020. The original closing date was November 30, 2022,
  extended by 16 months to March 31, 2024, during the third restructuring.

  Restructuring: The program had three restructurings.



                                                                                                   Page 3 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



Restructuring 1, September 28, 2020

At the time of the first restructuring, US$48.98 million had been disbursed (ICR, p. iii). A partial loan
cancellation of US$11.3 million was undertaken due to changes in the exchange rate that would result in
savings. At appraisal in 2017, the exchange rate was INR 65/US$; at restructuring it was INR 74/US$. The
restructuring reduced the PforR component from US$114 million to US$106 million. The TA component was
reduced from US$5 million to US$1.5 million (Restructuring Paper, RES43069, p. 6).

Restructuring 2, January 28, 2021

The second restructuring included a US$35 million cancellation of the loan amount because of activities that
were unlikely to be achieved during the program time frame due to the COVID-19 pandemic. At the time of
restructuring, US$53.18 million had been disbursed. The following changes were made to PDO indicators
and targets:

--PDO 1 (DLI 1): The indicator was changed. The original indicator was “Percentage of selected colleges
that have improved their National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) grade from the previous
cycle of accreditation.” It was dropped because field reviews for accreditation by NAAC teams could not
take place during the pandemic. The indicator was replaced with “Blended learning and self-study approach
adopted in the selected HEIs,” which sought to maintain student learning during school closures. The target
was that 75 percent of HEIs would implement blending learning and self-study. The aim was to improve
quality of higher education institutions while reducing dropout and improving retention of students affected
by economic shocks and other vulnerabilities (Restructuring Paper, RES44286, p. 5). The revised indicator
represented a shift and reduction in project scope.

--PDO 2 (DLI 2) was on-time graduation rate of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected
institutions. Targets for this indicator were reduced. The original and revised targets were: Total students
with on-time graduation rates: reduced from 70 percent to 64 percent; Scheduled Caste (SC) students:
reduced from 61 percent to 55 percent; Scheduled Tribe (ST) students: reduced from 52 percent to 46
percent; female students: reduced from 77 percent to 71 percent. The revised targets represented a
reduction in project scope.

--PDO 3 (DLI 4): A new indicator replaced the original indicator. Two new targets were added. The original
indicator was: “Percentage of government-aided colleges that implemented revised regulations issued by
HED on the creation/composition of Governing Bodies (GBs) and their functioning.” The ICR reported that
good progress had been made on reform of governing bodies. The new PDO 3 was: “Strengthened
governance of faculty management,” which aimed to incentivize the modernization of faculty recruitment
and promotion in government colleges (Restructuring Paper, RES44286). The two new targets
were: “Faculty recruitment and promotion rules of government colleges amended,” and “Personnel
Information Management System (PIMS) upgraded and used as e-database to improve faculty
management.” The revised indicator and targets represented an expansion of project scope.

Restructuring 3, November 18, 2022

The restructuring occurred because additional time was needed to complete all the planned civil works that
stopped or were delayed due to the pandemic (Restructuring Paper, RES51824). Additional time was also
required to meet the new targets for PDO 3. At the time of restructuring, US$62.89 million had been
disbursed, and the disbursement rate was 86.5 percent (Restructuring Paper (RES51824) para 3). The


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



   closing date was extended by 16 months to March 31, 2024. US$3.08 million from the undisbursed loan
   amount was cancelled.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  At the time of appraisal, Odisha was facing significant challenges in higher education. The gross enrollment
  rate was 19.6 percent, which was low compared with the national average of 24.5 percent. Significant
  inequalities existed in access for females and social groups including Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Scheduled
  Castes (SC), which comprise 40 percent of the state’s population. Odisha is among the poorest states in
  India with a high incidence of poverty among SCs and STs. These factors, coupled with outdated curricula
  with modest labor market relevance, have contributed to their low enrollment rates in higher education

  Increasing concerns about the quality of higher education discouraged participation in higher education,
  notably in rural and poor areas. A shortage of qualified faculty and limited faculty training opportunities
  contributed to quality concerns. In 2014, 42 percent of the teaching posts in government colleges, 35 percent
  in universities, and 15 percent in government-aided colleges were vacant.

  Governance in higher education was challenged by the composition of Governing Bodies, which included
  political interests that were not always aligned with the needs of students and faculty. Decision-making
  processes on administrative and financial matters in the HED were highly centralized, with only 7 percent of
  the total expenditures on higher education in the state made by colleges and universities for their own
  priorities.

  The objectives of the program were aligned with the Government of India’s Higher Education Plan, Rashtriya
  Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA), which aimed to improve the quality of state universities and government
  colleges countrywide. They were also aligned with the Government of Odisha’s Higher Education Plan 2018-
  2022, which aimed to improve the quality of and access to higher education and to strengthen governance.

  At appraisal, program objectives were relevant to the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for
  the period 2013-2017 (Report No. 76176) and its focus area 3 on Investing in Human Capital,
  which addressed equitable access to higher education. The program was also aligned with the CPS priority
  to focus on low-income states. The program was preceded by World Bank non-lending technical assistance
  (TA) for the HED with emphasis on improving quality and addressing inequalities of access and outcomes.
  Program preparation was informed by the TA's findings on governance and fiduciary practices. The
  program was the first World Bank-supported initiative for the higher education sector in Odisha.

  With restructuring, the program remained relevant during the pandemic. A planned activity to conduct
  accreditation field visits was dropped due to closure of HEIs for two years. The Government of
  Odisha introduced and mandated blended learning, including online learning and self-study, to promote
  student enrollment and retention during a period of economic shocks and vulnerabilities.



                                                                                                  Page 5 of 20
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



                       The program remained relevant under the Country Partnership Framework for the period FY18-FY22 (Report
                       No. 126667), which envisioned improving higher education equity and quality through strengthening teacher
                       performance, accountability systems, learning outcomes, governance, and quality assurance. At program
                       closing, the Government of Odisha committed to finishing the 10 percent civil works not completed by the
                       program closing date using State funds.

                       The PforR instrument was appropriate to incentivize Odisha’s higher education sector to focus on outcomes
                       expected from priority interventions and helped to strengthen institutions through better systems and capacity
                       building. The PforR program complemented the national RUSA scheme, which supported infrastructure and
                       equipment in colleges and universities in Odisha, and did not duplicate activities funded by RUSA.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       Substantial


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Improved quality of selected government and government-aided institutions (increased percentage of selected
                colleges that have improved their NAAC grade from the previous cycle of accreditation).

                Rationale
                This DLI captured selected colleges’ progress in improving their accreditation performance grade.
                Approximately 126 of the 800 affiliated colleges in Odisha had NAAC accreditation. This low level of
                accreditation was due to a shortage of qualified teaching staff, vacancy of teaching posts, lack of teacher
                training, and inadequate training facilities, all of which affect the quality of higher education. This DLI was
                relevant to the PDO, although due to COVID-19, field visits could not be conducted, and therefore this
                indicator was dropped during the second restructuring.



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 1 REVISION 1
                Revised DLI
                Blended learning and self-study approach adopted in the selected HEIs: percentage of selected HEIs
                implementing blended learning and self-study approach.

                Revised Rationale
                This DLI was introduced in response to the closure of higher education institutions during the COVID-19
                pandemic and the need for distance learning to support student retention. It was also added due to the
                government mandate of making blended learning (online and print materials) and self-study mandatory in all

                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



government and aided colleges. The ICR noted that the aim of this DLI was to support autonomous learning
to enable students to take charge of some parts of their learning. However, the indicator did not measure
contribution to improved quality of HEIs.



Revised Rating
Modest

DLI 2
DLI
Increased on-time graduation rate of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected institutions
(disaggregated by women, ST, SC, and total students).

Rationale
This DLI captured the number of on-time graduating students who have passed all their requisite courses to
be awarded their degree from university or college. Higher education institutions submitted data on
graduating students to the HED. The DLI intended to improve equitable access, and the ICR results
framework noted that this DLI aimed to measure improved student outcomes, including among disadvantaged
groups.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Annual performance milestones met by the HED and selected institutions.

Rationale
This DLI measured the number of key activities, or milestones, that eligible colleges and universities
completed. Each institution established its own priorities and milestones to contribute to improving quality.
While the indicator measured the number of milestones met, it did not measure the milestones' specific
contribution to the improved quality of HEIs.



Rating
Modest

DLI 4
DLI
Revised regulations on the creation/composition of GBs and their functioning issued by the HED and
percentage of affiliated government-aided colleges that implement the regulations.

Rationale

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 20
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



            This DLI measured HEI compliance with a government mandate regarding the composition, qualifications,
            and functions of their governing boards. The mandate included regulations to increase member composition
            from groups such as academic, industry leaders, women, and ST and SC representatives. This DLI was
            relevant to the PDO as it aimed to make reforms more effective and accountable to ultimately enhance the
            governance of the higher education system.



            Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 4 REVISION 1
            Revised DLI
            Strengthened governance of faculty management.

            Revised Rationale
            This DLI was a new indicator, “Strengthened governance of faculty management,” which aimed to incentivize
            the modernization of faculty recruitment and promotion in government colleges. It replaced the original
            indicator owing to good progress having been made on the reform of governing bodies, as reported in the
            ICR. This DLI was relevant to the PDO as it built on the original DLI (which was achieved) and enabled faculty
            recruitment and promotion to be merit-based and transparent, ultimately strengthening governance of the HE
            system.



            Revised Rating
            Substantial

            DLI 5
            DLI
            Improved fiduciary management in selected institutions measuring percentage of selected aided institutions
            that completed data entry using the online FM system (DLI 5a) and enhanced procurement management (DLI
            5b)

            Rationale
            This DLI related to the need for HEIs to improve financial management. The HED mandated the use of an
            online financial management system in government-aided colleges. The aim was to address fiduciary risks
            identified at appraisal and strengthen FM and procurement performance.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                                                                                                             Page 8 of 20
                   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




               Rationale
               The objectives were well aligned with country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy. The
               relevance of DLIs 1 and 2 was substantial, as those DLIs focused on improving the quality of HEIs and
               equitable access, respectively. DLI 3, however, was not clearly part of a results chain linked to the objective
               to improve quality. The relevance of DLIs 4 and 5 was substantial, as both of those DLIs were closely aligned
               with the objective to improve governance in HEIs. Overall relevance, including the original DLIs, is rated
               Substantial.



               Rating
               Substantial

               OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING REVISION 1
               Revised Rationale
               The objectives were well aligned with country context, government strategy, and Bank strategy. The revised
               DLI 1 was only modestly relevant, as it had a weak causal link to the objective to improve quality. The revised
               DLI 4 was substantially relevant, as it was clearly linked to the objective to improve governance in HEIs. DLIs
               2 and 3 were not revised and were substantially and modestly relevant, respectively. DLI 5 was not revised
               and was substantially relevant. Overall relevance, including the revised DLIs, is rated Substantial.



               Revised Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To improve the quality of selected institutions (original indicators and targets)

               Rationale
               The theory of change held that incentivizing colleges to improve on-time graduation rates, monitoring the
               number of annual performance milestones achieved, filling vacant faculty positions, implementing short-term
               teacher trainings, and evaluating curriculum reform would improve the quality of selected higher education
               institutions, measured by improvements in their NAAC performance grades.

               Outputs and intermediate results




                                                                                                                  Page 9 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



The number of projected student beneficiaries disaggregated by gender (IRI 1) was met with a total of
880,810 students, exceeding the original target of 827,200. There were 440,400 female student beneficiaries,
exceeding the original target of 417,000.

At completion, fifty-three out of fifty-six annual performance milestones (APMs) were achieved by the HED,
colleges, and universities (IRI 2, DLI 3). The original target was 75 percent of institutions achieving 75 percent
of institution-based APMs. Inconsistency between how the original target (percentage of institutions and
APMs) and actual at completion (number of APMs only) were framed prevents assessment of achievement of
the target. The APMs aimed to contribute to improving the quality of HEIs and equitable access and included
MIS development, placement and career counselling, faculty training, and architectural plans and construction
of civil works and facilities including completion of 1,170 classrooms, 226 science laboratories, 31 student
hostels, 70 computer laboratories, 16 libraries, and 65 reading rooms.

The percentage of sanctioned teaching posts filled with regular faculty in selected institutions was 95.4
percent, meeting the original target of 95 percent (IRI 3). Faculty having a contract for a minimum of two
years was considered regular faculty.

The cumulative number of faculty and administrators in degree colleges and state universities who completed
a short-term training program was 14,902, exceeding the original target of 13,000 (IRI 4). There were 8,664
males, which did not meet the original target of 8,700. There were 6,238 females, which exceeded the original
target of 4,300.

The evaluation of curriculum reform was not met (IRI 6). The original target was two rounds of curriculum
reform to be undertaken and evaluated. One round of reform was conducted.

Satisfaction levels of student and faculty beneficiaries increased 20 percent over baseline (IRI 7). The ICR
does not report data on meeting the original target. The indicator was revised during the second restructuring.
Three surveys were planned: a baseline survey in Year 1 (2018), initial survey in year 3 (2020), and end-term
survey in year 5 (2022).

Outcomes

For the percentage of selected colleges that improved their NAAC grade from the previous cycle of
accreditation (PDO 1 and DLI 1), the target was 25 percent with a baseline of 20 percent. The ICR results
framework did not report data on meeting the original target. The indicator was dropped during the second
restructuring due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as change in the NAAC accreditation process and
grading, making it no longer feasible to implement related activities in the remaining program period. Before
the restructuring, an ISR (ISR 7, December 2020) noted that 3 percent of institutions had improved their
NAAC grade in year 3, which did not meet the target in year 3. The project team later informed IEG that, as of
July 2024, 49 percent of universities and 24 percent of colleges had NAAC accreditation, which exceeds the
target and is higher than the Indian averages of 40 percent of universities and 16 percent of colleges.

The on-time graduation rate of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected colleges was 76.5
percent, exceeding the original target of 70 percent (PDO 2, DLI 2). The original targets for female students,
SC, and ST were met or exceeded: female students: 76.5 percent (original target: 77 percent); SC students:
63.9 percent (original target: 61 percent); ST students: 52.9 percent (original target: 52 percent) (ICR, p. 17).



                                                                                                   Page 10 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the quality of selected institutions (revised indicators and targets)

Revised Rationale
Incentivizing higher education institutions to adopt and implement blended learning and self-study
approaches when colleges and universities were closed due to the COVID-19 pandemic would promote
enrollment and retention during a period of economic shocks and vulnerabilities. It is unclear, however, how
blended learning and self-study contributed to improving the quality of selected higher education institutions.

Revised outputs and intermediate results

At completion, fifty-three out of fifty-six APMs were achieved by the HED, colleges, and universities (IRI 2,
DLI 3). The revised target was 80 percent of institutions achieving 60 percent of institution-based APMs.
Inconsistency between how the revised target (percentage of institutions and APMs) and actual at completion
(number of APMs only) were framed prevents assessment of achievement of the target.

The cumulative number of faculty and administrators in degree colleges and state universities who completed
a short-term training program was 14,902, surpassing the revised target of 6,000 faculty (IRI 4). Of the faculty
trained, 6,238 were female, surpassing the revised target of 1,500.

Satisfaction levels of student and faculty beneficiaries improved in 72 percent of selected HEIs along at least
50 percent of satisfaction survey parameters, exceeding the revised target for year 5: 60 percent of HEIs
improving on 50 percent of the parameters (IRI 7). Survey findings were shared with colleges and universities
and the HED.

Revised Outcomes

Blended learning and self-study approaches were adopted in 100 percent of the selected HEIs, such that the
target of 75 percent was exceeded (PDO 1, DLI 1). In a feedback survey, 56 percent of students and 60
percent of teachers reported that blended learning was quite or extremely effective compared to face-to-face
learning. The ICR notes that blended learning delivered mixed results. Only those students with reliable and
active internet connections could access the content, which relied heavily on e-resources including
instructional videos, readings, and textbooks. Due to limited digital access, not all students were able to
undertake the blended learning and self-study program (ICR, Annex 11). Although the target was met,
evidence of achievement of the objective to improve the quality of selected institutions is not convincingly
demonstrated by the indicator.

The on-time graduation rate of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected colleges was 76.5
percent, exceeding the revised target of 64 percent (PDO 2, DLI 2). For SC students it was 63.9 percent,
exceeding the revised target of 55 percent. For female students, it was 76.5 percent, exceeding the revised



                                                                                                  Page 11 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



target of 71 percent. For ST students it was 52.9 percent, exceeding the revised target of 45 percent (ICR, p.
17).



Due to lack of a plausible results chain connecting implementation of blended learning to the objective of
improved quality of HEIs, achievement of this objective under the revised indicators and targets is rated
Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve students’ equitable access to selected institutions (original indicators and targets)

Rationale
The theory of change for this objective held that building academic and residential infrastructure and
implementing other aspects of APMs in rural and SC/ST-dominant areas would improve equitable access to
higher education. The main measure of equitable access was on-time graduation rates among females and
SCs/STs.

Outputs and intermediate results

The ICR notes that the APMs aimed to contribute to improving equitable access, specifically through
placement and career counselling services, faculty training, and architectural plans and construction of civil
works and facilities including completion of 1,170 classrooms, 226 science laboratories, 31 student hostels,
70 computer laboratories, 16 libraries, and 65 reading rooms.

Outcomes

The on-time graduation rates of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected colleges was 76.5
percent, exceeding the original target of 70 percent. (PDO 2, DLI 2). The original targets for female students,
SC, and ST were met or exceeded. Female students: 76.5 percent (original target: 77 percent); SC students:
63.9 percent (original target: 61 percent); ST students: 52.9 percent (original target: 52 percent) (ICR, p. 17).



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve students’ equitable access to selected institutions (revised indicators and targets)

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




Revised Rationale
Revised outcomes

The on-time graduation rate of students in undergraduate degree programs in selected colleges was 76.5
percent, significantly exceeding the downward revised target of 64 percent (PDO 2, DLI 2). For SC students,
it was 63.9 percent, significantly exceeding the downward revised target of 55 percent. For female students, it
was 76.5 percent, significantly exceeding the downward revised target of 71 percent. For ST students, it was
52.9 percent, significantly exceeding the downward revised target of 45 percent (ICR, p. 17).



Revised Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance governance of the higher education system in Odisha (original indicators and targets)

Rationale
The theory of change was that implementing revised government regulations for the composition of HEI
governing bodies; conducting a benchmarking exercise for HEIs on goals, management, autonomy, and
accountability to assess progress; developing an MIS to strengthen program management; and adoption by
colleges of a mandated online financial management system to improve fiduciary management, would
enhance governance of the higher education system in Odisha.

Outputs and intermediate results

The HED's MIS was strengthened to specified standards (IRI 8), meeting the target.

The percentage of government-aided HEIs that completed data entry using the online financial management
system was reported as 61.5 percent, which did not meet the original target of 90 percent (IRI 9, DLI 5).

Only the first round of the governance benchmarking scorecard exercise in selected HEIs (IRI 10) was
conducted, which did not meet the original target of carrying out two rounds of the exercise (ICR, Annex 1, p.
21).

Outcomes

The percentage of HEIs that followed government-revised regulations for the composition of governing bodies
was 74 percent, falling short of the original target of 90 percent (PDO 3, DLI 4).



Rating
Modest


                                                                                                Page 13 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To enhance governance of the higher education system in Odisha (revised indicators and targets)

Revised Rationale
Governance in the higher education system was to improve by reforming faculty management to be merit-
based and transparent. A new indicator, strengthened governance of faculty management (PDO 3, DLI 4),
was added. Two new targets were: (i) faculty recruitment and promotions to be implemented according to
amended government rules to make the process for recruitment and promotion more transparent and merit-
based, and (ii) Personnel Information Management System (PIMS) upgraded and used as an e-database for
faculty management.

Outputs and intermediate results

The percentage of government-aided HEIs that completed data entry using the online financial management
system was 61.5, percent which met the revised target of 60 percent (IRI 9, DLI 5).

Outcomes

HEIs universally adopting rules set by the government for recruitment and promotion of faculty, meeting the
target. However, the target of development of the Personnel Information Management System (PIMS) for
management of faculty deployment, transfers, and recruitment was not met.



Revised Rating
Modest




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
Original indicators and targets

Objective 1 to improve the quality of selected institutions was rated Substantial. Objective 2 to improve
equitable access to selected institutions was rated Substantial. Objective 3 to enhance governance of the
higher education system was rated Modest. These ratings aggregate to an efficacy rating under the original
outcome targets of Substantial, with caveats related to the Modest achievement of the third objective.




Rating                                                  Primary Reason
Substantial                                             Low achievement

                                                                                               Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




 OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
 Revised Rationale
 Revised indicators and targets

 Objective 1 to improve the quality of selected institutions was rated Modest. Objective 2 to improve equitable
 access to selected institutions was rated High. Objective 3 to enhance governance of the higher education
 system was rated Modest. These ratings aggregate to an efficacy rating under the revised outcome targets of
 Substantial, with strong caveats related to the Modest achievement of the first and third objectives.



 Revised Rating                                            Primary Reason
 Substantial                                               Low achievement


5. Outcome

Relevance is rated Substantial under both the original and revised indicators and targets. Efficacy is rated
Substantial, but with caveats, under both the original and revised indicators and targets. The overall Outcome is
therefore rated Moderately Satisfactory under both the original and revised indicators and targets, producing an
overall Outcome rating of Moderately Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
    Moderately Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

Government mandates required HEIs to adopt reform measures, including changes to the composition of
HEI governing bodies, the process of recruiting and promoting faculty to make it more merit-based and
transparent, and improvements in fiduciary management with the use of a new online financial management
system for HEIs. The presence of government mandates suggests that these changes are likely to be
sustained. Academic and residential infrastructure built with program support in rural and ST/SC-dominant
areas should encourage higher education participation of disadvantaged youth over the long term. The
government of Odisha has committed to funding the ten percent of planned civil works that had not been
completed by the closing date of the program using available state funds. Operation and maintenance
costs will need to be covered as well to maintain the new infrastructure and equipment.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



  The program was relevant and aligned with the higher education strategy of the Government of India and
  the State of Odisha to improve quality and access in higher education. It was informed by prior World
  Bank non-lending technical assistance in higher education in the state. The Project Management Unit
  (PMU) was located in the HED in Odisha in order to oversee implementation of the program as well as
  the state’s funding from the Government of India’s RUSA scheme to improve the quality of higher
  education. The Program Director was responsible for both the RUSA program in the state (a centrally
  sponsored national government scheme launched in 2013 to provide strategic funding to eligible state
  HEIs) and for this project.

  The program was the first higher education program in Odisha. The risk rating for institutional capacity for
  implementation and sustainability was Substantial. A Fiduciary System Assessment was carried out at
  appraisal to evaluate the adequacy of the proposed financial management and procurement
  arrangements. Mitigation measures were built into program design to address risks, including
  establishing a web-based financial management accounting system and continuous training of
  stakeholders at all levels.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team conducted nine formal implementation support missions that included both technical
 and fiduciary support. Three Aide Memoires documented challenges, implementation progress, and time-
 bound action plans. The team carried out three restructurings in response to implementation challenges
 and the COVID-19 pandemic. The restructurings included changes to PDO indicators and targets.

 Program design included US$5 million for technical assistance, which aimed to support implementation of
 fiduciary recommendations and procurement capacity building in the PMU, strengthening of HED
 monitoring capacity, support for implementation of recommendations on strengthening the environmental
 management system and social safeguards for the program, a study on learning outcomes, and
 independent verification of the DLIs. As noted in the PAD, the outcome orientation of the program would
 require considerable capacity building of the agencies and systems implementing the program (PAD,
 Annex 10 and para 20). The TA component supported many but not all of the planned activities (the study
 on learning outcomes was not conducted). During the first restructuring, the TA component was reduced to
 US$1.5 million, with another US$0.33 million cancelled at the third restructuring.

 There were shortcomings in the design of some of the indicators and targets that were added during
 restructuring (see Section 8).



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PAD recognized the challenges faced in Odisha regarding the poor quality of data in higher
 education. Program design aimed to improve M&E through incorporating a robust results framework and
 DLIs, increasing compliance and data quality using existing systems, building the capacity of the HED, and
 conducting a series of evaluation studies. An MIS for the program was included in M&E design, to be
 developed by the HED for program management and for monitoring performance indicators and annual
 disbursements to the colleges.

 The planned program expenditures of US$88 million for infrastructure and capital assets were focused
 especially in areas with high shares of vulnerable populations. Although the on-time graduation rate for
 disadvantaged groups (females, SCs/STs) was a reasonable indicator to measure progress on the
 equitable access objective, the results framework could have usefully also included indicators to measure
 outreach to and enrollment (not just graduation) among these groups. The ICR noted that better higher
 education facilities, including hostels, science and computer labs, and other assets in rural districts and
 high ST/SC population districts enable higher education to be more feasible and attractive to rural and
 ST/SC students. Also, hostels are important for accessing higher education in states with large rural and
 tribal populations and women.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PMU in the HED was responsible for conducting M&E activities, including periodic sector
  and progress reviews, preparation and dissemination of progress reports, reporting on DLI achievements,
  and independent verification of DLIs. HEIs reported regularly on progress and targets. Monitoring data
  was provided to the PMU and shared with the World Bank team to track progress on the results
  framework. Independent verification reports were received in a timely manner. Two rounds of student and
  faculty satisfaction surveys were completed by the PMU.

  The results framework's logic under the first objective had shortcomings. The new PDO 1 indicator
  introduced in the second restructuring, blended learning and self-study approach adopted in the selected
  HEIs, measured the percentage of HEIs that adopted new mandated curricula; however, there was no
  clear causal link between the mandated curricula and achievement of the objective of improved quality.
  As noted in Section 4, there was also a disconnect between the framing of the target for the output
  indicator on achievement of APMs and the way actual achievement was reported in the ICR.



c. M&E Utilization
  Satisfaction survey data were shared within HED and HEIs and reportedly generated substantive
  discussion on future improvements to the quality and relevance of higher education in the state.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The program was classified as Environmental Category B, partial assessment, at the time of appraisal. The
   main trigger for Category B was the potential environmental and social impacts associated with the
   construction and rehabilitation of classrooms, hostels, libraries, and other civil works within the campuses of
   the selected HEIs. The specific safeguard policies triggered were Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
   and Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10. As part of the preparation process, an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework was prepared. A grievance mechanism was included in program design. The HED
   monitored civil works-related grievances through an online spreadsheet on a biweekly basis and the
   activities of the operation through a grievance redress cell in the HED. The ICR does not report on the
   number of grievances, nature of reported grievances, or resolution. ISRs reported safeguard ratings
   of Satisfactory during implementation and at closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   The ICR notes that good-quality audit reports and interim unaudited financial reports were submitted to the
   World Bank in a timely manner (ICR, p. 15). A review of HEIs’ audits done by local bodies was
   commissioned by the World Bank and facilitated by the PMU to identify gaps and solutions to improve local
   accounting practices, owing to one reported case of fraud.

   The ICR did not report financial management or procurement performance ratings or risk ratings. For
   this ICRR, Aide-Memoires were reviewed. At the Mid-Term Review, financial management was rated
   Satisfactory (Aide Memoire, November 2020), revised downward to Moderately Satisfactory in September
   2022 (Aide Memoire, September 2022). Financial management performance at closing was Moderately
   Satisfactory.

   Procurement at the Mid-Term Review in November 2020 was rated Satisfactory, with generally timely
   awards of contracts. Performance was revised downward to Moderately Satisfactory in September 2022
   due to delays in contracting out and implementing civil works. By closing, procurement performance was
   rated Satisfactory, as agreed actions had been completed.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None reported.



d. Other

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



   N/A



10. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                                                                 Shortcomings in achievement of
                                                                                 the third objective under both the
Outcome                          Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 original and revised indicators
                                                                                 and targets.
                                                                                 Moderate shortcomings in M&E,
Bank Performance                 Satisfactory         Moderately Satisfactory    particularly following
                                                                                 restructurings.
Quality of M&E                   Substantial          Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                  Substantial


11. Lessons

IEG draws the following lessons from this program:

A robust theory of change and results framework are essential to ensure successful
implementation. Programs benefit from a robust theory of change with well-defined objectives and
clear causal links with interventions and outputs that support achievement of the objectives.
Programs are well served when all objectives are included in the theory of change. A results
framework with clearly defined indicators and targets is critical for keeping measurable objectives in
sight and revising indicators, targets, and objectives as needed during program implementation,
especially in a PforR, where the DLIs/PDOs are explicitly designed to incentivize performance.
Revised indicators and targets during a restructuring can serve a program well when there are
clearly linked outputs and outcomes. Evaluating achievement of objectives rather than assessing
whether targets were met enables a program to contribute to improving development outcomes.

A split evaluation assesses achievement across an entire project lifetime under both the
original and revised objectives/targets. When a program warrants a split evaluation, separate
efficacy ratings are given for both the original and revised project objectives and outcome targets,
covering performing across a project's entire lifetime. World Bank guidance for conducting a split
evaluation is helpful when using the split rating method.



12. Assessment Recommended?

  No



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Odisha Higher Education Program (P160331)



13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR was clear, comprehensive, and candid. Its data quality and analysis were substantial. Its lessons were
compelling and should prove useful for the design of other projects. However, there were minor
shortcomings. The revised theory of change and results chain adjusted for implementation did not include the
new outcome indicator on blended learning and self-study and its causal link to the achievement of Objective 1.
The split rating methodology was not correctly applied, with end-of-project results assessed against both the
original and revised outcome indicators and targets.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                 Page 20 of 20
