     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                     Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



                                                                         Report Number: ICRR0024517

1. Program Information



 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Kenya                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                  Approved Operations
 0                                   0

 Operation ID                        Operation Name
 P175251                             KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF




 L/C/TF Number(s)                   Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-69100                          30-Jun-2022                                        750,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                 Closing Date (Actual)
 10-Jun-2021                        30-Jun-2022
                                    IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                     750,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                      750,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                  750,000,000.00                                            0.00




P176903_TBL
 Country                             Practice Area (Lead)
 Kenya                               Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                        Operation Name
 P176903                             KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF2 ( P176903 )




                                                                                          Page 1 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)




  L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                      Total Financing (USD)
  IBRD-93430,IDA-69100,IDA-70510            28-Feb-2023                                             750000000.00

  Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
  16-Mar-2022                               28-Feb-2023

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                 Co-financing (USD)

  Original Commitment                          750,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Revised Commitment                           750,000,000.00                                                 0.00

  Actual                                       750,000,000.00                                                 0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator            Group
 William F. Steel            Donna Kaidou Jeffrey         Donna Kaidou Jeffrey              IEGEC




2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The original program development objectives (PDOs) in the first development policy finance operation (DPF1) in
this two-part series (Accelerating Reforms for an Inclusive Growth and Resilient Recovery) were: [1] accelerating
reforms for a resilient and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 shock, and [2] the continued advancement of
Kenya’s inclusive growth agenda (ICR, para. 9).

The PDOs were revised for the second operation (DPF2) in light of faster-then-expected recovery along with
elevated pandemic uncertainty. This Implementation Completion Report Review (ICRR) uses the revised PDOs
(ICR, para. 16), as follows:

Contributing to Kenya’s inclusive and resilient recovery from the COVID-19 crisis by::

      PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management;
      PDO2: Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector while placing Kenya on a green energy
       path;
      PDO3: Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human capital (environment,
       land, water and healthcare).


b. Pillars/Policy Areas



                                                                                                     Page 2 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



DPF2 consolidated the original four Pillars into three:

    A. Fiscal and debt reforms;
    B. Electricity sector and public private partnership (PPP) reforms;
    C. Environmental and natural resource governance.

The specific Policy Areas addressed under these Pillars were (ICR, paras. 22, 27 and 31):

1. Fiscal and debt reforms:

      Procurement;
      Public investment management;
      Primary debt market.

2. Electricity sector and PPP reforms:

      Good governance
      Procurement
      Private infrastructure investment

3. Environmental and natural resource governance.

        Climate change mitigation and adaptation;
        County Own Source Revenues (OSR) and land price transparency;
        Management and conservation of Kenya’s water resources;
        Healthcare system.


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

Total financing of US$1.5 billion consisted of an IDA credit for DPF1 of US$750 million (approved and effective
in June, 2021, and closed 29 June, 2022, as scheduled) and an IDA credit of US$520 million and IBRD loan of
US$230 million for DPF2 (approved and effective in March, 2022, and closed 28 February, 2023, as
scheduled).

The IMF provided complementary financing of US$2.34 billion over 38 months from April, 2021, to support fiscal
consolidation and the economic recovery from the COVID-19 crisis (ICR, para. 7).


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives

 Country context




                                                                                                   Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



Kenya’s economy had been performing well prior to the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, with pro-poor growth
averaging 5.8 percent per annum over the prior decade lifting Kenya into the lower-middle income country
range and reducing extreme poverty from 44 percent in 2006 to an estimated 33 percent in 2019 (Program
Document for DPF1 [PD1], para. 1.2). Corresponding improvement in Kenya’s Human Development Index
from 0.55 in 2010 to 0.60 in 2019 reflected gains in education, health and access to electricity (reaching 75
percent of the population).

Nonetheless, rising expenditures, especially for infrastructure, with flat revenue collection meant fiscal deficits
of nearly 8 percent of GDP and a sharply rising ratio of government debt to GDP, from 43 to 64 percent over
just five years, 2014-19 (ICR, para. 2). The adverse effects of the pandemic and resulting domestic
containment measures, especially on key foreign exchange earners, exposed underlying fiscal vulnerabilities
and put fiscal consolidation measures on pause (PD1, para. 1.3), with stagnant GDP in 2020, a 50 percent
drop in household business income, and a four percentage-point rise in the poverty rate (PD1, para. 1.4).
While participation in the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) provided some fiscal space for spending
to support the healthcare system and vulnerable households and firms, while initiating a vaccination program,
uncertainties surrounding the emergence of new COVID variants and impending elections, as well as liquidity
constraints on the Kenya Power and Lighting Company (KPLC), posed significant challenges (ICR, paras. 4-
6).

These challenges motivated the DPF series to revive the fiscal reform program, strengthen the health and
education sectors, and support KPLC, while also pursuing a path toward green energy.

Relevance of objectives

While primarily responding to the fiscal, economic and social effects of the pandemic and recovery measures,
the DPF PDOs were reasonably well aligned with the longer-term objectives of both the World Bank Group
(WBG) and the Kenyan Government.

Kenya’s Vision 2030 program (launched in 2008) provided the framework for the WBG Country Partnership
Strategy (CPS) for FY14-FY20 and for a previous DPF series, as well as the one under review. The CPS
sought to engage in three main areas: (i) competitiveness and sustainability; (ii) human resource
development; and (iii) devolution of responsibility for provision of certain services to the county level – with
good governance as a cross-cutting theme (PD1, para. 4.54). PDOs 1 and 2 were relevant to the first area
and PDO3 to the second area, with one PA pertaining to the third area.

The Government’s Medium-Term Plan (MTP) III for 2018-22 prioritized four main pillars (the “Big Four”; PD1,
para. 3.1): food and nutritional security; affordable housing; universal health coverage; and raising the share
of manufacturing to 15.0 percent of GDP. However, the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted implementation of the
Big Four and prompted the government to launch an Economic Recovery Strategy (ERS) “designed to
mitigate the adverse socioeconomic effects of the pandemic and facilitate opening of the economy,
accelerate economic recovery and attain higher and sustained economic growth,” with a focus on healthcare
systems, information and communications technologies, private sector activity, a green and resilient recovery
and growth, and strengthening governance and economic management (PD1, para. 3.2). PDO1 dealt with
the fiscal consequences The Government’s Medium-Term Plan (MTP) III for 2018-22 prioritized four main
pillars (the “Big Four”; PD1, para. 3.1): food and nutritional security; affordable housing; universal health
coverage; and raising the share of manufacturing to 15.0 percent of GDP. However, the COVID-19 pandemic
disrupted implementation of the Big Four and prompted the government to launch an Economic Recovery
Strategy (ERS) “designed to mitigate the adverse socioeconomic effects of the pandemic and facilitate


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



opening of the economy, accelerate economic recovery and attain higher and sustained economic growth,”
with a focus on healthcare systems, information and communications technologies, private sector activity, a
green and resilient recovery and growth, and strengthening governance and economic management (PD1,
para. 3.2). PDO1 dealt with the fiscal consequences of mitigating the socioeconomic effects of the pandemic;
PDO2 addressed private investment in electricity and green energy; and PDO3 focused on governance
aspects of natural and human capital management.


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Eight policy areas had a pair of related prior actions (PAs) across the two operations, taking advantage of the
series to strengthen the implementation path. One policy area was addressed only in DPF1, while PAs in two
policy areas were introduced in DPF2, for a total of 19 PAs and 26 sub-actions. The actions generally
addressed constraints identified in prior analytical work and technical assistance (TA) and made substantive,
credible contributions to achieving the stated objectives.

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions (PAs) for Kenya DPF Series (Accelerating Reforms for an
Inclusive Growth and Resilient Recovery)

 PAs under DPF1                                  PAs under DPF2
 PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management
 Procurement
                                                PA2: To strengthen the transparency of public
                                                procurement and reduce opportunities for
 PA1: To establish the legal framework for
                                                corruption, the National Treasury has
 government procurement to move to a
                                                approved the E-GP policy framework, which
 transparent electronic platform (EGP), the
                                                includes the E-GP: (i) Strategy (ii)
 Recipient has issued the Public Procurement
                                                Implementation Roadmap (iii) Business Model
 and Asset Disposal Regulations 2020.
                                                and (iv) Business Processes and
                                                Specifications
 Public investment management
 PA3: To strengthen public investment           PA4: The Cabinet has taken a decision for
 management, the Recipient’s Cabinet has        rationalizing the public investment project
 approved the Public Finance Management         portfolio, using criteria that include: (i) the
 (Public Investment Management) Regulations completion progress of the project, (ii) the
 of 2021, covering all phases of the public     adequacy of financing needed to complete the
 investment project cycle, including the        project beyond the current budget cycle, (iii)
 provisions relating to the identification,     the priority status of the project considering
 economic appraisal, selection, implementation, development priorities, and (iv) the
 and monitoring and evaluation of all proposed, availability of sufficient data on the project to
 active and completed projects.                 measure implementation progress and impact.
 Primary debt market
 PA5: The Recipient’s central bank (CBK) has PA6: To strengthen the domestic bond yield
 approved and issued the auction rules and      curve and increase secondary market liquidity
 guidelines for the issuance of                 through a transparent and active structured

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



Kenyan government securities, to add clarity     issuance strategy that ensures regular,
and transparency in the primary domestic         predictable benchmark-bond issuances linked
debt market.                                     with active liability management, the Central
                                                 Bank of Kenya has adopted and published the
                                                 Guidelines for, and is implementing, the
                                                 Treasury Bonds Benchmark program



PDO2: Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector while placing
Kenya on a green energy path
Good governance
PA7: To move closer to electricity sector cost-
recovery, i) the Recipient’s Energy and
Petroleum Regulatory Authority (EPRA)
has allowed the following in the retail tariff: a) PA8: To improve the operational and financial
higher system loss provision for pass-through performance of KPLC: (i) a competitive
items (fuel cost, foreign exchange, inflation)     selection process for the Managing Director of
for KPLC; and b) full pass-through of power        KPLC has been introduced with the process
purchase costs from new capacity PPAs; and initiated for the currently vacant position, (ii) a
ii) The Recipient’s National Treasury has          revenue protection program (RPP) covering
provisioned for KSh5 billion in the                high value consumers is being implemented.
supplementary FY2020/21 budget for partial
clearance of outstanding receivables against
the last mile electrification program
Procurement
PA9: To allow competitive procurement of
renewable energy and to reduce the cost of
supply, the Recipient’s Ministry of Energy has
approved and published (a) a Feed in Tariffs
(FiT) policy to include only small hydro,
biomass and biogas technologies and
restricted the generation pipeline to include
only projects that have a signed PPA as of
March 29, 2021; (b) a Renewable Energy
Auctions Policy for solar and wind.
PA10: To prevent a build-up of excess              PA11: The Ministry of Energy has approved a
capacity and support the transition to a           five-year power generation and transmission
greener energy system, the Recipient’s             development plan (2021-2026) to guide the
Ministry of Energy has updated the Least Cost competitive procurement of clean energy, at
Power Development Plan (LCPDP) 2021-2030 least-cost and aligned with demand.
Private infrastructure investment
                                                   PA12: The Borrower has enacted the Public
                                                   Private Partnerships Act (2021), to enhance
                                                   project selection and implementation
                                                   processes, and clarify the roles and
                                                   responsibilities of key participants in the PPP


                                                                                                     Page 6 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



                                               cycle, for efficient and timely delivery of PPP
                                               projects.




PDO3: Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human capital
Climate change mitigation and adaptation
PA13: The Recipient has approved its updated
                                                PA14: In order to enhance environmental
NDC, with increased and accelerated
                                                management and mainstream climate change
mitigation commitments by 2030 (with 2025
                                                governance, the Cabinet has approved the
milestones) and submitted it to the secretariat
                                                Environmental Management & Coordination
of the United Nations Framework Convention
                                                Bill (2022).
on Climate Change.
County Own Source Revenues (OSR) and land price transparency
                                                PA15: To equip county governments to
                                                mobilize own-source revenues based on
                                                property and to improve land price
                                                transparency, the Cabinet has approved the
                                                National Rating Bill.
Management and conservation of Kenya’s water resources
                                                PA17: To enhance access to water and
                                                sanitation services and improve the
PA16: To ensure prudent management and          management and conservation of water
development of Kenya’s scarce water             resources: (i) the MoWSI has approved the
resources, the Recipient has through its        medium-term framework for a National Water
Cabinet approved (i) a new National Water       and Sanitation Investment Program
Policy; and (ii) regulations for the            (NAWASIP); (ii) the Water Resources
implementation of the Water Act 2016 and the Authority has designated six basin areas under
Irrigation Act 2019.                            section 24 of the Water Act 2016; and (iii) the
                                                MoWSI has stipulated new water use charges
                                                and water conservation levies.
Healthcare system
                                                PA19: To strengthen Kenya’s infectious and
PA18: The Recipient has submitted to its        non-infectious disease prevention and
Parliament the National Hospital Insurance      response capabilities, including by
Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2021 which seeks to consolidating existing public health emergency
align the National Hospital Insurance Fund’s preparedness and response functions under
mandate with the goal of universal health       one authority, the Borrower has established
coverage (UHC), and strengthen its              the Kenya National Public Health Institute.
governance and performance.


Source: ICR, Table 1.

PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management


                                                                                                  Page 7 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



PA1 and PA2 made an essential contribution to PDO1 by laying the legal and policy foundation to address
the important constraint on effective government procurement: the “lack of the information needed for
effective oversight and enforcement of rules” (PD1, para. 4.5). Developing a transparent electronic platform
for government procurement (E-GP) was necessary for “improving transparency and reducing corruption in
public procurement,” which represented as much as 9.0 percent of GDP. The expected results chain (PD1,
paras. 4.7 and 4.10) was that greater transparency through E-GP would reduce corruption opportunities,
make public spending more transparent, and thereby “increase the efficiency and effectiveness of
government investment spending. Relevance of PA1: Highly Satisfactory (HS); PA2: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

PA3 and PA4 responded to “the need for streamlining dormant, stalled, and non-performing projects in the
development budget,” as identified in a Public Expenditure Review (PD1, para. 4.8). Getting the Cabinet to
adopt regulations and apply appropriate criteria to appraise, select, implement, monitor and evaluate public
investment projects (existing and proposed) was expected to make an essential contribution to fiscal
consolidation by reducing non-performing projects (ICR, para, 25) and stemming the rise of public investment
spending to 5.8 percent of GDP (PD1, para. 4.8). Relevance of PA3: Highly Satisfactory (HS); PA4:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA5 and PA6 addressed the risks posed by the rise in domestic debt to nearly half of all government
borrowing and 33 percent of GDP by 2020, responding to the 2019 WB report on Developing the Government
Securities Market in Kenya (PD1, para. 4.11 and Table 4). Adopting and implementing clear guidelines for
Treasury Bonds was expected to increase transparency and investor confidence, thereby reducing
fragmentation of the yield curve and lowering the cost of domestic borrowing, hence contributing substantially
to the objective of strengthening fiscal management (PD1, para. 4.14). The actions were intended to improve
transparency and functioning of the debt market, though not the dominant determinant. Relevance of PA5:
Satisfactory (S); PA6: Satisfactory (S).

PDO2: Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector while placing Kenya on a green
energy path

PA7 drew on a 2018 cost of service study to support cost pass-through measures that would make a major
direct contribution to remedy KPLC’s deteriorating financial situation by addressing the failure to recover the
full cost of service due to delayed tariff reviews (PD1 para. 4.18 and Table 4). The sub-action to provide
budget to partially clear outstanding receivables of the last-mile electrification program likewise directly offset
a significant source of KPLC’s debt problems. Relevance of PA7: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA8 represented a modification of the indicative trigger (IT) from DPF1 to shift the focus from revenue
generation to cost reduction (PD2, paras. 57-58). The sub-action to use a competitive selection process and
outside human resources firm to fill the vacant position of Managing Director of KPLC was expected to help
strengthen KPLC management. The sub-action to enhance metering and auditing of high value consumers
was intended to protect major revenue sources. The sub-action to budget for partial clearance of outstanding
receivables would help ease KPLC’s debt problems. Although no specific analytical base for these measures
was indicated (PD2, Table 5), they were relevant and likely to make a moderate contribution to addressing
the underlying management and revenue problems. Relevance of PA8: Moderately Satisfactory (MS)

PA9 addressed the gap between excess generation capacity relative to low demand growth (PD1, para.
4.18). While the Feed-in-Tariff (FiT) policy (PA9a) incentivized investment in intermittent renewables (solar,
wind) that are important for the goal of 100 percent renewable energy, these take-or-pay power purchase


                                                                                                       Page 8 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



agreements (PPAs) were costly in the face of inadequate demand to recover costs. Hence the actions to
restrict them going forward and to transition to an as-needed auction approach (PA9b) represented a major
contribution to stemming this strain on KPLC’s finances. These measures were based on “a detailed strategy
… for solar and wind energy developed with support from World Bank-executed trust funds” (PD2, Table 5).
Relevance of PA9: Satisfactory (S).

PA10 and PA11 were needed to address the underlying constraints of decreasing efficiency, increasing
overcapacity and inadequate pricing in the electricity sector (PD2, para. 61). Updating the Least Cost Power
Development Plan and approving a five-year power generation and transmission plan were expected to make
a major contribution to stemming expensive, unneeded projects and ensuring that new renewable energy
projects are competitively priced, thus yielding cost savings. Relevance of PA10: Satisfactory (S); PA11:
Satisfactory (S).

PA12 addressed weaknesses in the public-private partnership (PPP) law that led to long delays in projects
and hampered decision-making at the local level (PD2, paras. 63-65). By improving project selection and
implementation processes and clarifying responsibilities relevant to Kenya’s devolved governance system,
the supported amendments were expected to help strengthen mobilization of private investment across the
economy, as well as in the electricity sector, thereby making a significant contribution to PDO2 and the
parallel Kenya Infrastructure Finance and Public-Private Partnerships (IFPPP) Project (P121019). Relevance
of PA12: Satisfactory (S).

PDO3: Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human capital

PA13 and PA14 addressed the constraint on sustainability of Kenya’s growth posed by the increasing
number and severity of climatic threats (especially floods and drought) to natural resource-dependent sectors
(especially agriculture, livestock and fishing), which account for 70 percent of employment and 42 percent of
GDP (PD1, paras. 4.25-4.26). The PAs represented a major contribution to implementing and
institutionalizing pledges made in Kenya’s Paris Agreement Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) by
updating it and providing work plans, improving coordination, and strengthening institutional capacities at
national and sub-national levels (PD1, para. 4.27), thus complementing the Financing Locally Led Climate
Action Program-for-Results operation. These were satisfactory enabling actions, expected to lead to further
Climate Change Actions plans at the County level, though the ultimate impact would depend on whether
“Kenya will take effective actions on climate change as per its NDC….[and whether] the achievement of these
goals is being supported by complementary interventions. (PD2, para. 70). Relevance of PA13:
Satisfactory (S); PA14: Satisfactory (S).

PA15 was needed to overcome constraints on the ability of county governments to meet their increased
obligations under devolved responsibilities and on land taxation due to the absence of standardized land
value information (PD2, para. 64 and 71). The National Rating Bill supported under PA15 represented a
moderate contribution by supporting development of a national land value index, indirectly enabling county
governments to improve their revenue streams. Relevance of PA15: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PA16 and PA17 followed through on the National Water Policy adopted under the preceding DPF series by
addressing a number of gaps in the policy and regulatory framework for intergovernmental cooperation in
water and sanitation services (WSS) (PD1, paras. 4.34-4.36; PD2, paras. 75-76). The five sub-actions under
these two PAs represented essential contributions to the objective of strengthening the governance
framework by implementing the regulations and stipulations needed to improve the management and



                                                                                                 Page 9 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



 conservation of water resources – particularly crucial in an arid, water-scarce country such as Kenya.
 Relevance of PA16: Highly Satisfactory (HS); PA17: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

 PA18 and PA19 sought to address weaknesses in the institutional framework underpinning the government’s
 objective of universal access to healthcare, under a policy drafted with World Bank TA support under
 Sustainable and Efficient Health Financing in Kenya (PD1, paras. 4.42-4.44). The actions represented only
 initial steps at institutional reforms by amending the National Health Insurance Fund Act (which “seeks to
 align” its mandate with the universal health coverage goal) and enabling establishment of a National Public
 Health Institute to coordinate public health programs (PD2, para. 82). Relevance of PA18: Moderately
 Satisfactory (MS); PA19: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).



Rating

Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

The 14 RIs fully captured the intended results of the 19 PAs (of which eight in sequential pairs across DPF1 and
DPF2) and were generally attributable to the supported actions. Definitions and measurement were clear.

Table 2: Results indicators by Objective and PAs; baseline and target values; status
                                 and achievement

                                    Source: ICR, Table 1.
    Results                    RI   Base-                                 Actual
                    Asso-                    Target      Actual
 indicator (RI)                      line                                 as % of RI Achieve-
                    ciated
                             Rele-                                       targeted ment rating
                     PAs                     (2023)     (2023)
                             vance (2020)                                 change
                           PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management
RI1: Number of
  Government
                                                             0
   Ministries,
  Departments
                     PA1                                   [E-GP
 and Agencies
                               HS     0        5           models          0%      Negligible*
    (MDAs)
                     PA2                               piloted;rollout
 procuring all of
                                                         actions in
their goods and
                                                        FY24 DPO]
services on the
 E-GP platform.
RI2: Number of
                                               30
    projects         PA3
                                           ongoing &
 complying with                HS     0                     146           487%        High
                                            all new
       PIM           PA4
                                            projects
  Regulations

                                                                                                      Page 10 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



                                          i. KES
                                           50bn i. KES 60bn
                                         bonds <5
RI3: Minimum      PA5                        yrs  ii. KES 62bn i. 120%
 benchmark                 MS      N/A                                      Substantial
  bond size       PA6                     i. KES iii.KES 66bn ii. 83%
                                           75bn    bonds 10-25
                                         bonds 5-       yrs
                                           10yrs
           PDO 2: Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector
RI4: Proportion
  of KPLC total
revenues to the
  total revenue    PA7
  requirements              S     87%       90%      90.65%       122%         High
  computed by      PA8
     KPLC and
   agreed with
       EPRA.
  RI5: Pipeline
     electricity
      capacity
  terminated or
    deferred to   PA9(a)   HS      N/A   400 MW      522MW       130.5%        High
   better match
    supply and
    demand by
       2025.
                  PA9(b)
RI6: Percentag
                                  11% 5% [-6%-       9.74% [-
 e of electricity
                  PA10     MS                pt.    1.25%-pt.      21%       Negligible
generated from
                                 (2019) reduction] reduction]
    fossil fuels.
                  PA11
RI7: Number of
  PPP projects
     that have
   achieved at
     least one
     additional
     milestone    PA12     HS       0        10         26        260%         High
   (RFQ, RFP,
 negotiations or
      contract
 signing) under
  the new PPP
    Directorate



                                                                                               Page 11 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



   PDO 3: Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human
                                       capital
RI8: Number of
 Counties with
County Climate
Change Action
        Plans
                 PA13
    developed
                            S     8        25          45        218%       High
       through
                 PA14
  participatory
methodologies
  endorsed by
        county
 governments.
RI9: Number of                                    0 submitted
 County Value                                    to Parliament     0%
Maps prepared PA15          S     0        15                             Negligible*
 and submitted                                     [27 maps     [partial]
 to Parliament.                                    prepared]
 RI10: Number
     of people
gaining access
                 PA16
   to improved
                           HS     0     300,000     230,731       77%     Substantial
    water and
                 PA17
     sanitation
services under
  the program.
RI11: National
     data and
   information                                    Information
       system                                     available for
                                Not in
     capturing  PA17 (ii) S             In place   WASREB Achieved          High
                                place
       gender                                      regulated
disaggregated                                       facilities
    WSS data
      annually
RI12: Proportio
 n of the Water
    Resources
    Authority's
        annual
                PA17 (iii) HS   20%       70%         58%         76%     Substantial
operating costs
      financed
 through water
    abstraction
    revenues.



                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



 RI13: Number
   of poor and
    vulnerable
   households
                   PA18
     covered
                             HS 223,968 1,000,000 1,696,624           192%         High
     through
                   PA19
   government
financed health
    insurance
    subsidies.
RI14: Capacity
  to respond to
  public health
   events and
  emergencies      PA19     HS      43%       65%         57%         63.6%       Modest
 based on IHR
 States Parties
      Annual
Reporting Tool.

PDO1: Strengthening fiscal management

RI1 was directly attributable to PAs 1-2 in that they established the legal basis and implementation roadmap for
the E-GP platform on which achievement of RI1 depended. The transparency represented by procurement of all
goods and services on that platform related directly to the objective of strengthening fiscal management. The
criterion was readily measurable. Relevance of RI1: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI2 was fully attributable to PAs 3-4, which set up the regulations and implementation conditions for tracking the
number of projects complying with PIM regulations. PD2 (para. 49) stated that “a PIM Information System under
the GESDeK PforR will enable the National Treasury to monitor the compliance of proposed and existing
projects with the PIM regulations.” Compliance was readily measurable and suitable to reflect the objective of
strengthening fiscal management. Relevance of RI2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI3 was fully attributable to PAs 5-6, which established the rules and guidelines for implementing the Treasury
Bonds Benchmark program, and it directly measured contribution to the objective of strengthening fiscal
management. Nevertheless, monitoring and evaluation was compromised by the imprecise wording (“minimum
benchmark bond size”) and contradictions between how the targets were stated in the PD Annexes (“Bonds with
remaining maturity up to 5 [10] years”) and in the text (“remaining maturity of up to five years…more than five
years”; PD1, para. 4.14; PD2, para. 52). Relevance of RI3: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PDO2: Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector while placing Kenya on a green
energy path



RI4 was attributable to PA7 and PA8 sub-action (ii), which enabled KPLC to adjust its revenue streams closer to
meeting total revenue requirements, consistent with the objective of strengthening operational efficiency. It
indirectly reflected improved management capability to implement reforms, associated with PA8 sub-action (i) to

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



competitively recruit a new Managing Director, as well as PA8 sub-action (iii) to ease the costly debt burden.
Nevertheless, revenue trends could also be attributed to other factors. Measurement was straightforward.
Relevance of RI4: Satisfactory (S).

RI5 related directly to PA9a to restrict the pipeline of new generation capacity in order to better balance supply
and demand, and was easily monitorable during implementation. Delaying new projects could reasonably be
attributed to the revised FiT policy. Measurement was straightforward. Relevance of RI5: Highly Satisfactory
(S).

RI6 tracked success in achieving a green energy path in terms of reduced reliance on fossil fuels while taking
actions (supported by PAs 9b, 10 and 11) to control costs of green energy and minimize excess electricity
generation capacity and thereby strengthen operational efficiency in the sector. While readily measurable,
changes in fossil fuel generation could also be attributed to other factors affecting demand for and supply of
electricity (e.g., droughts). Relevance of RI6: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

RI7 directly tracked and was attributable to the impact of the Public Private Partnerships Act (supported by
PA12) in improving project selection and implementation processes. It specified the milestones that qualified for
inclusion, and hence was readily monitorable during implementation. Relevance of RI7: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

PDO3: Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human capital

RI8 tracked implementation of and was reasonably attributable to those aspects of the NDC and Environmental
Management and Coordination Bill (supported by PAs 13-14) related to enhancing the coordination framework
between national and county governments on environmental management (PD1, para. 4.28). The number of
County Climate Change Action Plans was readily measurable. Relevance of RI8: Satisfactory (S).

RI9 was directly attributable to the National Rating Bill supported by PA15, and the number of County Maps was
readily measurable. Although it did not reflect the ultimate objective of increasing property taxes at the county
level, it represented an important step in that direction and in improving transparency in land valuation (PD2,
para. 73). Relevance of RI9: Satisfactory (S).

RI10 directly measured the intended result of the various actions supported by PAs 16-17 to improve the policy,
regulatory and institutional framework for increased access to water and sanitation services. Relevance of
RI10: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI11 tracked whether approval of the National Water and Sanitation Investment Program (NAWASIP),
supported by PA17(i), resulted in “a national data and information system that captures gender-disaggregated
WSS data,” which was intended to strengthen the governance framework (PD2, paras. 78-79) and represented
a step toward the ultimate objective of redressing gender inequities. Relevance of RI11: Satisfactory (S).

RI12 indicated the degree of success of PA17 (especially sub-action [iii] regarding charges and levies) in
strengthening the (fiscal) capacity of the Water Resources Authority (WRA), thereby substantially contributing to
the objective of strengthening the governance framework. Relevance of RI12: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

RI13 directly indicated the extent to which the institutional reforms supported by PAs 18-19 achieved the
intended result of universal health coverage by increasing health insurance coverage of poor and vulnerable
households. Relevance of RI13: Highly Satisfactory (HS).


                                                                                                     Page 14 of 22
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



  RI14 reflected the extent to which consolidation of public health emergency preparedness by establishing the
  Kenya National Public Health Institute (PA19) yielded the intended result of improving capacity to respond to
  public health emergencies, thereby contributing significantly to the objective of strengthening the governance
  framework. PD2, para. 83, explained how the indicator was calculated, using the International Health
  Regulations (IHR) States Parties Annual Reporting Tool. Relevance of RI14: Highly Satisfactory (HS).



  Rating

  Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               Strengthening fiscal management.

               Rationale
               RI1 as stated was not achieved (ICR, Table 1): no MDAs were able to “procure all of their goods and services
               on the E-GP platform” inasmuch as it was not yet operational. The ICR (para. 40) attributed the delay to
               budget reallocations during the COVID-19 pandemic and to extension of the pilot phase. The ICR (para. 40
               and Table 1) noted that 12 out of 14 “phase 1 modules” have been piloted and that “development of phase 2
               modules is expected to start in January, 2025.”* The complementary Program to Strengthen Governance for
               Enabling Service Delivery and Public Investment provided additional evidence that the e-procurement Module
               on Registration and Procurement Planning was fully piloted, an E-GP Project Implementation Unit was
               established, and a roadmap for upgrading e-procurement system had been agreed. Achievement Rating
               RI1: Modest.

               RI2 was substantially surpassed in number, although the ICR did not indicate whether the portion of the
               criterion specifying that “all new projects included in the Budget” be in compliance with the PIM regulations
               (PD2, Annex 2) was met (in addition to 30 ongoing projects). Achievement Rating RI2: High.

               RI3 specified targets for two categories of bond maturities, and the ICR (Table 1) reported on three maturities.
               One of the category targets was fully achieved (120%), the other substantially (83%), yielding a combined
               rating of Substantial. Achievement Rating RI3: Substantial.



               Rating
               Satisfactory



               OBJECTIVE 2

                                                                                                                 Page 15 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)




Objective
Strengthening operational efficiency in the electricity sector while placing Kenya on a green energy path.

Rationale
RI4 was exceeded in that KPLC’s revenues as a proportion of total revenue requirements rose from 87
percent to 90.7 percent, or 122 percent of the targeted 3 percentage-point increase. The ICR (para. 46) did
not indicate the sources of the revenue increase or speculate on the relative impact of the four sub-actions of
PAs 7-8. Achievement Rating RI4: High.

RI5 was achieved by deferring procurement of a planned 522MW project, which exceeded the target of
deferring 400MW of new capacity to better match supply and demand. Achievement Rating RI5: High.

RI6 tracked the reduction in the share of electricity generated from fossil fuels, with a targeted reduction of 6
percentage points (from 11 to 5 percent). Although the ICR and TTL credited the government with remaining
committed to progress in reducing fossil fuel energy generation despite setbacks associated with
unprecedented drought, actual reduction was only 1.26 percentage points, or 21 percent of the target – below
the benchmark of 25 percent to receive a Modest rating. Achievement Rating RI6: Negligible.

RI7 was substantially exceeded in that 26 (as against a target of 10) PPP projects had met at least one of the
specified milestones in the wake of amendments to the PPP Act to streamline processes. Achievement
Rating RI7: High.



Rating
Moderately Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
Strengthening the governance framework for Kenya’s natural and human capital (environment, land, water
and healthcare).

Rationale
RI8 was exceeded in terms of the number of County Climate Change Action Plans developed. The ICR (para.
49) provided no further information on the extent of participatory methodologies involved or how these plans
might feed into achievement of national climate change mitigation objectives. Achievement Rating RI8:
High.

RI9 was not achieved in that “the maps have not been submitted to Parliament due to lack of clarity on
processing steps and budgetary constraints” (ICR, para. 49). Nonetheless, the ICR (Table 1) provided
evidence of some progress in that 27 county value maps had been prepared (against a target of 15 maps
submitted) and the remaining 20 were in process. Achievement Rating RI9: Modest.



                                                                                                  Page 16 of 22
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



                  RI10 was substantially achieved through an increase in access to WSS by 230,731 people, 77 percent of the
                  target, which can be associated with the changes in policy, regulations and management supported by PAs
                  16-17. Achievement Rating RI10: Substantial.

                  RI11 was satisfied by the Government rolling out the National Data and Information System to capture annual
                  gender-disaggregated data on WSS access. Achievement Rating RI11: High.

                  RI12 was substantially achieved through an increase in the cost coverage ratio of water abstraction revenues
                  from 20 to 58 percent – 76 percent of the targeted increase. The ICR (para. 51) reported that the Senate
                  challenged the water use and conservation levies. It did not state whether the Attorney General has actually
                  published them (raising some question as to whether the improved cost coverage can be attributed to the
                  levies). Achievement Rating RI12: Substantial.

                  RI13 was exceeded in terms of the increase in the number of households receiving health insurance
                  subsidies. This was associated with passage of the National Social Health Fund Act in 2023, which replaced
                  the National Health Insurance Fund bill originally supported under PA18 and which was well aligned with the
                  goal of universal health coverage (ICR, para. 52). The majority were covered under the “Linda Mama” policy
                  for free maternity care (ICR, paras. 53 and 61). Achievement Rating RI13: High.

                  RI14 achievement was constrained by “insufficient state capacity and lack of funding” (ICR, para. 52), limiting
                  the improvement in public health emergency response capacity (according to the specified Reporting Tool)
                  from 43 percent baseline to 57 percent in 2023. This represented 63.6 percent of the targeted improvement,
                  hence Modest achievement (i.e., below two-thirds of target; contrary to the ICR’s rating of Substantial [Table
                  1; para. 52]). Achievement Rating RI14: Modest.



                  Rating
                  Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

Almost half of the RIs were rated as High achievement. Although three were Negligible as of 2023, additional
evidence on partial progress enabled two to be uprated to Modest. This resulted in Satisfactory ratings for PDO1
and PDO3, while PDO2 was Moderately Satisfactory (on the basis of one Negligible RI achievement), yielding
an overall rating of Satisfactory.



Overall Efficacy Rating


                                                                                                                   Page 17 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

Both PA relevance and Efficacy are rated as Satisfactory


a. Rating

Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

Political resistance to increased taxes inhibits Kenya’s ability to reach fiscal management goals. The
2024 Finance Bill introduced tax increases needed to reduce the fiscal deficit and access IMF funding to help
recover from Kenya’s debt crisis, but it was withdrawn following widespread protests and ensuing violence. The
latest tax bills would raise only half as much additional revenue, if passed and sustained despite ongoing
resistance (“Kenya's Latest Tax Pitch,” Forbes, Nov. 18, 2024). Failure to sustain IMF support would likely
undermine Kenya’s ability to meet bond issuance targets. The ICR (para. 75) noted that continued failure to
meet fiscal revenue targets “could risk its fiscal consolidation objectives” – potentially aggravated by
macroeconomic volatility and rising interest rates (which would increase borrowing costs).

Eliminating “excess supply” and relying increasingly on variable “green” energy raise the risk of
periodic electricity shortages. The variability of wind and solar energy mean that, even when there is nominal
“excess capacity,” actual “’firm capacity’ that can respond to system conditions as needed [may mean]
insufficient reserves to meet peak demand.”[1] Pursuing operational efficiency and cost-recovery objectives will
have to be balanced against the ability to deliver energy reliably and consistently.

Increasing climate hazards may affect achievement of climate-related and WSS objectives (ICR, para.
76). Kenya’s predominantly arid/semi-arid ecosystem and reliance on agricultural is especially vulnerable to
significant annual fluctuations in precipitation, raising the risks of both droughts and floods and of lack of access
to WSS, especially for the poor.

[1] Murefu Barasa and Mark Thurber, “The Illusion of ‘Excess Capacity’ in Kenya,” Energy for Growth Hub, May
20, 2024: https://energyforgrowth.org/article/the-illusion-of-excess-capacity-in-kenya/




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



Results chain and indicators

The ICR (paras. 23, 28 and 32) asserted that the PAs had a “clear and credible result chain link” to each of the
PDOs, “grounded in analytical work,” without providing specific explanations as to how each action would lead to
the intended outcomes. Although the PDs did not provide an explicit overall theory of change, they did explain
the “expected results” of each action in detail, including how the output/outcome would contribute to
achievement of the PDO. The RIs were generally well linked to the actions being supported, and readily
measurable.

Identification and mitigation of risks

The design team was acutely aware that the “high uncertainty generated by the ongoing pandemic” aggravated
the already substantial economic, political, governance and institutional capacity risks (PD1, para. 6.1; PD2,
para. 115). Complementary operations by the WBG and other development partners were viewed as helping to
mitigate the potential impact of these risks on implementation of reforms, along with the government’s “track
record of undertaking difficult reforms” (PD1, paras. 6.2 and 6.4). PD2 (para. 118) also noted the risk of
stakeholder opposition to increased water rates, as well as risks associated with the political cycle.

Consultation with stakeholders and development partners

PD2 (para. 88) stated that the legislative reforms supported by this DPF series underwent extensive stakeholder
consultations, with comments and subsequent modifications posted on a public website. The underlying
Medium-Term Plan and Economic Recovery Strategy likewise involved substantial consultations at both national
and county levels, as well as with the Development Partners Group (PD1, paras. 4.56-4.57). The European
Union and the African Development Bank provided complementary budget support, with at least nine bilateral
development partners providing additional “financial and non-lending support in several areas covered by the
operation (public investment management, public financial management, health, education, land)” (PD1, para.
4.59).



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

Adaptation

DPF2 adjusted to evolving policy priorities and easing uncertainty regarding evolution of the COVID-19
pandemic by consolidating the original Pillars 3 and 4 and shifting the human capital focus toward the health
(rather than education) sector (ICR, para. 71; PD2, para. 5). Otherwise, PAs in PD2 generally followed through
on ITs in PD1, except that PA8 adapted to growing resistance to water rate increases by shifting the focus from
revenues to cost recovery in pursuit of increased cost coverage. PD2 (para. 64) responded to the slow




                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



development timeline for PPPs by supporting the Public-Private Partnerships Act to enhance and clarify project
selection and implementation processes.

Monitoring

The ICR (para. 72) stated that WBG staff in the field and Global Practices supervised the operations in
collaboration with government officials from a wide range of ministries and agencies, under the coordination of
the National Treasury and Planning as the Implementing Agency.



Rating

Highly Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

In the difficult and uncertain context of the COVID-19 pandemic and its social, economic and fiscal
consequences, the WBG team, working with the government and development partners, designed a coherent
approach to a wide range of (often interrelated) reforms, well-sequenced over the two operations. The series
was consistent with complementary operations and laid the groundwork for further support through a
subsequent DPF series. The PAs and RIs were generally satisfactory, with clear lines of attribution. Risks were
fully assessed and mitigated to the extent feasible, in particular through complementary operations and TA.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Highly Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

It is too early for evidence to be available on possible social and poverty impacts.



b. Environmental

It is too early for evidence to be available on improvements in resilience to climate change and other external
shocks.



c. Gender

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)




It is too early for evidence to be available on impacts on women’s access to WSS.



d. Other

None



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR was complete in coverage, results-oriented, internally consistent, and followed the guidelines. It
provided a clear review of the context and the rationale for changes during implementation. It generally linked
results to objectives, although more detailed explanations would have been useful of results chains, upgraded
ratings in cases where targets were not achieved as originally stated, and sources of evidence.

The ICR (like the PDs) did not present an overall theory of change or results chain – which would have been
useful to help understand how the different parts of this rather large and complex set of actions are interrelated
and expected to lead to the desired outcomes. The ICR (paras. 23, 28 and 32) simply asserted that the PAs had
a “clear and credible result chain link” to each of the PDOs and were “grounded in analytical work.” It is
important to provide specific explanations as to how each action (especially if only partially achieved) would lead
to the intended outcomes, including by setting up for further implementation support in subsequent operations.

In two cases where the target as specified was not met (RIs 1 and 9), the ICR did introduce some additional
information regarding qualitative steps toward implementation, but without sufficient explanation as to why these
measures would justify a higher rating than “not achieved.” It tended to take explanations of delays and
expected actions as sufficient to upgrade the rating (e.g., para. 40). In upgrading a rating that was not achieved
as of the target date, it is important to state explicitly that the rating is based on measures taken after the target
date and that the barriers causing delays have been resolved (e.g., para. 49).

The Lessons Learned were clear, useful, and largely based on evidence presented in the ICR.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
 Ratings                          ICR                    IEG
                                                                                    Disagreement/Comments
 Outcome                          Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                    In the difficult COVID-affected
 Bank Performance                 Satisfactory          Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                    environment, the WBG designed

                                                                                                       Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     KE: ACCELERATING REFORMS DPF (P175251)



                                                                                and adapted a coherent
                                                                                approach to a wide range of
                                                                                reforms, well-sequenced over
                                                                                the two operations. No evident
                                                                                weaknesses in either design or
                                                                                implementation phases.
Relevance of Results
                                ---                   Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICRR draws the following lesson from those provided in the ICR (paras. 78-82):

A DPF series is an effective tool for building consensus in an uncertain environment. The DPF series
provided a framework and justification for the necessary consultations with the various stakeholders. Especially
because it was built on a previous DPF series and provided a foundation for further DPFs, this DPF series
helped to mobilize consensus around a large policy matrix by charting a course while allowing flexibility for
modifications that were made during implementation (e.g., regarding PPP processes, land valuation, and
changing priorities from education toward health). By establishing a framework for dialogue with the relevant
government agencies, the DPF series facilitated review of priorities with respect to improving cost recovery in
electricity provision that shifted actions from emphasis on raising tariffs to the less fraught area of cost
reduction.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
