     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



                                                                              Report Number: ICRR0024354

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P165453                                  ProEnergia

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                               Energy & Extractives


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                            143,532,481.97

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2019

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                   0.00                                  64,527,890.00

 Revised Commitment                                    0.00                                  64,527,890.00

 Actual                                                0.00                                  62,188,169.43




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Burcin Pamuksuz            Dileep M. Wagle            Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the International Development Association (IDA) Financing Agreement (p.5) dated May 24,
   2019, and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, p. 17) the project development objective (PDO) was “to
   increase access to electricity service in Mozambique”.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?

                                                                                               Page 1 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  11-Mar-2020

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   Mozambique Energy for All (ProEnergia) Project was to support the implementation of the first phase of the
   National Electrification Strategy (NES) of the Government of Mozambique (GoM) by financing the
   construction of on-grid and off-grid infrastructure and technical assistance for sustainable provision of
   electricity services. The project consisted of three components:

   A. Peri-urban and Rural Electrification (estimated cost at appraisal, US$126 million; revised cost at the
   first restructuring, US$98 million; revised cost at the second restructuring, US$132.51 million; actual cost at
   closing, US$136.9 million). This component was to finance the design, procurement of materials and
   construction works required to electrify all participating households and businesses in the project target
   areas located close to existing electricity networks (in peri-urban and rural areas). The GoM and the
   Electricity of Mozambique (EDM) which is the state-owned vertically integrated utility in charge of
   generation, transmission and distribution countrywide, had identified twenty target districts which were to be
   electrified through a combination of densification and short-range grid extension. Accordingly, under this
   component, activities of construction of about 1,500 km of MV lines, installation of 1,200 distribution
   transformers, extension of 3,500 km of low voltage distribution lines and installation of about 11,000 km in
   service drops (users’ connections) were to be implemented. Also, ready boards were to be installed in low-
   income households which were unable to pay for the internal wiring. As a result of the activities
   approximately 250,000 households were to be connected to electricity and about 50 percent of the new
   connections were expected to be made in the five poorest provinces of Mozambique. The EDM was to
   implement this component.

   B. Off-grid Electrification (estimated cost at appraisal, US$13 million; revised cost at the second
   restructuring, US$0.58 million; actual cost at closing, US$0.3 million). This component was comprised to
   two sub-components and was to be implemented by the Energy Fund (FUNAE) in charge of promoting the
   development and use of different forms of low-cost energy and sustainable management of energy
   resources. B.1 Mini-grid Electrification: This activity was to support the electrification of areas where
   electricity supply through mini-grids represented the least-cost option from the country’s perspective. The
   locations of mini-grids were to be informed by the results of the Mozambique Geospatial Options Analysis
   towards Universal Electrification (funded by Energy Sector Management Assistance Program -ESMAP)
   which included the initial site identification made by FUNAE. This subcomponent was to pilot a public-
   private partnership in which FUNAE was to finance and construct distribution infrastructure of the mini-grids
   and private sector was to be contracted to supply power to them. Accordingly, six locations were selected
   out of the thirteen potential sites identified by FUNAE for construction of mini-grids in accordance with the
   criteria identified in the NES. In addition, this sub-component was to finance preparatory studies to: (a)
   confirm the sites through further feasibility studies and techno economic analysis; (b) promote productive
   and efficient use of energy by users; and (c) provide technical, legal, and procurement support to effectively

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ProEnergia (P165453)



design the bidding documents and supervise the construction of the mini-grid assets. B.2 Off-grid Results-
based-financing Facility (RBF): This sub-component was to support the expansion of off-grid energy
market in Mozambique through RBF Facility. The RBF was to offer financial incentives to distributors for the
sale of high-quality products, including Solar Home Systems (SHS) and potentially other energy
technologies such as solar water pumps for agriculture and efficient cooking solutions on a first-come, first-
served basis. The RBF was to cover expansion costs, including finding and training new agents, improving
supply chains, and acquiring new customers. The RBF was to disburse funds based on verified results by
an independent verification agent, through a Fund Manager. These agents were to be contracted by
FUNAE.

C. Technical Assistance and Implementation Support (estimated cost at appraisal, US$9 million; revised
cost at the second restructuring, US$8.48 million; actual cost at closing, US$7.2 million). This component
comprised two subcomponents for technical assistance (TA) to EDM (C-1 for US$6 million) and to FUNAE
(C-2 for US$3 million). Subcomponent C.1 Technical Assistance to EDM. This activity was to finance (a)
capacity building and implementation support, project management expenses (external audits), oversight of
implementation activities such as environmental and safeguard instruments, health and safety aspects, and
enhancement of procurement procedures; (b) community engagement programs which was to include a
gender-sensitive connection campaign; (c) a Young Professionals Program (YPP) at EDM to develop a new
generation workforce; and (d) gender mainstreaming in EDM to increase gender participation through
specific initiatives. Subcomponent C.2 Technical Assistance to FUNAE. This activity was to finance
project management-related expenses such as the financing of external audit, oversight of implementation
of the environmental and safeguard instruments for the investment components, as well as the oversight of
health and safety aspects during construction and operation. In addition, FUNAE, with support from
contracted consultants, was to develop a business strategy aligned with the roles it had been assigned
under the NES. Also, capacity building and consultancy services related to the development of Lighting
Global quality standards for Solar Home Systems (SHS) and the procurement of an independent verification
agency for the RBF facility were to be financed under this sub-component.

Revised components:

      Component A: Due to delays in the signature of the Administrative Agreement (AA) with the EU, it
       was understood that the EU contribution for the first disbursement for Component A would not be
       realized. In this context, the project was restructured the first time. The restructuring allowed the
       project team to proceed with the contracts without the expected EU contribution. With this, the team
       avoided any risk of delays or overcommitting funds. The reduction in the availability of funds (US$28
       million being removed from the MDTF Contribution) resulted in a reduction of the project scope,
       including a reduction of new on-grid connections. The selection of new customers to be excluded
       from the project was to be done in close coordination with EDM, to ensure that no previously
       selected provinces are excluded from the project. The restructuring reduced the MDTF contribution
       for Component A to from US$66 million to US$38 million; total cost of the Component A from
       US$126 million to US$98 million. In accordance with the reduction of funds, targets for PDO
       indicator and intermediate results indicators (IRIs) for Component A were reduced. However, once
       the framework agreement was completed and the AA between the EU and IDA was signed, the task
       team included these funds for the project at the second restructuring of the project. The scope of
       Component A was scaled up, total cost was increased to US$132.51 million (this amount included
       reallocated funds of US$11.57 million from Component B) and the reduced targets at the first
       restructuring were increased beyond the original targets of the project.


                                                                                                 Page 3 of 19
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    ProEnergia (P165453)



        Component B: As a result of delays in completing feasibility studies for mini-grids, findings of their
         economic nonviability to the private sector and the lack of a clear business model for their
         implementation Component B was dropped. Accordingly, a total of US$11.57 million (US$8.77
         million from sub-component B1 and US$2.8 million from sub-component B2) was reallocated to
         Component A. The Component B activities were transferred to the next phase of the project
         (Sustainable Energy and Broadband Access in Rural Mozambique Project- ProEnergia Plus,
         P175295, approved on December 14, 2021). The relevant IRIs were dropped. A new IRI (Feasibility
         studies for mini-grids completed) was added to ensure the completion of the preparatory works for
         the min-grids.

  Further details regarding the Restructurings are provided under section 2.e below.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost: The project cost was originally estimated at US$148 million; total of SDR 58 million (US$82
  million equivalent) IDA grant and US$66 million grant from the Mozambique Energy for All Multi-Donor Trust
  Fund (MDTF). Total cost of the project was revised down to US$120 million at the first restructuring and
  then increased to US$141.57 million at the second restructuring. The actual cost at closing was US$144.4
  million. The difference was due to exchange rate changes.

  Financing: The project was to be financed through an IDA grant with joint co-financing for Component A in
  the form a grant from the Mozambique Energy for All MDTF. The MDTF was comprised of contributions
  from the Kingdom of Norway, the Government of Sweden and the European Union (EU). Components B
  and C were to be financed solely by the IDA grant. At appraisal the MDTF grant amount was estimated at
  US$66 million and IDA grant amount at SDR 58 million (US$82 million equivalent). By project closing, the
  project disbursed US$144.4 million.

  Borrower contribution: Borrower contribution was not foreseen and none was materialized by project
  closing.

  Restructurings: The project had three restructurings:

        First Restructuring (March 11, 2020, Level 2): The restructuring included: (i) removal of the
         existing disbursement condition related to the partial protection zone (PPZ) which ensured that the
         rights of people located within the PPZ were not adversely affected by electricity distribution
         networks being supported under Component A of the Project and introduction of a new covenant
         consistent with the advice received from World Bank management; and (ii) adjustment of project
         funds allocated to Component A and the results framework to reflect delays in signing the AA
         between the EU and World Bank as part of the MDTF that would result in lower results under the
         PDO indicator and Component A intermediate indicators. Accordingly, the funds allocated to
         Component A were reduced from US$126 million to US$98 million. In addition, the PDO indicator of
         the number of people provided with new or improved electricity serviced was reduced from
         1,360,000 to 1,085,000.
        Second Restructuring (November 29, 2022, Level 2): The framework agreement was completed
         and the AA between the EU and the World Bank was signed on November 24, 2020. As a result of
         this development, the task team included funds in the amount of US$28 million back to project’s
         financing. With the restructuring, the scope of Component A was scaled up, total estimated cost was

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



          increased to US$132.51 million (this amount included reallocated funds of US$11.57 million from
          Component B). The reduced PDO and IRI targets at the first restructuring were further increased
          beyond the original targets of the project. Regarding the Component B, due to the limited response
          from the market during the procurement of the RBF fund manager (sub-component B.2), and also to
          the change in GoM’s priorities and non-readiness of the feasibility studies for the 11 mini-grid sites
          (sub-component B.1), the implementation progress of Component B had been slow. Taking into
          account the project’s closing date, FUNAE and the World Bank team agreed to launch procurements
          of some of the activities under this Component under ProEnergia Plus. The US$2.8 million allocated
          to the RBF was re-allocated to Component A to cover EDM’s needs. For Component B.1, the
          uncommitted funds at the time of the restructuring (US$8.77 million), were re-allocated to
          Component A as well.
         Third Restructuring (December 20, 2023, Level 2): The restructuring extended the closing date of
          the project financing agreement by four months to April 30, 2024 to give additional time for
          completion of the activities under ProEnergia, utilization of 100% of funds allocated to the project,
          and to ensure a proper transition between ProEnergia and ProEnergia Plus in terms of storage of
          materials.

   Dates: The project was approved on March 28, 2019, and became effective on October 23, 2019. The
   original project closing date was December 31, 2023. During implementation, it was extended by 4 months
   (please see section on restructuring above for the reasons of project closing date extensions) at the third
   restructuring. The project closed on April 30, 2024.

   Reasons for undertaking split assessment of the project outcome: The ICR review implements a
   double split rating since the PDO target and the project scope narrowed at the first restructuring and again
   the project scope further narrowed by dropping full Component B at the second restructuring.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context and consistency with the country strategies and priorities: The PDO was well
aligned with the country strategies and priorities. Although access to electricity expanded significantly
between 2006 and 2018 and off-grid market was starting to emerge, at appraisal, about two-thirds of
Mozambicans did not have access to electricity (among the 20 countries in the world with largest access
deficit). The following power sector weaknesses were the main reasons for low access to electricity in the
country: i) weakness of the transmission system, connecting the northern and central systems but which did
not provide internal connection with the south; ii) a financially and operationally challenged public utility
(EDM); and iii) low quality of off-grid solar products. To ensure access to electricity the GoM launched
Electricity for All National Program and within the framework of a National Electrification Strategy (NES)
targeted to achieve universal access by 2030. The World Bank and other development partners supported
the GoM for development of NES. The PDO supported implementation of the initial stages of the NES, by
financing the construction of on-grid and off-grid infrastructure needed to provide electricity services to new
users and technical assistance needed for that purpose. In addition to the NES, the country’s Five- Year
Development Plan (2020–2024) also prioritized access to electricity as a key objective of the energy sector.



                                                                                                     Page 5 of 19
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      ProEnergia (P165453)



               World Bank strategy: The PDO was in line with the World Bank strategy, as defined in the Country
               Partnership Framework (CPF) FY23-27. Under the CPF’s second high level objective (inclusive job
               creation), Objective 6 was identified as “expanded infrastructure”. The energy sector supports this objective
               through a series of projects in the energy sector value chain, involving distribution infrastructure to
               accelerate access and the leveraging of private sector for implementation of off-grid investments. The
               project also supported the WBG’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity, and was aligned
               with the Sustainable Development Goal 7 (SDG7) and Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL). Providing
               electricity connections was to increase access to electricity services for poor households in rural and urban
               areas while enabling opportunities to study and work, contributing to raising the quality of life.

               Previous sector experience: At appraisal, EDM was already implementing two World Bank projects. The
               Energy Development and Access Project-EDAP (P108444) consisted of the incorporation by EDM of a set
               of management information systems (MIS) and other tools to improve efficiency, transparency, and
               accountability in operations in all business areas. The Power Efficiency and Reliability Improvement Project
               - PERIP (P158249) ensured effective application of functionalities of the incorporated MIS in processes and
               activities carried out in all business areas. These projects increased the capacity of EDM and prepared the
               institution for implementation of activities under the ProEnergia project and also NES. In this context, the
               outcome was consistent with progress over time as compared with earlier projects. While implementing
               electrification planning, the project was to use Geographic Information System (GIS) least cost tool. This
               tool was proven to be the best practice in electrification planning in sub-Saharan countries like Kenya,
               Nigeria and Rwanda.

               The PDO is substantially relevant in addressing the development problem to increase electricity access
               through grid and off-grid activities as well as technical assistance. It was also well aligned with the World
               Bank strategy and the needs in the country as identified in the NES and GoM’s ‘Electricity for All’ National
               Program. However, since the project supported implementation of the NES, the formulation of the PDO
               could have followed the complementary approach of NES and have been targeted to assess the
               contribution of grid and off-grid solutions on increased electricity access separately. On the other hand, the
               project’s outcomes were consistent with progress over time and complemented previous projects which had
               focused on addressing reliability and sustainability, whereas the current project was focused on
               connectivity.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to electricity service in Mozambique

                             Rationale

                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ProEnergia (P165453)



Theory of Change (ToC): To achieve the stated objective, the project provided technical assistance, capacity
building and necessary materials and construction works required to electrify all participating households and
businesses in the project target areas and in the selected locations where electricity supply was to be
provided through mini grids or off-grid solutions. The expected outputs included construction of about 1,500
km of MV lines, installation of 1,200 distribution transformers, extension of 3,500 km of low voltage
distribution lines and installation of about 11,000 km in service drops (users’ connections), creation of virtual
warehouses, and construction of combined solar PV/battery energy storage mini grids by competitively bid
IPPs, installation of stand-alone SHS and other technologies in isolated areas. The expected outcomes
included increased access to electricity services by public facilities, enterprises and households. The
anticipated long-term outcomes included the expansion of electricity supply and access, provision of
affordable reliable sustainable electricity services contributing to reduction of poverty and shared prosperity.
The critical assumptions were that the new contractual arrangements for goods and services would be
coordinated smoothly and the benefits of bulk purchases would overall contribute to an overall reduction in
unit costs despite the coordination challenges. In addition, the environment for the private sector would be
favorable enough for them to participate in construction of private off-grid electricity generation facilities.

Overall, the ToC reflected relevant activities that were directly connected to the outputs and intermediate
outcomes. However, since the project supported implementation of the NES, the formulation of the PDO (and
also the PDO indicators) could have followed a complementary approach to the NES and could have
addressed the contribution of grid and off-grid solutions on increased electricity access, separately.

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Within the scope of the project, 4,899 km of distribution lines was constructed or rehabilitated
       exceeding the original target of 3,800 km. In addition, five virtual warehouses (Target: 5 virtual
       houses) were created for use for the project. Target was achieved.
      By project closing, a total of 517,125 accounts were created, while exceeding the original target of
       267,800 accounts. The household connections established through the project were 514,862 at
       project closing (the original target was 250,000 at appraisal). The project provided 400 public facilities
       (schools, health centers, administrative buildings) with access to electricity services with grid
       connections. Target of 400 facilities was achieved.
      None of the output targets related to off-grid connections (i.e., number of households provided with
       access to electricity, number of off-grid companies mobilized, number of households provided with
       electricity connections by stand-alone systems) were achieved. The ICR (p.11) reports that the design
       of the off-grid component faced two distinct challenges: for mini-grids, there were limitations in the
       enabling environment for private-sector participation, and for SHS, the small size of the RBF was
       insufficient to attract experienced results-based facility managers. In addition, the output target for
       adoption of Lighting Global quality standards for solar home systems were not adopted and
       published.
      Through technical assistance and implementation support activities provided to the EDM, the project
       contributed to gender equality and justice. A gender-sensitive communication campaign was
       developed. The percentage of females hired under the Young Professionals Program (supported by
       the project to build a new-generation workforce with enhanced leadership skills and practical
       experience focused on electrification projects and project management disciplines.) at EDM was
       33.33% (Target 50%). With the support of the project activities, the EDM has developed and disclosed

                                                                                                   Page 7 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ProEnergia (P165453)



       a policy for gender equality and justice. Lastly, the ICR (p. 11) reports that according to EDM statistics
       about 52 percent of the project beneficiaries (1.3 million), were female because of the company’s
       focus on inclusiveness.
      The capacity building and institutional strengthening for FUNAE increased capacity of staff in
       preparation of feasibility studies and bidding documents for mini-grids, preparation of a roadmap for
       off-grid electrification, and in procurement procedures of the World Bank and the GoM requirements.
       This new capacity is expected to facilitate implementation of Component B activities which had been
       transferred to ProEnergia Plus. In addition, the ICR (p. 10) reports that the project provided training to
       53 FUNAE staff in various technical subjects, including the design, installation, and O&M of solar
       systems (in Brazil); climate finance (Portugal); and gender (Portugal).

Additional output achievements reported in the ICR without specified targets:

      The project contributed to the electrification of the five poorest provinces of Mozambique.
       Approximately 64 percent of the household connections (329,942) were in Zambezia, Nampula, Cabo
       Delgado, Niassa, and Sofala (five poorest provinces). This helped helping to reduce poverty by
       providing income earning opportunities and social services such as health and education. The GoM’s
       zero-connection cost policy facilitated the connection of 100 percent of households in the project
       areas (ICR, p. 11).

Outcomes:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      By project closing 2,574,310 people were provided with new or improved electricity service, thereby
       exceeding the original target of 1,360,000 people. The actual outcome exceeded the target because
       the household connections via the on-grid were much higher (514,862 connections) than the 250,000
       estimated at appraisal. This became possible due to the increased scope of distribution lines. The cost
       savings achieved as a result of EDM’s new implementation strategy (contracting separately for the
       infrastructure design, material, and construction - instead of the turnkey approach used in previous
       projects and procuring main distribution materials in bulk) and use of reallocated funds from
       Component B, enabled financing of the increased scope of distribution lines.



Overall, the project exceeded its target for PDO indicator and achieved the majority of output indicators.
There was no achievement with regards to increasing access through off-grid solutions. Based on this
assessment, the project’s efficacy in achieving its objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase access to electricity service in Mozambique

                                                                                                     Page 8 of 19
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   ProEnergia (P165453)




Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: This objective was not revised. The theory of change remained the same. However,
targets for the PDO and some of the output level indicators were revised downwards in line with the reduced
funding due to delayed signature of the Administration Agreement with the EU (First restructuring).

Outputs:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      Within the scope of the project 4,899 km of distribution lines was constructed or rehabilitated by
       exceeding the revised target of 2,900 km.
      By project closing a total of 517,125 accounts were created while exceeding the revised target of
       198,000 accounts. The household connections via grid were 514,862 at project closing (the revised
       target was 195,000 at the first restructuring). The project provided 400 public facilities (schools, health
       centers, administrative buildings) with access to electricity services with grid connections. This
       achievement exceeded the revised target of 300 facilities.

Outcomes:

Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

      The revised target of 1,085,000 people with new or improved electricity service was exceeded. The
       project achieved to provide service for 2,574,310 people.



Overall, the rating does not change after the first revision. The project exceeded its target for PDO indicator
and achieved the majority of its output indicators. No achievement could be reported with regards to
increasing access through off-grid solutions. Based on this assessment, the project’s efficacy in achieving its
objective is Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To increase access to electricity service in Mozambique

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change: This objective was not revised. However, the theory of change revised since Component
B for off-grid solutions was removed from the project. The project, as mentioned in Section 3 Relevance of
Objectives, supported implementation of the NES of GoM which had advocated a complementary approach

                                                                                                    Page 9 of 19
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               ProEnergia (P165453)



                            encompassing both grid and off-grid solutions. According to the PAD (p.14), if implemented, this component
                            was to facilitate creating a platform for private sector participation in energy service delivery and was
                            therefore accelerate delivery of energy solutions to the population. Accordingly, with the absence of off-grid
                            solutions in the project, the expected increase in the electricity access was to be achieved through grid
                            solutions only. Although, with the second revision the PDO target and output the targets for grid electrification
                            were increased (beyond the original targets), the scope of the project shrank as Component B was not
                            implemented.

                            Outputs:

                            Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

                                  By project closing 4,899 km of distribution lines was constructed or rehabilitated by exceeding the
                                   revised target (increased back to the original at appraisal) of 3,800 km.
                                  Project created a total of 517,125 accounts while exceeding the revised target of 320,000 accounts
                                   (second restructuring). The project provided 400 public facilities (schools, health centers,
                                   administrative buildings) with access to electricity services with grid connections. This achievement
                                   exceeded the revised target of 30 facilities only. According to the ICR, the target of public facilities was
                                   revised to only 30 because EDM had reported difficulties in connecting customers due to payment of
                                   connection costs and fewer public facilities in the project areas than expected. However, by project
                                   closing with newly built networks, more public facilities were connected, resulting in the achievement
                                   of the original target (ICR, p.7).
                                  Feasibility studies for 10 mini-grids completed (New indicator).

                            Outcomes:

                            Achievements as reported in the Results Framework:

                                  The revised target of 1,600,000 people with new or improved electricity service was exceeded. The
                                   project achieved to provide service for 2,574,310 people. The off-grid component did not contribute to
                                   the PDO outcome indicator.

                            Overall, the rating does not change after the first revision. The project exceeded its target for PDO indicator
                            and achieved the majority of output indicators. However, off-grid solutions did not contribute to this result as
                            Component B was not implemented. On the other hand, the transfer of Component B activities to the
                            ProEnergia Plus project, and completion of relevant mini-grid feasibility studies under the project, indicate that
                            the expected outcomes are likely to be achieved by the implementation of ProEnergia Plus. Based on this
                            assessment, the project’s efficacy in achieving its objective is Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Revised Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                                                                                                                                Page 10 of 19
             Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
             ProEnergia (P165453)




         OVERALL EFFICACY
         Rationale
         The overall original efficacy is assessed as Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR1_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
         Under Revision 1, the overall efficacy is assessed as Substantial.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
         Substantial

 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Under Revision 2, the overall efficacy is assessed as Substantial



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



 5. Efficiency
Economic analysis: At appraisal, the analysis was based on standard cost-benefit analysis for investment
components, Component A and Component B. The technical assistance component (Component C) was not
included in the analysis due to the methodological challenges in quantifying its costs and benefits. The analysis
could not be replicated at closing since Component B was not implemented and transferred to ProEnergia Plus.
Within the scope of the analysis at appraisal, the benefits of providing access to electricity to 272,000 new
customers in targeted areas of Mozambique (250,000 through grid densification, 4,000 through mini-grids and
18,000 by incentivizing the SHS market) were assessed. Net economic and financial benefits were measured by
comparing the consumer benefits and savings gained from access to modern electricity services to the costs of
investment (grid, off-grid and SHS) and O&M of power infrastructure and supply of grid electricity to connected
households. At appraisal, the overall expected project economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at
17.4%. and NPV of US$84.2 million. When the environmental benefits through GHG abatement were included
the EIRR was to increase to 29.5% and NPV to US$187 million. At project closing, the cost-benefit analysis was
conducted for Component A only and for 514,862 households in the project target areas, predominantly with a

                                                                                                           Page 11 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ProEnergia (P165453)



high population density, located close to existing electricity networks (in peri-urban and rural areas). The ICR
estimated the overall project EIRR at 48% the NPV at US$369 million. The ICR (p. 26) reports that the economic
returns were high due to significant welfare gains of grid-connected households. However, a 20 percent
reduction in consumer benefits would still yield significant economic returns: an NPV of US$172 million and an
economic IRR of 25 percent. When environmental benefits were accounted for, the NPV of combined benefits
increased to US$534 million.

Administrative and operational efficiency: Administrative efficiency of the project varied across the
components. Component A was implemented efficiently as a result of the chosen implementation strategies
which resulted in cost savings. On the other hand, while implementing Component B significant inefficiencies
were experienced as a result of delays in completing feasibility studies for the mini-grids and the GoM’s decision
to prioritize use of funds allocated for mini-grids to mobile solar systems for internally displaced persons (IDPs).
In addition, limitations in the enabling environment for private-sector participation was a factor for cancellation of
sub-component B.1. For SHS (sub-component B.2), the small size of the RBF was insufficient to attract
experienced results-based facility managers. The failed procurement of an RBF manager and the subsequent
decision to reallocate the funding to component A also contributed to the non-completion of this sub-component.
Despite this reduction in scope of the project, its total cost did not change much.



Overall, the project had strong results from the economic analysis for Component A which exceeded estimated
results for Component A and B together at appraisal. On the other hand, the project had inefficiencies in
implementing Component B which resulted in non-completion/non-implementation of the relevant activities.
Based on these assessments, the efficiency of the project is rated Substantial.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                 Rate Available?             Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                        0
 Appraisal                                                   17.40
                                                                                         Not Applicable
                                                                                        0
 ICR Estimate                                                25.00
                                                                                         Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Given that both the original and revised objectives had highly relevance, substantial efficacy and efficiency
ratings, the overall outcome is rated as Satisfactory.


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 19
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      ProEnergia (P165453)




a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Financial Risk: The project’s financing risk is significant. To pursue electrification efforts and reach the
ultimate goal of electricity for all Mozambicans, GoM needs to ensure that sufficient financing would be
available for realization of grid and off-grid investments. This would require not only the necessary budget
allocations but also the continued support of development partners in this regard. Although the
implementation of follow-up projects financed by the World Bank and other development partners provides
continued to support GoM, the financial resources to be allocated by the GoM to the electrification activities
remains to be secured.

Government Ownership: This risk relatively low. The government is committed to implement its “electricity
for all” agenda. With this purpose, the government adopted its major policy document (NES) which has
brought clarity on the roles of each institution, including new implementation and financial model for
electrification. The government also engaged in new projects which support implementation of NES. In
addition, the GOM has committed to achieve a cost-reflective tariff which demonstrates GoM’s determination
to pursue the reform agenda.

Institutional Risk: This risk is relatively low. The EDM is experienced in implementing large capital
investments in transmission and distribution system expansion and upgrade financed by the World Bank and
other development partners. On the regulatory side, the formation of the Energy Regulatory Authority
(ARENE) will allow for more transparent regulatory process in the country; the World Bank is currently
supporting ARENE as part of the technical assistance provided on the PERIP.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was strategically relevant to the Government of Mozambique’s policies. The PDO was in line
  with the government’s priorities and the Bank strategies. The GoM’s ‘Electricity for All’ National Program
  within the framework of the NES targeted the achievement of universal access by 2030. The World Bank
  and other development partners supported the GoM for development of NES. The PDO supported
  implementation of initial stages of NES for increasing electricity access by financing the construction of
  on-grid and off-grid infrastructure needed to electricity services to new users and technical assistance
  needed for that purpose. The design of the project benefitted from lessons learned by similar utilities in
  the region, such as implementation of an innovative approach for the procurement of activities related to
  electrification, which replaced the use of Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) contractors
  for the separate procurement of materials in bulk and engineering and construction services. Following
  recent Sub-Saharan African experience in Kenya, Nigeria, and Rwanda, Geographic Information System


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



  least cost planning tools were used in the project. These tools supported the policy maker in balancing
  the need to maximize the efficient use of limited public resources with the objective of providing equal
  opportunities to those living in areas far away from the existing grid.

  The design of the project followed NES’s complementary approach of involving both grid and off-grid
  solutions. The project aimed to reduce poverty and to stimulate development by providing electricity
  connections to increase access to electricity services for poor households in rural and urban areas
  enabling opportunities to study and work, contributing to raising the quality of life, improving safety and
  economic interaction. Gender-disaggregated indicators were included in the results framework to assess
  the extent to which women equally benefitted from extended services and taking increased number of
  technical positions at EDM. Seven main risks were identified at the appraisal stage. These included,
  among others, political and governance risk, macroeconomic risks, sector strategies and policies. The
  PAD also defined specific measures to mitigate these risks. The overall risk was rated Substantial.
  However, the risks associated with implementing the new models for the off-grid component were not
  articulated at project appraisal (ICR, p.11). The enabling environment for private sector participation was
  not fully assessed. The small scale of the RFB by design, has negatively impacted operationalization of
  the facility. These factors constituted challenges for implementation of mini-grids and eventually led to the
  cancellation of Component B. EDM was responsible for the implementation of Component A and C.1.
  FUNAE was to implement Components B and C.2. The two PIUs one at each implementing agency were
  established. The Environmental and Social Safeguards Unit was a critical unit to ensure full compliance
  with World Bank safeguards requirements during the implementation of this project. As regards M&E,
  overall, this was simple and clear, but had some shortcomings related to PDO indicators. The results
  framework would have benefitted from PDO indicators which could have better assessed the impact of
  the implementation of grid and off-grid solutions separately on the electricity access.



  Overall, there were moderate shortcomings in articulation of risks associated with implementation of the
  off-grid component, assessment of the enabling environment for private sector participation and scale of
  the RBF which resulted in cancelation of the relevant component.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank conducted 11 supervision missions during the implementation of the project. Both the
 Implementation Status Reports (ISRs) and Aide Memoires were crucial to identifying challenges and
 obstacles that could negatively impact the progress such as delays in signature of MDTF, issues related to
 off-grid solutions. Despite the delayed mid-term review (December 2023), the project team maintained
 regular monitoring and evaluation of activities through supervision missions and informal meetings held by
 the different TTLs. The World Bank supported EDM and FUNAE to overcome constraints imposed by
 COVID-19 through encouraging direct payments to contractors/consultants, speeding up payments, and
 contributing to cost reductions for goods, works, and services. During the implementation, the project team
 identified shortcomings and problems in relation to Component B. The team acted proactively and
 cancelled Component B by restructuring the project at an early stage in order to ensure that

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



 implementation was progressing towards the achievement of the PDO. The issues in relation to M&E
 arrangements mentioned in the Quality at Entry Section above were however not addressed during
 implementation.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The PDO was simple yet broad and was assessed based on a single PDO outcome indicator. The PDO
 indicator was relevant and measurable. However, had the indicator been designed with sub-indicators (e.g.
 people provided with new or improved electricity services through grid and through off-grid solutions), by
 replicating the approach of the NES, this could have provided additional evidence on the impact of the
 project. The results framework included 16 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the progress of the
 different project activities. The IRIs were measurable and connected to the project activities. The project
 implementing units in each of the implementing agencies (EDM and FUNAE), were to collect and verify
 data. Supervision consultants hired by EDM were expected to support the PIUs in preparing progress
 reports and evaluating the progress of the works implemented by the contractors. By design, the main M&E
 instrument was a semiannual report prepared by the PIUs for each organization’s senior management and
 for submission to the World Bank. The reports were expected to include results indicators, with the
 implementation status of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Resettlement Action
 Plan (RAP), and health and safety plans.



b. M&E Implementation
  The PIUs at EDM and FUNAE prepared and shared semiannual progress reports and interim financial
  reports (IFRs) with the World Bank. The reports prepared by FUNAE were often delayed and not of
  sufficiently high quality (ICR, para 59); however, these improved during the course of project
  implementation. The ICR (p.13) reports that the reporting on E&S matters and grievance handling was
  less informative primarily because the engineers, contractors, and EDM did not have adequate staff to
  manage these matters at sites. Also, additional capacity and tools were required for oversight and M&E
  of some of the intermediate results. A number of indicators in relation to Component B were dropped
  from the results framework and targets of majority of intermediate indicators were increased. These
  changes could be made due to the reports and activity summaries that the implementation units provided.



c. M&E Utilization


                                                                                                   Page 15 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



  The M&E findings were regularly reviewed by the project team and the implementing agencies. The
  M&E framework enabled the project team to make appropriate adjustments to the implementation plan,
  depending on the status of physical progress. Accordingly, the project was restructured three times while
  amending the results framework and extending the implementation period. During the implementation,
  the M&E system was used as a tool to facilitate decision making and achieving the PDO by the
  implementing partners.



  Overall M&E design was simple and clear. However, it lacked some additional PDO indicators which
  could contribute to better assessment of the impact of the project on increased electricity access through
  grid and mini grid/off-grid solutions. Based on this assessment M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was assigned an environmental Category B. The project was expected to have positive
   environmental impacts. The electrification program was to help to displace the use of kerosene for lighting
   and was to also displace small diesel generators used by businesses. There were no significant and/or
   irreversible adverse environmental issues anticipated from the investment for electrification under
   Components A and B.

   The project triggered the following World Bank policies: (OP/BP 4.01) on Environmental Assessment,
   (OP/BP 4.04) on Natural Habitats, (OP/BP 4.11) on Physical Cultural Resources, and (OP/BP 4.12) on
   Involuntary Resettlement. During implementation, no additional safeguard policies were triggered. The ICR
   does not provide a clear information whether the safeguard policies triggered were complied with. The ICR
   (p. 13) reports that the main problems concerned occupational health and safety (OHS) and the delayed
   establishment and management of a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). During the implementation the
   project experienced 25 accidents, 4 of which resulted in fatalities (three were linked to the project and EDM
   carried out required measures to comply with obligations to the families). In mid-2023, a World Bank
   safeguard investigation mission was conducted. The mission found significant deficiencies in the
   management of OHS issues. Based on the mission findings, EDM assigned 25 OHS officers to the different
   project areas and organized ongoing training. In addition, the World Bank has provided EDM with templates
   for the content required for safeguard reporting and supported EDM to bring reporting in line with the E&S
   requirements. The establishment of GRM mechanism could take place only in 2022. Approximately 53
   complaints were registered through the GRM, almost half of which related to delays in paying salaries and
   electrifying neighborhoods. All grievances had been resolved by project closure (ICR, p.14).




b. Fiduciary Compliance

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 19
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     ProEnergia (P165453)



   Procurement: Both Components A and B involved procurement of goods and services. Under Component
   C, TA support to enhance capacities of the implementing agencies (EDM and FUNAE) was provided. The
   ICR reports that the management of procurement was satisfactory in EDM but weak in FUNAE. The
   implementing agencies’ internal procurement steps, such as bid evaluations, were often delayed, and the
   quality of documents contributed to further delays. Also, the requirement of the Tribunal Administrativo
   (Administrative Tribunal, AT) to translate procurement documents into Portuguese before bidding and
   awarding contracts further delayed processes. The procurement of an RBF manager failed since the small
   size of the RBF was insufficient to attract experienced results-based facility managers. These issues
   contributed to dropping of Component B. The procurement performance for the project was rated
   satisfactory in the final ISR.

   Financial management: The project finance teams at EDM and FUNAE had experience in managing
   World Bank–financed operations; however, internal control processes for the systems in both institutions
   had weaknesses. The preparation of budgets was delayed. The other issues encountered during the
   implementation were: lack of key information in the fixed asset registers such as serial numbers in both
   agencies; invoices without stamps indicating payments, belated delivery of IFRs. The ICR does not include
   any information regarding project external audits and whether the external auditors’ opinions were
   qualified. At project closure, the project financial management was rated moderately satisfactory in the final
   ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   None.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory          Satisfactory
                                                                                 Due to shortcomings in
                                                                                 articulation of risks, assessment
Bank Performance                Satisfactory          Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                 of the enabling environment in
                                                                                 relation to Component B.
Quality of M&E                  Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

                                                                                                   Page 17 of 19
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       ProEnergia (P165453)




The following lessons are from the ICR with some adaptation of language:

        A programmatic approach supported by a clear government vision can provide
         flexibility and can contribute to increased cumulative impact by the implemented
         projects. The NES and the Electricity for All program of GoM led the way for the WB to
         develop a series of three operations to supporting the target of GoM. The projects of
         ProEnergia, ProEnergia Plus, and lately ASCENT Mozambique (FY25) with each phase
         overlapping with the previous phase by two to three years allowed for flexibility in design to
         address challenges. In the case of ProEnergia, by shifting and scaling up the off-grid
         component to ProEnergia Plus (once it became clear that the amount allocated was
         insufficient and that mini-grids needed more time for the regulatory framework to be
         implemented), this allowed for lessons learned to be immediately applied to the next project,
         build capacity of the PIU to resolve challenges, and find efficiencies to leverage scale.
        Departure from a classic turnkey approach and willingness to incorporate innovative
         approaches can help save costs and increase effectiveness of the projects. The
         innovative approach implemented under ProEnergia, which separated contracts for
         engineering services, supply of materials (in bulk) and installation resulted in cost savings.
         This was a lesson learned by similar utilities in the region which have embarked on
         successful electrification programs there. Large economies of scale in the procurement of
         materials in bulk can also lead to lower cost per connection This was an important departure
         from the turnkey approach used by EDM in the past but it was critical for the project’s
         substantial contributions to access improvement.
        Deepening cooperation among the development partners through increased
         consultations during the implementation can increase the likelihood of success of
         future projects. The pooling of resources provided to EDM at scale under harmonized
         processes and procedures significantly improved the success of the current project.
         Increasing the cooperation beyond the joint financing and information sharing to increased
         consultations during implementation can further increase the success of the projects
         implemented in the future.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a comprehensive overview of the project. It is candid in explaining the issues encountered at
design and implementation phases. The report is concise and is consistent with the guidelines. It is also
internally consistent, and there is a logical linking of the various parts of the report (i.e., efficacy with bank
performance). The discussion in the Lessons and Recommendations section is, useful, and mostly based on
the evidence outlined in the ICR though the recommendations are not highly specific. In addition, the sections
on safeguards and fiduciary aspects should have provided more information on compliance



                                                                                                     Page 18 of 19
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  ProEnergia (P165453)




a. Quality of ICR Rating
   Substantial




                                                                    Page 19 of 19
