     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



                                                                               Report Number: ICRR0024406

1. Project Data



 Project ID                               Project Name
 P154698                                  Sustainable Landscape Management

 Country                                  Practice Area(Lead)
 Madagascar                               Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 COFN-C1540,IDA-59790,IDA-D8740           01-Aug-2022                                         96,351,143.49

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)
 23-Mar-2017                              30-Apr-2024

                                          IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         65,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          97,638,887.67                                               0.00

 Actual                                      88,100,094.91                                               0.00




 Prepared by               Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin         Avjeet Singh                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




 P157909_TBL
 Project ID                               Project Name
 P157909                                  GEF Sustainable Landscape Management ( P157909 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                         Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                 8660436.91

 Bank Approval Date                       Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                                Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



 23-Mar-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                        0.00                               13,699,083.00

 Revised Commitment                                         0.00                                9,739,083.00

 Actual                                                     0.00                                8,660,436.91




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Madagascar Landscape Management Project (PADAP) as
   articulated in the Financing Agreement (FA, page 5) was identical to the one stated in the Project Appraisal
   Document (PAD, paragraph 21) and aimed to:

   "Increase access to improved irrigation services and agricultural inputs, and strengthen the
   integrated management of natural resources in the Selected Landscapes by the local actors and to
   provide immediate and effective response to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency."

   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following four objectives:

   1. To increase access to improved irrigation services.

   2. To increase access to improved agricultural inputs.

   3. To strengthen the integrated management of natural resources in the selected landscapes by the local
   actors.

   4. To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by the following four components:




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



1. Information and planning (appraisal cost: US$3.50 million, actual cost: US$3.37 million). This
component was comprised of three sub-components:

1.1. Data collection and decision support tools. Activities under this component aimed to build the
analytical capacity, develop the planning tools, and promote a conducive policy environment that will allow
for a landscape management approach to be developed in detail and take root in the key line Ministries.

1.2. Preparation of selected Sustainable Landscape Management Plans. This sub-component aimed to
finance the preparation of Sustainable Landscape Management Plans (SLMPs) for the selected
landscapes.

1.3. Policies for landscape management. This sub-component aimed to contribute to the development of
policy notes on landscape management best practices; natural resources management transfer to local
communities; operations and maintenance of water infrastructure; value chain governance at the local level;
payment for environmental services.

2. Investments and capacity building in the selected landscapes (appraisal cost: US$US78.50
million, actual cost: US$68.48 million). This component aimed to support on-the-ground implementation
of the landscape approach. It aimed to facilitate and finance preparation, implementation, monitoring, and
scaling-up of investments to improve agricultural performance and effective natural resources management
in a landscape context, as well as build local structures’ capacity for effective and long-term adoption of
improved practices. It was comprised of three sub-components:

2.1. Capacity building. This sub-component aimed to establish the capacity of decentralized authorities
(namely, regions and municipalities) and deconcentrated authorities (the representatives of central
ministries in the regions) to effectively manage the landscape in an integrated way.

2.2. Productive investments. This sub-component aimed to address the constraints that cause low
productivity and lack of resilience of systems. They include physical infrastructure for irrigation, hillside
stabilization through terracing, gully erosion control structures, and feeder road maintenance.

2.3. Management of critical ecosystems and protected areas. This sub-component aimed to support
sector agencies, decentralized authorities and protected areas management agencies in managing key
conservation and protected areas in the selected landscapes.

3. Project Management Coordination and M&E (appraisal cost: US$10.60 million, actual cost:
US$10.65 million). This component covered the project management by the Project Implementation Unit
(PIU) and the Regional Implementation Unit (RIUs). The component would support all aspects of project
management, including fiduciary management, Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E), knowledge generation and
management, communication, and monitoring mitigation measures related to safeguards.

4. Contingency Emergency Response (appraisal cost: US$40.00 million, actual cost: US$39.09
million). This component would establish a disaster response contingency funding mechanism that could
be triggered in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, such as a natural disaster involving a formal
declaration of a national or regional state of emergency, or a formal request from the Government of
Madagascar in the wake of a disaster.

Revised Components. While the project underwent 4 Level II restructurings, none of the restructurings
triggered a revision of the PDO nor change in the composition of components. Significant changes, included

                                                                                                     Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



  activation of CERC as part of the first project restructuring, cancellation of unutilized funds, cost
  reallocations between components during the project implementation (see below for further details).



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$107.06 million. The actual cost according to the
  ICR Data Sheet (page 2) was US$96.35 million.

  Financing. The project was financed through US$65.00 million IDA credit, and US$13.70 million GEF
  Grant. The French Development Agency (AFD) co-financed the project with $26.60 million equivalent credit.
  The project also received US$40.00 million as IDA additional financing (AF). The total IDA financing was
  US$105.00 million. The actual amounts disbursed were as follows: US$67.83 million for the original IDA
  credit, US$19.86 million for the IDA AF, and US$8.66 million for the GEF Grant. The total disbursed World
  Bank amount was US$87.69 million.

  Borrower Contribution. Local beneficiaries were expected to contribute US$1.50 million. The project team
  explained that "no direct financial contribution had been provided by the borrower. However, the Ministry in
  charge of Agriculture provided office building to the projects for the field coordination and covered the water
  and electricity related expenses for the National PIU."

  Dates. The project was approved on March 23, 2017 and became effective seven months later on October
  31, 2017. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted in November 2021 (project team). The project closed
  on April 30, 2024 which was about 21 months beyond the original closing date on August 1, 2022.

  The project was restructured four times all Level 2 restructuring as follows:

  1. On December 22, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$18.66 million, in order to revise:
  components, results, disbursement estimates, disbursement and procurement arrangements, and reallocate
  funds between disbursement categories. This restructuring also responded to the Government of
  Madagascar's (GoM) request to trigger a portfolio-wide CERC in response to the outbreak of the COVID-19
  pandemic.

  2. On June 7, 2022, when the amount disbursed was US$65.81 million, in order to extend the GEF and AfD
  co-financing for twelve months from August 1, 2022, to August 1, 2023, and replenish the project financing
  with the IDA Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$40.00 million allocated to the CERC. The AF
  aimed to replenish funds for components 1 and 2 to fill the financing gap and allow the project to implement
  the originally planned activities.

  3. On May 4, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$79.97 million, in order to extend the loan closing
  date by nine months from August 1, 2023 to April 30, 2024, to compensate for delays in irrigation works due
  to weather conditions and price escalations.

  4. On June 27, 2024, when the amount disbursed was US$111.07 million, in order to cancel US$14.48
  million of unutilized funds (US$7.36 million of IDA, US$3.16 million of AfD, and $3.96 million of GEF).




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



   A split rating will not be applied because the PDO remained the same and the scope and ambition of the
   project did not change.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. The agricultural sector is the cornerstone of the economy in Madagascar as it
contributes about a third of the GDP. About 80% of the population is engaged in agriculture. However, over
half of the agricultural land is affected by severe soil degradation, inefficient water management, and limited
fertilizer use. The economic cost of land degradation in Madagascar is an average of US$141.4 million per
year, equivalent to five percent of agricultural, GDP. The sector also suffers from low productivity, primarily
due to subsistence farming practices, inefficient water management, limited fertilizer use, lack of advanced
technology and machinery, insufficient access to high-quality seeds and fertilizers, inadequate storage
facilities, poor infrastructure and land tenure challenges. To address these challenges, this project aimed to
apply an integrated approach of sustainable management of natural resources and enhanced agricultural
productivity considering the longer-term use of the surrounding environment.

Previous Bank Experience. This project drew on lessons from previous World Bank operations,
namely: Ethiopia's sustainable land management Project and Madagascar's Irrigation and Watershed
Management Project, where the later emphasized the importance of focusing on both irrigated perimeters
and their watersheds to advance agriculture. This led to the development of the irrigation and watershed
management concept that underpinned this project. Also, the project benefited from China's First Loess
Plateau Watershed Management Rehabilitation Project which emphasized the importance of incorporating
livestock management in project design. Overall, the Bank had relevant previous experience to design and
oversee the implementation of this project.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the World Bank's Country
Partnership Framework for Madagascar (CPF, FY2017-FY2021). The CPF prioritized rural development,
including improvement of agricultural productivity and the development of spatial planning tools, to achieve
sustainable poverty reduction. The project also directly contributed to the World Bank Group’s twin goals of
ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity through improving the livelihoods of poor rural
households.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the World Bank's current CPF for Madagascar (FY 2023
- FY 2027). Specifically, the CPF's objective 3.4 which aimed to improve natural resource management.
The CPF also emphasized that the implementation of PADAP project introduced a shift in the
conceptualization of rural development in the country. This was evident with the government and its
technical and financial partners recording an increasing reference to the criticality for integrated landscape
management.

Consistency with the Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with two of
the five strategic axes of Madagascar’s 2015-2019 National Development Plan, namely: (i) inclusive growth
and territorial anchoring of development (axis 3); and (ii) conserving natural capital and strengthening

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



               resilience to risks and catastrophes (axis 5). The project also supported several Madagascar sector
               strategies, including: (i) the Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Strategy; (ii) law 2015-003, which updates
               the Malagasy Environment Charter establishing the general principles for environmental management in the
               country; and (iii) the upcoming Environmental National Policy for Sustainable Development, which aimed at
               promoting healthy livelihoods and at increasing the contribution of environmental services to the national
               economy.

               At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the Watershed and Irrigated Perimeters Program under
               Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, Malagasy Environmental Charter of the Ministry of Environment and
               Sustainable Development, and the Integrated Water Resources Management Program of the Ministry of
               Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.

               Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. The PDO statement was complex as it embodied
               four separate objectives and was pitched at an ambitious level relative to the set targets and conditions on
               the ground. At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the current Bank strategy as well as the
               Government priorities. Sustainable land management is expected to continue to be a top priority for the
               government given its direct impact on agriculture and the economy in general. Therefore, Relevance of
               Objectives is rated High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To increase access to improved irrigation services.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported new or improved
                             irrigation/drainage services and the rehabilitation of irrigation works. This was expected to significantly
                             improved access to irrigation services. These activities were also expected to improve irrigation efficiency.

                             The expected outputs included: area (hectares) supported with improved irrigation and drainage, number of
                             irrigation systems managed by Water User Associations, and number of schemes rehabilitated.

                             The expected outcome was an increase in the area (ha) provided with irrigation and drainage services which
                             was expected to increase access to improved irrigation services.




                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by three critical assumptions: the project remains
aligned with the priorities of the government, governments commits to support communities and community
organizations, and trainers are able to reach farmers and beneficiaries.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the stated outputs and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. The critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO were logical and
realistic. However, the ToC lacked a connection between the supported activities and improving irrigation
efficiency as there were no indicators to capture this element.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      56 Irrigation systems were managed by Water User Associations (WUAs) exceeding the target of 25.
       However, only 8 WUA achieved a 70% minimum target recovery of operation and maintenance (O&M)
       fees.
      18 technical and feasibility studies were completed, 41 irrigation schemes were enhanced, cleaning
       works for 214,383 linear meters, improved water management for rice paddies across 3,315 ha.

Outcome

      By project completion, 20,666 ha were provided with improved irrigation and drainage services
       exceeding both the original target of 14,000 ha and the revised target of 20,600 ha (PDO outcome
       indicator target exceeded). Those included 16,078 ha of perimeters that have benefitted from
       rehabilitation works entrusted to companies, 1273 ha that have benefitted from installation of two
       motor pumps to
       ensure water flow for irrigation, and 3,315 ha rehabilitated at level of secondary canals through High
       Labor Intensity Works (HIMO) which were managed by Development Intervention Fund (FID).

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project slightly exceeded its revised PDO outcome target pertaining
to this objective. Also, the target on the intermediate results indicator was exceeded. The project-supported
rehabilitation work of concreting the canals was expected to reduce water leakage and infiltration. This was
expected to enable farmers to have more efficient water use, control, and equitable management and
distribution amongst stakeholders. The ICR (paragraph 20) reported that the rehabilitation works reduced
irrigation time as it only took a few hours for the water to reach
the end of the canal and covering the entire area, enabling equitable distribution. Therefore, the efficacy of
the project in achieving this objective is rated Substantial as the activities supported by the project contributed
to increasing access to improved irrigation services.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To increase access to improved agricultural inputs.

Rationale
                                                                                                     Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported the implementation of
various agro-ecological practices, soil conservation, land management, and erosion control activities.
These activities were expected to increase farm productivity and incomes.
These measures were also expected to enhance community adaptation to climate change, increase
resilience, and lower greenhouse gas emissions. The project also introduced improved practices of crop
breeding and crop rotations which improved soil fertility. The project worked with the Department of
Agricultural Extension (DRAE) to catalog farming practices, including through geo-referencing, analyze
cropping patterns, conduct experimental studies, and apply improvements. To increase access to expensive
agricultural equipment, the project created the concept of an Agricultural Equipment Management Center
(CGMA). These management centers were managed by local committees to lease the agricultural equipment,
provide technical support for operating, maintaining and repairing the equipment.

The expected outputs included: farmers reached with agricultural assets and services, number of farming
extension and mechanization stations, number of established emergence rice models, and number of farmers
including women benefiting from garden crops value chain.

The expected outcome was an increase in the number of clients who adopted improved agricultural
technologies promoted by project. All these measures and activities were expected to contribute to increasing
access to improved agricultural inputs.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by three critical assumptions: the project remains
aligned with the priorities of the government, governments commits to support communities and community
organizations, and trainers are able to reach farmers and beneficiaries.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the stated outputs and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. The critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO were logical and
realistic. However, the impact of the project activities on yield improvements was not captured.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      28,204 farmers were reached with agricultural assets and services including 8,148 women exceeding
         both the total target of 20,600 and the women target of 8,000.
        The project established 21 farming extension and mechanization stations which was below the target
         of 28.
        The project established 60 Agricultural Equipment Management Centers (CGMAs) across 5
         intervention landscapes, to alleviate the difficulties that local producers faced in acquiring essential
         agricultural equipment (no target provided).
        240 people, including 120 managers and 120 drivers, members of the CGMAs benefited from the
         theoretical and practical training
         provided by the Antsirabe training center.
        Mechanized transplanting was applied on 58.97 ha benefitting 117 producers in 117 demonstration
         plots (no targets provided).
         1430 farmer were registered trainers, of which 458 were women for promotion of dissemination of
         advanced agricultural technologies and mentor farmers (no targets provided).
        Rice emergence models were applied on 777 ha, benefitting 973 farmers (no targets provided).
        Garden crops value chain were applied on 43.47 ha, benefitting 542 farmers, including 184 women
         (no targets provided).

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)




      The project established 35 local entities (Agricultural Service Centers (CSAs), Deconcentrated
       Technical Services (STDs), and Territorial Decentralized Committee (CTDs) exceeding the target
       of 28. While 4 STDs were aimed to be established, the project established 77 STDs following
       significant demand for these activities.

Outcome

      By project completion, 14,149 clients (of which 4,462 were women) adopted an improved
       agricultural technology promoted by the project exceeding the target of 12,500 and substantially
       achieving the women target of 5,000.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its target for the PDO outcome indicator
pertaining to this objective. Also, several intermediate results indicators were exceeded, except for
the farming extension and mechanization stations which fell short. Based on the evidence provided in the
ICR and the above-mentioned achievements, it is plausible to assume that the project contributed to
increasing access to improved agricultural inputs. Therefore, the efficacy of the project in achieving this
objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To strengthen the integrated management of natural resources in the selected landscapes by the local actors.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported a Payment for Ecosystem
Services (PES) for conservation and restoration of landscape areas that were important for hydrological
services, biodiversity, and carbon to benefit both the landholders and environmental service users. The
project also developed and supported the implementation of Sustainable Landscape Management Plans
(SLMPs) which helped to accomplish the PES targets connecting land use and the desired environmental
services. The project established a Spatial Information System (SIS) which provided the basis for the
hydrological modeling necessary for the development and implementation of PES pilots. These hydrological
models were utilized to prepare river basin plans for project sites to identify critical hydrological areas in the
target watersheds and identify land uses that could impact and contribute to protecting downstream water
users. The project also supported the roll out of the Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) process
for the carbon payments, monitoring of the forest cover, and sensitization of the sustainable forest and
landscape management.

The expected outputs/intermediate results included: Landscape management plans approved by the National
Steering Committee and Regional Monitoring Committees, spatial information system established and
operational, 77 COBAs operational, pilot payment for environmental services mechanism established, policy
briefs prepared; validated and disseminated to stakeholders, share of target beneficiaries with score satisfied
or above on application of integrated landscape approach in targeted landscapes, area under conservation
with a management plan, area in protected areas in the targeted landscapes with Management Effectiveness

                                                                                                     Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



Tracking Tool (METT), CSAs, STDs and CTDs operational, establishing Local forest user groups (COBAs)
across 5 districts, implementation of PES mechanisms, conservation of 400,000 ha with management plans,
reforestation and restoration completed in 6,143 ha, and enhanced management of 150,000 ha.

The expected outcomes included: land area where sustainable land management practices were adopted as
a result of project support. All these measures and activities were expected to contribute to strengthening the
integrated management of natural resources in the selected landscapes by the local actors. Anticipated long-
term impacts included: enhanced resilience of landscapes; and poverty reduction.

The achievement of the stated objective was underpinned by three critical assumptions: the project remains
aligned with the priorities of the government, governments commits to support communities and community
organizations, and trainers are able to reach farmers and beneficiaries.

The ToC reflected relevant activities that were connected to the stated outputs and outcome in a plausible
causal chain. The critical assumptions that underpinned the achievement of the PDO were logical and
realistic.

Outputs/Intermediate Results

      5 Landscape management plans were approved by the National Steering Committee and Regional
         Monitoring Committees fully achieving the target of 5.
      The spatial information system was established and operational (target achieved),which provided the
         basis for the hydrological modeling necessary for the development and implementation of PES pilots.
        5 policy briefs were prepared, validated and disseminated to stakeholders fully achieving the target of
         5.
        88.3% of target beneficiaries were satisfied with the application of the integrated landscape approach
         in targeted landscapes exceeding the target of 65% (target exceeded).
        77 COBA were operational substantially achieving the target of 100 (target substantially achieved).
        5 pilot payment for environmental services (PES) mechanism were established exceeding the target
         of 4.
        303,508 ha were under conservation with a management plan which was below the original target of
         500,000 and substantially achieving the revised target of 400,000 ha (target substantially achieved).
        195,651 ha in protected areas in the targeted landscapes registered a score over 70 on
         the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) exceeding the target of 150,000 ha (target
         exceeded).
        Reforestation and restoration were completed in 6,143 ha (no target provided).
        1,440 ha sloping land were improved for hill side stabilization (no target provided)
        Two technical studies were completed and 69 kilometers of feeder roads were rehabilitated (no
         targets provided).
        Notable achievements not directly captured by the Results Framework (RF) included: 1. The project
         supported agro-ecological practices that contributed to lowering greenhouse gas emissions by
         adopting practices that align with global efforts to combat climate change; and 2. The
         project supported the roll out of the MRV process for the carbon payments, monitoring of the forest
         cover, and sensitization of the




                                                                                                  Page 10 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



       sustainable forest and landscape management, and preparation of the next monitoring, reporting and
       verification report.

Outcome

      By project completion, a total of 652,571 ha had sustainable land management practices adopted as a
       result of project activities substantially achieving the original target of 700,000 ha and exceeding the
       revised target of 550,00 ha (PDO outcome indicator). The ICR (paragraph 25) attributed the higher
       achievement relative to the revised target to "the effectiveness of the SLMPs and efficiency of
       integrated management practices which enabled agricultural intensification, productive investments,
       enhanced ecosystem management, increased production yields, and improved irrigation and drainage
       services."

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project activities contributed to reducing Green house gas
emissions estimated at estimated at 4.3–4.42 tons of CO2 equivalent per hectare per year from rice-growing
land (ICR, paragraph 26). The project also successfully implemented Sustainable Landscape Management
Plans that allocated financing and designed field arrangements for communities and contract providers,
monitored compliance, made payments and established a contextual institutional framework. The project
exceeded its PDO outcome target against the revised area and substantially achieved its original target. Also,
most targets for the intermediate results were achieved. Based on the evidence provided in the ICR and the
results mentioned above, it is plausible to assume that the project activities contributed to strengthening the
integrated management of natural resources in the selected landscapes by the local actors. Therefore, the
efficacy of the project in achieving this objective is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 4
Objective
To provide immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The CERC was triggered in 2020 due to the outbreak of COVID-19. CERC
component financing in the amount of US$40 million was used for COVID-19 response that
included: emergency recovery and health response activities such as building capacity of personnel and
equipment for health facilities for testing and treatment, acquiring materials for rapid response, purchase of
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), and medicine.

Three new indicators were added to measure achievement under the CERC component as part of the
December 2020 restructuring. Those included: (i) percentage of identified close contacts of confirmed
COVID-19 cases determined based on national guidelines; (ii) number of COVID-19 tests conducted; and (iii)
percentage of health facilities with no stock-outs of PPE during the last 30 days.

Outputs/intermediate results


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)




                                  272,799 of Covid-19 tests were conducted exceeding the planned 82,195 tests (target exceeded).
                                  100% of health facilities with no stock-outs of PPE during last 30 days (target fully achieved).

                            Outcome

                                  The Bank responded to the request of the Government of Madagascar to trigger the CERC
                                   component and provided US$40.00 million in additional financing to support COVID-19 mitigation and
                                   prevention efforts.
                                  According to the ICR (paragraph 28) the CERC activity recorded: 1. 75% identification of close
                                   contacts of confirmed COVID-19 cases; 2. conducting of 352,195 COVID-19 tests; and 3. provision
                                   of PPE during for of 70% of health facilities within the last 30 days.

                            Summary of Efficacy Assessment. Based on the information provided in the ICR, the World Bank
                            responded to the request to trigger the CERC by the Government of Madagascar. Relevant support was
                            provided as noted above to improve the diagnosis of COVID-19 and limit infection. The project team
                            explained that the confirmation of the first COVID-19 case in Madagascar was in March 2020. To consolidate
                            different sectoral interventions and to prepare the medium-term response, a Multisectoral Emergency Plan
                            was adopted on July 1, 2020. Then, the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) / Contingent Emergency
                            Response Components (CERC) was activated in response to COVID-19. Then, the first restructuring to
                            reflect CERC was completed on December 22, 2020. The ICR did not provide any information on when the
                            CERC was triggered and the disbursement made. The team only clarified that it took nine months from the
                            reporting of the first COVID-19 case till the CERC was completed. Based on this information, it could be
                            conclude that while the Bank provided effective response to COVID-19, however, it is not clear whether the
                            response was immediate. Therefore, the project efficacy on achieving this objective is rated Substantial with
                            moderate shortcomings.




                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated Substantial. The project reached a total of 49,803 beneficiaries including 15,319
                            females almost achieving its total target of 50,000 and substantially achieving the 20,000 female target. The
                            project also surpassed its outcome targets for Objectives 1, 2 and 3 as noted above. Finally, the project
                            successfully implemented the CERC activities, but no evidence was provided to determine whether the
                            response was immediate.




                                                                                                                             Page 12 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)




  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



5. Efficiency
Economic and Financial Analysis (EFA)

Ex-ante

     The economic analysis estimated an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of 26.6% over a period of 20
      years under a discount rate of 6% which resulted in an Economic Net Present Value (ENPV) of
      incremental net benefits of US$207 million.
     The economic analysis was based on the aggregation of economic benefits from: (i) improving crop
      productivity; (ii) reducing siltation in irrigated perimeters, which would result in incremental net benefits of
      more than US$435,000 over 20 years; and (iii) benefits related to the project’s net carbon balance, which
      was valued at a social cost of carbon of US$30/tCO2e and could result in a value to society of US$10
      million per year.
     The financial analyses compared “with” and “without” project scenarios, and assumed improvements in
      productivity and associated production cost for irrigated rice, and crops grown on the hillsides, such as
      rainfed rice, cassava, onions, beans and vanilla and cloves, as well as zebu production.
     Sensitivity analysis demonstrated that the results remained robust against changes to key variables.
      Under the different scenarios tested, the project’s EIRR remained above the discount interest rate which
      was on average 11% between 2011 and 2014. However, changes in environmental benefits showed the
      largest impact on the EIRR.

Ex-post

     The ex-post EFA followed the same methodology applied under the ex-ante one to ensure consistency
      and comparability. The analysis used updated data on crop yields, unit costs and farm-gate prices
      provided by the project team. The overall EIRR of the project was estimated at 16.5% which was above
      the opportunity cost of capital in Madagascar at 11.25%, but lower than the 26.60% estimated at
      appraisal. The NPV was positive at US$111.8 million.
     The project activities were expected to generate climate change mitigation benefits in the forms of
      reduced GHG emissions and Carbon sequestration. Such emissions had global environmental benefits
      or costs which were externalities-related and public in nature. Project activities were expected to be a net
      Carbon sink at a level of 206,150 tCO2e per year.
     The crop/livestock financial models were conducted for a period of 20 years, at a discount rate of 12% to
      reflect the rural rate of borrowing. Financial models were used to include the actual on the ground project
      implementation: eleven models for a “without project” (WOP) and “with project scenario” (WP). The
      financial internal rate of return (FIRR) ranged from a low of 3% for maize to a high of 170% for dry
      cassava.
     The results of the financial models showed that under the WP scenario, households with 1.2 hectares of
      agricultural land could achieve an annual incremental benefit of US$2,141, while households with 1
      hectare of agricultural land and 5 zebus could achieve an annual incremental net benefit of US$3,921.


                                                                                                       Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



       This would help households to earn additional daily income of US$5.9 and US$10.9 per day,
       respectively.
      A sensitivity analysis showed that the project results were significantly impacted by a 50% increase
       in cost, 50% drop in benefits, and a two year delay where the EIRR dropped from 16.5% to 10.7%, 6.9%
       and 9.7%, respectively.
      Implementation efficiency. The project closed on April 30, 2024 which was about 21 months beyond the
       original closing date on August 1, 2022. According to the ICR (paragraph 31) "there were delays in
       implementation due to frequent staff turn-over, procurement issues and delays, and reduced efficiency
       from cost overruns resulting in project extension." Also, the implementation of project activities slowed
       due to the COVID-19 disruption, as well as adverse weather conditions, and the election period (ICR,
       paragraph 45). Finally, US$14.48 million (US$7.36 million of IDA, US$3.16 million of AfD, and $3.96
       million of GEF) of the project unutilized funds were cancelled.

Summary of Efficiency Analysis. The ex-post EIRR was estimated at 16.50% which was below the ex-ante
estimate at 26.50%, but still above the discount rate of 11.25%. The project experienced cost overruns,
and implementation delays that were partially due to external factors related to the COVID-19 outbreak. Finally,
US$14.48 million of unutilized project funds were cancelled. Therefore, efficiency is rated Substantial with
shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                26.60
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                             16.50
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial. The project reached a total of
49,803 beneficiaries including 15,319 females almost achieving its total target of 50,000 and substantially
achieving the 20,000 female target. The project also surpassed its outcome targets for Objectives 1, 2 and
3. While the CERC activities were effectively implemented to address the emergency of COVID-19, it was not
possible to determine whether the response was immediate based on the information provided in the ICR. The
efficiency was rated as Substantial with some shortcomings.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



Based on the assigned rating for the three outcome criteria, the project outcome is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. The sustainable financing model for WUAs is not fully assured. Although multiyear
contracts were signed with WUAs during the project, there is no assurance of their continuation, and they
may be less effective after the project closure.

2. Institutional risk. Community empowerment and financial mechanisms may not yet be fully matured.
Community committees like COBAs need further capacity building and empowerment to operate
independently. Without continued support and oversight, there's a risk of mismanagement and reduced
participation.

3. Technical risk. Some irrigation canals may not have sufficient water sources in the longer term because
of: (i) delays and limited in scope environmental activities and the upstream watershed treatment activities
were not fully implemented, while the downstream irrigation canals were constructed; and (ii) limited
upstream watershed management activities may result in silting, erosion of agro-irrigation infrastructure
developed in downstream regions.

4. Environmental risk. The strategy of providing free forestry seedlings from nurseries is not sustainable
because without adequate incentives nurseries could refocus on producing non-forest species seedlings.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic Relevance and Approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
          Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
          details). The project was prepared in close collaboration with the French Development Agency
          (AFD). The project was the first in a series of projects (SoPs) for which the Program Goals were
          to: (1) reduce the degradation of natural resources; and (2) increase the value of output from
          productive sectors.
         Technical, Financial and Economic Aspects. The project featured an ambitious PDO that when
          unpacked included four different objectives. The project design was complex with multiple
          activities against a background of weak implementation capacity. The design of the sustainable
          land management plans (SLMPs) took two year of preparation which resulted in a late start of the
          implementation of SLMPs. The PAD included a detailed economic and financial analysis that
          provided adequate justification for the project investments.

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



      Poverty, Gender, and Social Development Aspects. The project was aligned with world Bank's
         twin goals of reducing poverty and shared prosperity. The project activities focused on improving
         natural resource management, income generation through agricultural productivity, and access to
         essential services for rural communities. The project adequately reflected gender dimensions in
         the PDO indicators, ensuring sex-disaggregated data. Also, women were identified as key
         stakeholders, involving them in project preparation, decision-making, and implementation. Project
         activities also supported female household heads in tree planting in reforestation areas,
         horticulture, poultry, livestock and rice production.
        Environmental and Fiduciary Aspects. While the environmental and social safeguards were
         included in the project design, their detailed implementation procedure had to be clarified during
         the project implementation. This caused some delays due to the lack of consultants with relevant
         expertise. The project experienced procurement challenges and delays due to capacity
         constraints, lack of bidders on the market, low financial and technical capacity of local contractors
         for roads, as well as for agricultural activities. This questions the adequacy of fiduciary
         arrangements.
        Implementation Arrangements. Weak capacity was a key constraint that impacted the
         performance of the PMU. The PMU had limited safeguards expertise to prepare ESMPs and
         monitor activities. Also, the absence of clear reporting mechanism for project coordinator
         weakened coordination efficiency between the three ministries involved in the project activities.
         Overall, implementation arrangements were less than adequate to handle such a complex project.
        Risk Assessment. Eight risk areas were identified at appraisal, and the overall risk was rated as
         High. While risk identification was adequate and mitigation measures were applied during
         implementation, limited capacity continued to be a key constraint that impacted implementation.
        M&E Arrangements. The PIU had the overall coordinating role in M&E. The PIU was expected
         to hire one international M&E specialist and two national M&E specialists who would ensure that
         M&E data was produced and collected on time. M&E design reflected a well-structured
         system with an adequate Results Framework for monitoring activities and assessing
         the achievement of the PDOs.

Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project featured an ambitious PDO and a
complex design that aimed to address the key issue of land degradation by promoting the integrated
sustainable landscape management. The time required to design the SLMPs was underestimated and
this contributed to implementation delays. The project design reflected adequate poverty and gender
aspects. However, fiduciary aspects were questionable given the procurement challenges the project
faced. While the environmental and social safeguards were included in the project design, their detailed
implementation procedure had to be clarified during the project implementation. Also, the Bank did not
adequately plan for the training of necessary on-site safeguards staff for monitoring and advancing
environmental tasks. Implementation arrangements were less than adequate to handle such a complex
project. Risk identification was adequate, but limited capacity proved to be a key constraint. M&E
arrangements were adequate and the M&E system reflected an adequate Results Framework for
monitoring activities and assessing the achievement of the PDOs. Overall, the Quality at Entry is
rated Satisfactory.



Quality-at-Entry Rating
Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)




b. Quality of supervision
       The Bank conducted a total of 13 implementation support missions over the course of the project
        implementation, some of which were conducted virtually during the COVID-19 restrictions. The
        technical teams in support of project implementation reflected adequate expertise and skills to
        support project activities and fiduciary requirements.
       The Bank team provided consistent monitoring of the project activities. The team also addressed
        implementation bottlenecks, adapted to challenges under a multi-ministerial coordination system,
        and suggested relevant solutions to issues in implementation, procurement, and disbursements.
        The team worked closely with counterparts to develop various safeguard instruments.
       The team proactively restructured the project to ensure the delivery of project results and the
        achievement of the PDOs. The task team also responded to limited capacity through supporting the
        PMU by short term consultants and introduced regular operational reports to monitor progress in
        procurement. The team also provided support to resolve issues of top-value contracts, and
        track financial and physical progress by sub-components in between the missions. These measures
        helped the PMU to increase implementation pace and disbursements (ICR, paragraph 44).
       The Bank team facilitated the allocation of US$40.00 million for CERC component to build country’s
        emergency response capacity. However, less than 50% of the CERC funds were actually
        disbursed.

 Summary of Bank Performance Assessment. The Bank proactively supported the project and
 addressed implementation bottlenecks. The bank also demonstrated high responsiveness to government
 priorities evidenced in the activation of the CERC component and allocation of corresponding funds.
 Overall, the Bank allocated adequate technical, fiduciary, and training resources to guide PMU and achieve
 the PDOs. Therefore, Quality of Supervision is rated Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings to QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is
 rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include a ToC since it was not required by the Bank at the time of appraisal.
         Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the project activities,
         outputs and expected outcomes. This Review reconstructed a ToC for each objective based on the
         project description in the PAD and the RF.


                                                                                                 Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



       The achievement of the PDO was measured through four PDO level indicators: 1. Area provided
        with new/improved irrigation or drainage services, 2. Clients who have adopted an improved
        agriculture technology promoted by the project, 3. Land area under sustainable landscape
        management practices, and 4. Direct project beneficiaries (of which female).
       The PDO level indicators were specific, measurable, relevant and time-bound. The indicators also
        reflected achievable targets. However, the indicators were pitched more at an intermediate outcome
        level rather than a PDO level.
       The PAD reflected a detailed RF that included a clear definition of what each indicator intended to
        measure. The RF included 8 intermediate results indicators (IRIs) to track the achievement of the
        different activities supported by the project. Most IRIs were measurable, connected to the stated
        activities and reflected achievable targets. However, some IRIs lacked specificity and was difficult to
        measure, for example, indicator 2.2: Irrigation Systems Managed by WUAs, where
        irrigation systems vary greatly between different landscapes in the project. Also, indicator 2.6, areas
        under conservation with a land use and management plan was redundant with PDO outcome
        indicator 3.
       Overall, M&E design was adequate. The RF included relevant indicators to monitor progress
        towards PDO and was supported by adequate institutional arrangements. The design of the M&E
        system facilitated effective tracking of implementation progress and allowed for corrective actions
        when needed. However, the RF also could have benefited from an indicator to measure irrigation
        efficiency and the impact of the project on agricultural productivity/crop yields.



b. M&E Implementation
       According to the ICR (paragraph 47) "there was a systematic data collection system, which
         supported getting information from local associations and WUAs, to the regional offices, then to
         the central level, contributing to timely monitoring, reporting and evaluation."
        The PMU also redefined the two IRIs mentioned above to avoid redundancy, improve precision
         and allow comparability across different landscape contexts.
        Overall, M&E implementation was effective.



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E data informed the project management for project restructuring and decision-making
         (ICR, paragraph 48). For example, M&E data guided management in scoping and prioritization of
         activities. Also, M&E data was pivotal in proactive mitigation efforts, such as addressing delays
         and implementation challenges that were reported by the farmers and community organizations.
        The use of M&E data to inform project management decisions was further emphasized by the
         redefinition of reforestation objectives based on data insights, and the increased funding for
         viable activities like feeder roads, and Lavaca processing. This reflected a data-driven budgeting
         approach.

  Summary of M&E Quality Assessment. The project benefited from an adequate M&E system. The RF
  reflected relevant indicators to measure and track project activities and assess the achievement of the
  PDO. M&E implementation was effective and allowed the M&E system to generate enough data to track
  activities, assess outcome and facilitate decision making. Also, minor RF shortcomings were rectified

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



  during implementation. Finally, M&E utilization was evident in several management decisions as noted
  above. The M&E data were also used to inform the project ICR. Therefore, the Quality of M&E is rated
  Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as environmental category B
          - Partial Assessment since the environmental and social risks and impacts were expected to be
          moderate, site specific and easily manageable with specific mitigation measures, and in most cases,
          reversible. The project triggered seven World Bank safeguard policies, namely: Environmental
          Assessment (OP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP 4.12); Forests (OP 4.36); Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11) and Safety of
          Dams (OP/BP 4.37). The borrower recruited a consultant to prepare four safeguards documents: an
          Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework
          (RPF), an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP), and an updated Small Dam Safety Manual in
          compliance the World Bank’s safeguards policy.
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. According to the ICR (paragraph 50)
          "the project followed the World Bank’s policies and was in compliance with national guidelines on
          environmental and social clauses as well as the existing environmental, social, occupational health
          and labor safety requirements." A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) for the project was fully
          operational and handled 245 complaints with a 100% completion rate in processing by project’s
          completion.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). According to the ICR (paragraph 52) "the project complied with the
          World Bank's financial management reporting and audit requirements." While interim financial
          reports (IFRs) were submitted on time, some revisions were needed before final approval. External
          audit reports noted weaknesses in contracting procedures and internal control systems, and lack of
          insufficient follow-up on recommendations. Financial disbursement rates varied, and the last two
          years of implementation experienced significant delays that stemmed from treasury issues. Also, a
          non-compliance with national prerequisites for disbursement applications resulted in delays in
          project activities due to a lack of funds at the commercial bank level, despite Bank disbursements.
          There were cost overruns in the development of SLMPs. This required additional support from the
          French Agricultural Research and Cooperation Organization (CIRAD) to validate service provider
          deliverables, which led to higher-than-expected costs. Also, the need to hire international firms for
          two studies due to inadequate national skills resulted in additional costs. Capacity building
          disbursements were approximately US$ 2.5 million over the forecast, attributed to institutional

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



          strengthening of ministries and related bodies. FM performance was rated Satisfactory in the final
          ISR.
         Procurement. Procurement was challenging due to two main factors. First, there were centralized
          procurement delays due to the requirement
          for all procurement files from regional execution units to be reviewed by the central Procurement
          Officer. This resulted in significant delays due to the volume of work and the number of components
          and five regional units from five target landscapes involved. Also, a bottleneck was created at the
          PMU level due to the presence of only one Procurement Manager to approve all procurement
          requests, which slowed down procurement and causing implementation delays. Second, human
          resource constraints negatively impacted procurement as the project faced challenges due to the
          departure of the central Procurement Manager six months before the project closure. This
          resulted in significant delays leading to difficulties with service providers meeting contractual terms.
          On the positive side, the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP) system
          facilitated close follow-ups and allowed for corrective actions on delayed packages. Also,
          procurement activities benefitted from the Bank's advisory and supervisory role. This contributed to
          maintaining effective procurement practices in compliance and enhancing the operational
          capacities of project execution team. The task team also introduced report (STEP Dashboard) that
          helped the PMU track progress of the entire Procurement Plan monthly, focusing on the delayed
          packages. Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the final ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The ICR (paragraph 40) noted that "the project became the ‘reference point’ for other Bank projects, such
   as Food System Resilience Project and
   Rural Livelihoods Productivity and Resilience Project that pioneers an integrated management approach.
   This approach set a precedent for considering integration of environment at landscape level into other
   projects. The project through its improved irrigation infrastructure and techniques, PES and reforestation
   activities helped farmers to adapt to climate change, and mitigation included decrease in reductions in
   Carbon and GHG emissions. Sufficient availability of water for irrigation throughout the year, due to project
   activities in irrigation, had a significant social impact. It reduced conflicts over water between various
   villages and promoted peace in the region. Project built capacities within the government and contractors in
   addressing safeguards and in combating sexual exploitation and harassment at worksites. Improved access
   to water resources led to domestic use and income-generating activities like washhouses/laundry services.
   Food security and dietary quality improved through the introduction of cash crops, vegetables, fruits, and
   poultry, with surplus
   produce contributing to the nutrition of farmers' families."



11. Ratings


                                                                                                    Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)



                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                     IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory           Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial            Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                    Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:

1. Project design needs to balance between complexity and practicality to ensure timely and
effective project execution. While complex designs can be advantageous and adaptable to field
necessities, they also pose a risk of delays if not matched with the existing capacity in the
implementation context. This project's innovative nature highlighted the significance of a flexible
design and a practical approach to integrated landscape management. Simplifying processes,
aligning planning with investments, and focusing on capacity building and knowledge are crucial. For
example, the watershed planning, and management activities should start early on to allow time for
their effects to manifest in an integrated project.

2. Sustainable maintenance of irrigation schemes need adequate user fee collection and
effective maintenance funds for the functioning of community organizations. To address these
issues, project design require including fiduciary contingencies and ensuring greater community and
government participation in funding. Establishing a substantial contingency fund is vital for the
sustainability of environmental and agricultural activities, emphasizing community ownership and
availing adequate funds for maintenance.

3. To ensure the sustainability of project outcomes, design needs to include institutional
strengthening through capacity building of government staff, communities, and farmer
groups. Low capacities of private contractors need to be addressed early on by strengthening their
capabilities in implementing safeguards instruments, developing mitigation measures, and
conducting monitoring activities. It is crucial to include compensation clauses to ensure continuity to
retain skilled staff. It is recommended to continue hiring civil servants in projects as it helped in staff
continuity/stability and strengthened the relationship with government.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                        Page 21 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Sustainable Landscape Management (P154698)




     Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was adequate to assess the project
        outcomes.
       Results Orientation. The ICR used the available data to the extent possible to discuss the achievement
        of the four elements of the PDO.
       Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes was focused on the achievement of outcome
        indicators.
       Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
        integrated.
       Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
       Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
        available evidence to justify most of the assigned ratings. However, the overall outcome rating in the
        ICR required further justification because it was not corresponding to the assigned ratings to the three
        outcome criteria (Relevance of Objectives, Efficacy and Efficiency). This was later clarified with the
        project team.
       Conciseness. Overall, the ICR provided a concise coverage of project activities to the extent possible,
        and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the ICR (paragraph 50) reported that the project
        triggered six safeguard policies when they were actually seven as listed by the ICR (paragraph 50) and
        the PAD (paragraph 80).

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The ICR included an adequate discussion on the achievement
of the PDO. The lessons drawn by the ICR were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant
information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
        Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 22 of 22
