     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024515

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P154525                                    Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 India                                      Education


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                Total Project Cost (USD)
 IBRD-88770                                30-Jun-2023                                          54,180,848.67

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 19-Jun-2018                               31-Mar-2024

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           74,000,000.00                                                0.00

 Revised Commitment                            54,181,000.00                                                0.00

 Actual                                        54,180,848.67                                                0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Salim J. Habayeb           Judyth L. Twigg               Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The objectives of the project were to improve the quality and relevance of training at Priority Industrial
   Training Institutes and to increase the number of labor-market-relevant workers through short-term training in
   Uttarakhand (Loan Agreement, September 18, 2028, p. 6). The Loan Agreement between the Government of
   India and the World Bank was supplemented by a Project Agreement between the State of Uttarakhand and
   the World Bank on the same date, and it encompassed specific project execution aspects.



                                                                                                   Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project comprised three components discussed below. Components I and II followed a Results-based
   Financing (RBF) approach while Component III followed a regular Investment Project Financing (IPF)
   procedure. The reported costs below pertain to the IBRD Loan.

   I. Improving the Quality and Relevance of Industrial Training Institute (ITIs) Training (Appraisal:
   US$46.0 million; Actual: US$35.4 million): Component I aimed to improve the delivery of labor-market-
   relevant training and to increase the number of graduates in labor-market-relevant trades from the ITI
   system. It comprised four subcomponents, of which Subcomponents 1.1 and 1.3 benefited 25 priority ITIs
   that were strategically located, and Subcomponents 1.2 and 1.4 benefited all public ITIs.

         Subcomponent 1.1: Comprehensive improvement of the quality and relevance of priority ITIs,
          including their upgradation in line with the standards of the National Council for Vocational Training
          (NCVT). Master Plans for each priority ITI, developed in consultation with industries, articulated the
          scope of reforms, and included means to address and incentivize more equitable access for women
          and socially disadvantaged groups. Results of this subcomponent were tracked through DLI 1
          including its two sub-DLIs: (i) percentage of trade courses upgraded according to the Master Plans,
          and (ii) percentage increase in enrollment in NCVT courses.
         Subcomponent 1.2: Professional development of ITI teachers and staff was designed to
          improve the quality and relevance of teaching at ITIs through capacity development of principals,
          foremen and teachers in all public ITIs. The results of this subcomponent were to be tracked through
          DLI 2.
         Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening industry linkages was designed to foster an increase in the
          relevance of ITI training through better industry linkages. The outcomes of these activities were to be
          captured through DLI 3.
         Subcomponent 1.4: Institutional capacity development of the skills development system was
          designed to strengthen the ITIs by empowering them with increased financial autonomy (with
          progress to be captured by DLI 4).

   II. Increasing the number of Skilled Workers through Short-term Training (Appraisal: US$20.0
   million; Actual: US$16.5 million): Component II aimed to increase the number of skilled workers trained
   under nationally recognized market-relevant trades compliant with the National Skills Qualification
   Framework (NSQF) through short-term training conducted by the state’s Skills Development Mission (SDM).
   The results generated by this component were to be monitored by DLI 5.

   III. Policy and Institutional Development and Project Management (Appraisal: US$8.0 million; Actual:
   US$2.3 million). Component III was designed to finance technical assistance (TA) and institutional capacity
   development activities to support the design and implementation of activities under Component I and II and
   to enhance the administrative capacity of the public sector skills sector, including the Department of Skill
   Development and Employment (DSDE).


                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



  Neither objectives, nor components were revised during implementation.

  The project had six relevant DLIs as reflected below:

      1. Increasing the quality of training and enrollment in Priority ITIs.
      2. Continuous professional development of ITIs.
      3. Improving employment outcomes of ITI graduates.
      4. Strengthening financial management capacity of ITIs.
      5. Increasing the number of trainees certified under NSQF Compliant Short-Term Training by the
         Uttarakhand Skills Development Mission.
      6. Improving resilience of the ITI system.




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  At appraisal, the project cost was estimated at US$92.5 million, comprising an IBRD Loan estimated at
  US$74 million and counterpart funding estimated at US$18.5 million equivalent. The project was designed
  as an Investment Project Financing Instrument with Performance-Based Conditions. As noted in section 2d,
  Components I and II would follow an RBF modality with funds to be disbursed against Eligible Expenditure
  Programs up to capped amounts, and conditioned on achievement of Disbursement linked Indicators
  (DLIs), while Component III pertaining to institutional capacity building and technical assistance would be
  delivered under an IPF modality.

  The actual IBRD cost reported by the ICR was US$54.2 million. The difference between the original IBRD
  commitment and the lower actual cost was not related to performance issues, as project activities were
  completed as planned using Indian Rupees. The project ‘savings’ resulting from favorable exchange rates
  were partly used to support national efforts related to COVID-19 and the rest of the savings were ultimately
  cancelled. In 2020, project savings of US$6.8 million were channeled to the COVID-19 emergency, and, by
  December 2023, project disbursement in Indian Rupees had reached the agreed value between the Union
  Government and the State Government, triggering further subsequent cancellations of US$13.02 million, as
  discussed below under project restructurings.

  Dates: The project was approved on June 19, 2018, and became effective on December 4, 2018. A Mid-
  Term Review was undertaken on March 12, 2021. The project closing date was extended by nine months,
  and the project closed on March 31, 2024.

  The first restructuring on August 13, 2020, cancelled an amount of US$6.8 million in savings resulting
  from exchange rate fluctuations to the COVID-19 emergency relief activities as requested by the
  Government of India -- for assigning savings under various World Bank-financed projects to the COVID-19
  emergency. The restructuring adjusted the DLI matrix to reflect the cancellation and introduced reallocations
  among Components I and III.

  The second restructuring on January 4, 2022, adjusted the DLI matrix to reflect sequential steps in the
  upgradation of trades at priority ITIs which required a sequence of activities beginning with civil works,

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



   followed by procurement of tools and equipment, and finally applying the NCVT affiliation in contrast with
   the original DLI 1 that tracked upgradation only at the final step. The restructuring also considered the
   disruptive impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on implementation, introduced changes to DLI targets and
   prices, reallocated funds among components, and introduced DLIs to focus on equity in short-term training,
   and on digitalization and resilience building in ITIs.

   The third restructuring on June 2, 2023, extended the closing date by nine months, from June 30, 2023,
   to March 31, 2024, providing additional time for training and ITI upgradation in view of delays resulting from
   staffing gaps and capacity challenges during early implementation, followed by the COVID-19 pandemic
   disruptions.

   The ICR reported that a cancellation of an undisbursed amount of US$13.02 million was requested by the
   Borrower since the approval provided by the Government of India to the State Government was in Indian
   Rupees, and the disbursement in domestic currency reached the agreed level. The cancellation request
   was received on May 3, 2024, and the cancellation was processed as of that date (ICR, p. 3).




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Uttarakhand, with a population of about 10.1 million in 2011, became a separate state in 2000. It has
achieved significant economic growth by introducing favorable industrial promotion policies, which
specifically resulted in fast-growing manufacturing, construction, trade, and hotel sectors. Its skills
development landscape was complex with some degree of fragmentation, and encompassing multiple
service providers, a vast spectrum of target audiences, and a wide range of training modalities and skill
sets.

The State Government considered ITIs and short-term training programs as the main vehicles for the
advancement of skills development. ITIs offered formal one-to-two-year training to students with at least
Grade 10 qualifications. Short-term training courses of three to six months’ duration catered to unskilled
workers, school dropouts, and new labor market entrants. Short-term training played a role in supplying
skills toward the immediate skill gaps in the labor market.

The ITI subsector faced a number of systemically rooted challenges resulting in suboptimal quality and
inefficiencies. These included (a) mismatches between the trades offered versus their demand; and (b)
unpopularity of courses affiliated to the State Council for Vocational Training (SCVT) and limited spaces for
courses affiliated to the National Council for Vocational Training (NCVT) that were recognized throughout
India. To meet the growing demand for training, DSDE expanded the number of ITIs from 115 in 2010 to
184 in 2018 (ICR, p. 1). The state’s Skills Development Mission (SDM), established in 2013, lacked
implementation capacity. The PAD (p. 4) also noted that the quality and relevance of the training was
generally low because of the continued reliance on traditional theory-oriented training practices. The lack of
an overall sector policy and inadequate institutional capacity resulted in disconnects in the skills sector
leading to weak consolidation of efforts and coordination among stakeholders. Various long-term and short-
term training programs were provided by public and private entities, often leading to a duplication of efforts.



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



               Unmet skill demand, such as soft skills, and lack of job placement support during labor market transition
               were common gaps.

               In the broader national context, India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies,
               but it faces the dual challenge of both a paucity of highly trained workforce and non-employability of a large
               share of youth. The development of the skills and training sector in terms of access, quality, and relevance
               is one of the country’s top priorities. To take on these challenges, India launched the National Policy for
               Skill Development and Entrepreneurship in 2015 that set a goal to train 400 million workers by 2022. The
               Uttarakhand project was framed within this national policy, and aimed at complementing national-level skills
               and training initiatives (PAD, p. 1), with an added focus on increasing the pool of skilled workers to catch up
               with industry demands. In this context, the project would complement several ongoing World Bank-financed
               operations in skills development supported by the federal level (ICR, p. 9), as discussed in section 4.

               The project was relevant to the Country Partnership Strategy for India for the period 2013-17 and continued
               to be relevant to the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY18-FY22 at closing (the World
               Bank Group’s present engagement with India continues to be guided by its CPF FY18-22 according to the
               latest World Bank India Overview dated November 4, 2024). Project objectives remained fully consistent
               with the CPF’s Focus Area 2 (Enhancing Competitiveness and Enabling Job Creation) which reflected a
               shift in emphasis towards addressing systemic constraints to job creation. The project design and
               implementation arrangements were also responsive to the CPF’s “how” to engage. Specifically, the
               emphasis on the state being at the center of development, the project’s design and arrangements
               responded to the CPF’s “How #2” for Engaging a Federal India. The project maintained its relevance
               throughout implementation, including by strengthening the incentives that would increase the focus of the
               short-term training on disadvantaged groups.

               Project objectives also remained fully aligned with development strategies of the Government of India and
               the Government of Uttarakhand. In addition, the hybrid design encompassing IPF and RBF components,
               further shifted the focus of the investment toward results, while the IPF component aimed at enhancing the
               administrative capacity of the State Government’s skills sector.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             Improve the quality and relevance of training at priority industrial training institutes

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change envisaged the following inputs and activities: increasing capacity for labor market
                             relevant trades by upgrading existing trades and opening new ones, competency-based training provided to

                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



ITI teachers, principals, and foremen, involving industry in upgrading training facilities, apprenticeships, on the
job training, and provision of technical assistance for institutional capacity building.

These activities would be expected to lead or contribute to the following outputs: improved and upgraded
skills of ITI staff, strengthened industry linkage and job placement, and improved institutional and
administrative systems of ITIs.

The above activities and outputs would plausibly contribute to improved quality and relevance of training in
ITIs, mainly measured by increased job placement of ITI graduates.

Outputs and intermediate results

The project improved infrastructure and availability of equipment by financing civil works and infrastructure
development in 23 priority ITIs to upgrade and renovate their facilities and to obtain NCVT affiliation of trades
(DLI 1). Improvements included bringing workshops and classrooms up to standards, developing smart and
green campuses, and installing energy efficient equipment. The improvements in physical infrastructure,
including tools and equipment, would be expected to contribute to improving the quality of education and
relevance of training courses.

The project enhanced professional development of ITI staff. Following an initial analysis of professional
development needs, training was provided on an annual basis. Yearly targets were met with 97.2 percent of
teachers and staff in all public ITIs receiving training, exceeding the target of 95 percent (with a drop during
local and national elections that required instructors to go on compulsory election duty). Training was
provided on domain/technical skills, soft skills, and exposure visits to industries. Post-training feedback
showed that over 90 percent of instructors felt better prepared to teach, and more than 80 percent expressed
satisfaction with the relevance, quality and duration of training.

The project contributed to the resilience of the ITI system by introducing digital solutions. Related activities
included SMART classrooms and the use of ERP system (Note: SMART classrooms are technology-
enhanced classrooms that foster opportunities for teaching and learning; and ERP [Enterprise Resource
Planning] system is a software that helps schools manage their business processes). SMART classrooms
were equipped with interactive learning systems and workshops with WiFi facilities, creating interactive and
engaging learning environments with state-of-the art technology. In a first for the skills subsector, priority ITIs
have transitioned to using ERP for key administrative functions in an integrated manner, including (a)
introduction of e-class/e-training for digital teaching, attendance, feedback and assessment; (b) digitization of
ITIs, including electronic records of staff information; (c) SMS alerts for students about exam schedules and
tracking of trainee examination records; and (d) alumni database for students, including trainee placement
records. The inputs contributed to streamline administrative processes, improve data management, and
enhance transparent decision-making.

The project incentivized revenue generation in priority ITIs by exposing the trainees to producing marketable
products and services and strengthening financial management capacity at ITIs. While no such practice of
revenue generation existed in ITIs before the project, priority ITIs started generating revenue during the final
year of the project.

The project strengthened linkages between ITIs and the industry through several initiatives, including the
establishment of industry linkage cells (ILCs) and centers of excellence (COEs). All 24 priority ITIs
established ILCs comprising principals, nominated instructors and student representatives to foster stronger

                                                                                                     Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



industry engagement. The ILCs facilitated industry partnerships and interactions through partnership
frameworks, guest lectures, industry visits, placement and apprenticeship support, and job fairs. The COEs
were established in two training institutes, and aimed at contributing to modernizing and improving the
relevance of ITI training, while also serving as key resource centers for capacity building of ITI instructors in
advanced technologies. The trainees receiving advanced training at COEs after ITI training had enhanced
employment prospects, with more than 90 percent employment rate and significant wage premiums.

The project provided job preparation support and organized job fairs aiming at improving employment
outcomes.

Outreach efforts and a total of 20 awareness raising campaigns were carried out, one every quarter,
exceeding the target of 18 campaigns. With this strong outreach, the project was able to improve the demand
for enrollment in priority ITIs (DLI 1) with 32,297 students through completion, exceeding target of 24,000
students.

The ICR noted that there was complementarity between the project and other interventions supported by the
World Bank. The state’s strategy for skills training through ITIs was supported not only by the priority ITIs
under the project, but also by eight other public ITIs supported by another World Bank-assisted operation
(STRIVE). While there were no overlaps in core investments such as for infrastructure, STRIVE investments
enabled internet connectivity and the development of digital course modules. Industry driven activities under
STRIVE, notably for capacity building and outreach activities on industry engagement, provided an overall
boost to industry collaboration in the state. The short-term skills training benefited from district level skills
mapping supported by another World Bank-assisted operation (SIMO) that helped the state identify priority
sectors for training. This helped the project to further focus its short-term skilling interventions on sectors that
were in demand in the local market.

Note: The ICR reported that there were 370 teacher vacancies across all public ITIs and that the last round of
ITI instructor recruitment in the State occurred in 2010-11. The state initiated a new round of recruitment in
February 2024, and recruitment was expected to be completed by 2025.

In terms of outcomes, the ICR considered the following main results in its assessment: (1) student
enrollment in labor-market relevant trades; and (2) job placement.

1. The number of students enrolled in labor-market relevant trades (that is, with qualifications mapped to
recognized national standards) in priority ITIs increased from 4,065 to 5,879 students, slightly short of the
target of 6,100 students. The ICR (p. 5) reported that the decision of the Directorate General of Training to
close additional evening shifts and delays in upgradation activities caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
contributed to a slightly lower than anticipated enrollments. Female enrollment did not increase, as it
remained at the baseline of about 12 percent against an expected target of 25 percent, despite concerted and
continuous outreach by the State Government aimed at attracting students, including with an added focus on
attracting female students.

2. The job placement rate among graduates of priority ITIs within six months of training completion increased
from a baseline of 21 percent in 2018 to 42.1 percent in 2024, exceeding the target of 32 percent. The
placement rate increased for both males and females, meeting the targets (for males, the rate increased from
a baseline of 21.5 percent to 48.1 percent, exceeding the target of 33 percent; and for females, the job
placement rate increased from a baseline of 4 percent to 16.9 percent, slightly exceeding the target of 15
percent. The ICR noted that progress in job placement was further facilitated by the introduction of a new DLI

                                                                                                       Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



(DLI 3 ii) in the second restructuring to incentivize efforts aiming at promoting employability skills in ITI
training. More than 90 percent of students were enrolled in this training which included career guidance,
industry visits, and hands-on training. In the second-round tracer study, 27.8 percent of ITI graduates were in
higher education, up from 11.8 percent in the first round, with more female ITI graduates (33.5 percent)
pursuing higher education compared to male ITI graduates (25.7 percent).

The ICR provided further information on employers’ perspectives related to job placement and which were
derived from the second-round tracer study using interviews held with 53 employers randomly selected from a
list of 100 employers. On average, 21 percent of the interviewed employers’ workforce were ITI graduates, up
from 14 percent in the first round. About 60 percent of these employers were willing to pay wage premiums
over the normal wage to ITI graduates. Most employers (92 percent) were willing to recruit ITI students in the
future, while concurrently noting concerns regarding ITI graduates’ soft skills.




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Increase the number of labor-market-relevant workers through short-term training

Rationale
The theory of change envisaged that training imparted by Private Training Providers (PTPs) through the
state’s SDM, improving teacher quality, and activities promoting labor market relevance would lead to an
increase in certified trainees after short-term training. This would plausibly contribute to increased job
placement of short-term training candidates.

Outputs and intermediate results

The project supported a comprehensive institutional capacity assessment of DSDE through a functional
review and an action plan to improve administrative and planning capacities, including for creating greater
synergy with the state’s skills system. The action plan was endorsed by DSDE.

Under the project, 42,786 youths were trained in NSQF compliant labor market relevant courses that were
delivered by PTPs. The ICR noted that implementation of short-term training had variable delays related to
the hiring of PTPs, subsequent lockdowns due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and realignments in job role
classifications at the national level.

The project also implemented two short-term training pilots: (a) training on high-end skills, i.e., above NSQF
Level 5 which requires a higher qualification as eligibility (e.g., a bachelor’s degree); and (b) domain experts
training, i.e., training by experienced employers/industries with a record of providing market relevant training
and potential to absorb trainees in their production units.



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



                            In terms of outcomes, the ICR considered certification and job placement in its assessment:

                            1. By project completion, and out of the 42,786 youths who were trained in NSQF compliant labor market
                            relevant courses, a total of 34,023 youths were certified, exceeding the target of 32,000 youths. The share of
                            certified females was 66 percent, exceeding the target of 55 percent. The share of disadvantaged youths
                            (Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe categories) was 26.3 percent, also exceeding the target of 22
                            percent.

                            2. The overall job placement rate (encompassing both males and females) after three months of short-term
                            training completion was not achieved, as the combined overall rate was 45.1 percent, remaining around the
                            baseline of 45 percent, and short of the target of 50 percent. However, the employment rate for male trainees
                            increased from a baseline of 48 percent in 2018 to 67.6 percent in 2024, exceeding the target of 53 percent,
                            while the share of females fell short of expectations as it was reported at 34, short of the target of 48 percent.
                            The ICR suggested that one of the reasons for the low results of female placement was that some short-term
                            training programs targeted female trainees for self-employment in areas like tailoring, beauty and wellness,
                            etc., but no evidence is provided.

                            Therefore, the achievement rating for Objective 2 is assessed as Modest, given lack of progress in formal job
                            placement for females who had completed project-sponsored short-term training, and no direct evidence of
                            successful self-employment for these trainees.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The objective to improve the quality and relevance of training at Priority Industrial Training Institutes was
                            almost fully achieved and is therefore rated Substantial. The objective to increase the number of labor-
                            market-relevant workers through short-term training in Uttarakhand was Modestly achieved, as there was
                            underachievement of one of the outcomes used in the assessment. This aggregates to an overall efficacy
                            rating of Substantial, but with caveats related to modest achievement of one key outcome.

                            This ICR Review also notes the importance of several advancements related to development change
                            facilitated by the project. ITIs upgraded their infrastructure and equipped the classrooms to comply with
                            higher standard NCVT requirements. ITIs strengthened linkages with the industry, modernized their systems
                            through digital interventions, and secured approval for future teacher recruitment. Professional development
                            opportunities for ITI instructors and staff were enhanced. Project activities and pilot studies are also expected
                            to provide valuable inputs to future skills training in the state.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating

                                                                                                                                Page 9 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The PAD’s economic analysis (pp. 67-71) provided compelling arguments to justify public investment. The
increased probability of wage employment was a clear benefit of ITI education, and, among wageworkers, the
wage premiums were also higher among ITI graduates. While the contribution of industries and private
enterprises were acknowledged, public provision of training was necessary for the state and the country to
increase the skills pool to a higher level as envisaged by the national strategy. Also, the PAD estimated that the
project contribution to the state government expenditure was only 0.29 percent.

The PAD’s economic analysis carried out an adequate cost-benefit analysis. Three main channels of benefit
streams were quantified: (a) increased job placement rate and the number of ITI graduates as a result of
increased quality and relevance of ITI training; (b) reduced inefficiencies in ITI service delivery because of
increased seat occupancy rates; and (c) increased job placement and number of short-term trainees. It used
adequate assumptions based on existing information derived from the 2015 budget, state policy, national
sample survey, and World Bank studies. The assumptions included ITI capacity increase of 10 percent, annual
improvement in vacancy reduction of 4 percent, employment rate of ITI graduates of 32 percent, average
monthly wage of INR 9,000, and a unit cost per student of INR 64,882. For short-term courses, assumptions
included a unit subsidy per trainee of INR 35,000, a job placement for short-term training completers of 65
percent, and a starting average wage of INR 2,563.

Using a discount rate of 8 percent, the Net Present Value under the base scenario was US$117 million with an
Economic Rate of Return (EIRR) estimated at 17 percent. Sensitivity tests using different job placement rates
yielded an EIRR of 13.2 percent for the lowest scenario, and an EIRR of 20.5 percent for the highest scenario,
all indicating that the investment was strongly justified from an economic perspective.

The ICR repeated the same cost-benefit analysis with more conservative assumptions. The overall NPV
encompassing both ITI graduates and the short-term trainees, was estimated at US$46.4 million with an IRR
estimated at 14 percent, confirming the appraisal findings. The IRR estimates remained robust under a
sensitivity analysis, ranging from 11 percent to 14 percent, using different discount rates (5, 8, and 10 percent)
and varying numbers of potential beneficiaries receiving benefits. The ICR (p. 31) noted that the rate of return
can also be considered a lower bound estimate given that the project would provide other social benefits and
spillover effects such as increased economic and technical productivity, health improvements for families, and
higher tax revenue to the government.

Concurrently, there were certain implementation aspects that moderately reduced overall project efficiency. The
ICR (p. 11) noted that staffing of the State Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) was a binding constraint for
implementation. The State Government signed a contract with the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) to mobilize technical staff, including for procurement, financial management, and safeguards. There
was a need to revisit the roles and responsibilities of staff associated with the project to address issues related
to the distribution of responsibilities. By early 2022, there were still four vacant positions at SPIU, including that
of Senior Procurement Consultant, Gender and Social Specialist, M&E Consultant, and Project Officer
Institutional Development, as the project had difficulties in attracting and retaining qualified staff to the SPIU.
These issues were addressed only by the end of 2022, about one year before the closing date. The ICR
reported that the Project Director changed six times. The procurement of tools and equipment moved slowly with


                                                                                                       Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



delays in the completion of civil works, and the ICR noted that these were primarily due to the sequential nature
of project activities.

The COVID-19 pandemic inevitably impacted implementation in several ways. In March 2020, ITIs and short-
term training centers were closed following the nation-wide lockdown. Closures delayed examinations and
certification of students, which in turn delayed placements. The project responded by introducing digital classes,
and both SPIU and the Independent Verification Agency used online tools and telephone surveys for
independent verification of DLI achievements. The economic slowdown caused by the pandemic affected
placement opportunities for short-term training, especially in the hilly areas. The teacher training was also
impacted by travel restrictions. The impact of the pandemic contributed to a 9-month closing date extension.

On balance, overall efficiency reflected what is typically expected in the operation’s sector.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       100.00
 Appraisal                                                  17.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       100.00
 ICR Estimate                                               14.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome



Relevance of objectives was rated High, as objectives were fully aligned with national and state development
plans and with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework. Efficacy was rated Substantial, as project
objectives were almost fully achieved, but with Modest achievement of one of the key outcomes. Efficiency was
also rated Substantial, reflecting what would be expected in the operation’s sector. These findings are consistent
with a Moderately Satisfactory overall outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

                                                                                                    Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)




The achievements made by the project are likely to be maintained, and no major risks to development
outcomes were identified. Both national and state governments continue to prioritize skills development and
training. Institutional strengthening of DSDE was substantial, including for systematic planning,
implementation of ITI upgradation, and a system of performance contracts with private training providers,
based on skilling needs of the state. Priority ITIs have been strengthened considerably with industry-
linkages, innovations, and new structures. Further, the state has approved retaining part of student-fees in
the ITIs for industry linkage cells activities. The training pilots by domain experts are providing important
lessons based on which the state has amended the system of selecting and incentivizing training providers
to factor in the expertise of providers. The ICR (p. 14) noted that this was a proactive step demonstrating the
commitment of the state government to provide quality skills training.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  Based on the PAD and ICR’s information, the project was adequately prepared. It used a hybrid
  arrangement, combining RBF and IPF approaches to respond to state priorities that were aligned with
  national priorities while concurrently strengthening the state’s capacity.

  Project preparation benefited from lessons learned under previous and on-going World Bank-assisted
  projects in India and skills development operations globally (ICR, p. 9). Lessons included (a) the
  consideration of both state-specific skills development needs and implementation capacity; (b) the RBF
  approach provides an added focus on delivering results; (c) balancing the development approach by
  tackling both immediate skills constraints and a longer-term development of the skills system; and (d) the
  importance of a market-driven skills development system for increasing the relevance of training
  programs through partnerships with industry.

  A noteworthy preparation aspect was the inclusion of initiatives that would enhance sustainability beyond
  the project period, as many initiatives were designed as recurrent activities, including professional
  development (DLI 2), industry linkages and employment (DLI 3), ITI’s financial capacity (DLI 4), and
  Short-Term Raining (DLI 5).

  Detailed information on institutional and implementation arrangements was provided by the PAD (pp. 14-
  15). The project would be implemented by DSDE, directly supported by SPIU and SDM. DSDE consisted
  of the Directorate of Training, which is the administrative body for the overall training sector, ITIs, State
  Vocational Education Board, and SDM. A Steering Committee would be the apex body for project
  guidance and decision making. It was chaired by the Principal Secretary or Secretary, joined by the
  Secretary of Finance, representatives of key stakeholders, including industry representatives. At
  appraisal, the SPIU was already an existing unit, as it was supporting another operation, but has been left
  with skeletal staff (ICR, p. 13). The SPIU was to be enhanced under the project that structured SPIU with
  five implementation cells: (a) ITI improvement; (b) industry liaison and short-course training; (c)
  procurement; (d) financial management; and (e) M&E. SPIU would be responsible for overall M&E while
  DLI 5 (Short-Term Training), would be directly monitored by SDM. Further information on M&E

                                                                                                    Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



  arrangements is provided in section 9. The ICR noted that Component III (Policy and Institutional
  Development and Project Management) was somewhat over-costed.

  Key risks were adequately identified, including for staffing of key government officials at DSDE and
  appointment of principals and teachers at ITIs. While the overall risk was assessed as moderate, the
  institutional capacity risk was assessed as substantial (PAD, p. 5). The unfamiliarity with the RBF
  approach was considered a potential factor than could slow implementation, particularly during the early
  stages of implementation. Technical assistance funds were to be used for additional support, including
  fiduciary assessments, monitoring, and third-party verification to contribute to risk mitigation and for
  building long-term capacity.




  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Guided by the results framework and the DLI Matrix, the supervision team was reportedly focused on
 results. The Bank Team developed informative ISRs and Aide Memoires based on adequate
 documentation, and with justified and realistic ratings. The Team provided detailed information on
 implementation progress, including fiduciary and safeguard aspects, while flagging arising issues. The
 Bank Team was proactive and worked closely with its state government counterparts to prepare and
 process several restructurings that facilitated implementation progress and adaptations necessitated by the
 impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The team introduced new DLIs and adjusted original indicators and
 DLIs to incentivize some results that appeared to be lagging, such as for SC/ST short-term training. The
 ICR (p. 14) noted that the supervision and implementation support provided by the Bank Team were
 instrumental in helping the Client complete project activities, and substantially meet project objectives.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Objectives were clearly stated and reflected by the selected indicators. All indicators had baseline data with
 interim and final targets, monitoring frequency, data sources and collection responsibility. The project
 results framework and DLI matrix were clear and concise. The DLIs were relevant to the PDO, and had
 clear definitions and description of expected achievements expected, and allocated amounts. Protocols to

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



 evaluate DLR achievement were well prepared (PAD, pp. 34-37), and an Independent Verification Agency
 was responsible to verify the achievement of all DLIs.

 M&E arrangements were streamlined with obligations assigned to responsible units. Overall, M&E was well
 embedded institutionally. The SPIU was responsible for most M&E tasks, including: (a) regular monitoring
 of M&E implementation; (b) preparing biannual progress reports; (c) monitoring and verification of DLIs; (d)
 carrying out tracer studies; and (e) conducting citizens’ engagement surveys. SDM was responsible for
 monitoring DLI 5 (Short-term Training). The ITIs were responsible for monitoring the implementation of their
 master plans and for regularly reporting back to SPIU.




b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (p. 12) noted that M&E implementation was off to a difficult start but improved significantly with
  strong implementation support, after which it proceeded as planned. The SPIU routinely monitored
  progress, including that of civil works, carried out by two agencies that were contracted for civil works
  pertaining to ITI upgradation. Pertinent adjustments to DLIs were discussed with the project
  restructurings in section 2e. The SPIU compiled a wealth of information through routine surveys on staff
  training, students and employers, enrollment, and employment outcomes through two rounds of tracer
  studies. The IVA was contracted in 2019. The State Government delivered a Borrower’s Completion
  Report in May 2024.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data were used routinely to help identify potential bottlenecks to inform the implementation
  direction of the project. The DLI Matrix was used to monitor agreed DLRs and to approve loan
  disbursements. Insights gained from surveys and tracer studies informed activities related to enrollment,
  training, and placement aspects. The instructors’ feedback on the quality and relevance of professional
  development training helped in planning continuous staff professional development.

  As the M&E system as planned and implemented was robust and more than sufficient to assess the
  achievement of objectives, M&E quality was assessed as high.



  M&E Quality Rating
  High

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards



                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



  Overview: The Overall Safeguards Rating was moderately satisfactory throughout the recorded period in
  the Operations Portal (November 22, 2021-December 19, 2023), including the final ISR.

  The project was classified as Environmental Assessment Category B. The project triggered Safeguard
  Policies OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), based on
  environmental impacts anticipated from limited construction activities and because the project was to be
  implemented state wide in Uttarakhand which has a tribal population dispersed in a few districts (ISDS,
  appraisal stage, disclosed March 10, 2016).

  The ICR did not specify the above safeguard policies that were triggered, but it reported (p. 12) that the
  project’s environmental impacts were expected to be limited and that the project’s Environmental
  Management Framework (EMF) outlined measures to address potential environmental impacts. The ICR
  also reported that SPIU monitored the safe replacement of structural elements containing asbestos during
  civil works and their proper disposal at authorized hazardous waste disposal sites through a contracted
  agency for asbestos handling and management.

  According to the PAD (p. 21), an independent Environmental Assessment was undertaken by the State
  Government to analyze the existing situation to help design and implement the project in an environment-
  friendly manner. The potential environmental impacts primarily concerned (a) poor site planning and design;
  (b) lack of proper maintenance; (c) improper resource consumption and disposal; and (d) lack of
  environmental, health, and safety practices.

  The State Government also carried out a Social Assessment, based on which it prepared a Scheduled
  Caste and Scheduled Tribe Development Plan (SSDP), and Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
  Guidelines, both requiring social screenings for all civil works activities. Progress made on social
  safeguards management included: (a) social/gender checklists were consolidated and social aspects were
  integrated in the SSDP screening checklist for ITIs; (b) screening parameters were developed for on-site
  labor management and safety/prevention of gender-based violence; (c) a three-tier grievance redress
  mechanism was established; and (d) anti-harassment cells were established and/or strengthened in ITIs.
  The project utilized the existing Samadhan portal for grievance redress requests. In addition, SPIU and the
  ITIs set up helpdesks for complaints/feedback. All complaints, grievances, and feedback received were
  directed to appropriate authorities, and resolution was recorded in the portal (ICR, p. 12).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  The project’s financial management arrangements were predicated on the use of established country
  systems, which were considered adequate at appraisal to provide reasonable assurances on the use of
  project funds. The project’s financial management risk rating was moderate. Even though the project’s
  spending was slow, clear Eligible Expenditure Programs were available to support DLI disbursements
  throughout implementation, mainly owing to expenditures under identified treasury budget heads.
  Reimbursement for expenses under Component III (Institutional Development and Technical Assistance)
  was made against actuals via semi-annual Interim Unaudited Financial Reports. The ICR stated that the
  SPIU performed moderately well in the submission of interim financial reported and audit reports in terms
  of timeliness and correctness. Project accounting records were adequately maintained. The World Bank



                                                                                                Page 15 of 18
        Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
        Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



   provided continuous support, and financial management was rated as Moderately Satisfactory in most
   ISRs.

   Procurement was rated mostly as moderately satisfactory in the project’s ISRs. Two Government
   Enterprises with experience of procurement of Civil Works for World Bank funded IPF projects were
   entrusted with the procurement and supervision of civil works, and the SPIU routinely reviewed and
   monitored progress. Procurement of tools and equipment moved slowly primarily because of the sequential
   nature of project activities with delays in completion of civil works, according to the ICR. The World Bank
   delivered procurement training to help improve the process. The SPIU routinely reported on the physical
   and financial progress of all works, goods, and consultancy contracts under implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   The ICR (p. 9) reported positive impacts resulting from the introduction of digital learning in ITIs. The
   experience and lessons learned from its implementation benefitted the sub-sector and allowed ITIs to
   explore models that blend in-person classes with digital and remote platforms. The project generated
   interest among industries to partner with ITIs outside the project, and one ITI was being developed as a
   multi-skill complex cum training center with several industry partners.



d. Other
   --



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                           ICR                   IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                  Moderately
Outcome                                                Moderately Satisfactory
                                  Satisfactory
Bank Performance                  Satisfactory         Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                    High                 High

Quality of ICR                    ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR (pp. 14-15) provided several lessons and recommendations, including the following lessons
slightly restated by IEG Review:



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



A holistic approach to the skilling system, encompassing both long-term and short-term
skills training, can help achieve development results. Reforms and advancements in the ITI
system require institutional changes that take time, while short-term skills allowed the state to
address the immediate skilling needs of the market. Also, while the priority ITIs revolved around
industry centers, the short-term skills training helped the state expand its reach to geographically
difficult, hilly, and underprivileged areas where large capital investments are difficult to accomplish.

Co-opting industry as a development partner can yield higher relevance and better results.
The project promoted a long-term partnership with the industry, including through the establishment
of centers of excellence. Establishing and running centers of excellence as advanced training
centers require expertise that may not be available at the government level. Also, not all industries,
including large and multinational ones, have a strategy for boosting the labor force supply through
collaboration with the public education system and the local government. Under this public-private-
partnership model, the industry partners not only absorbed part of the cost of establishing the
centers, but also provided the technical workforce to operate the centers for a period of three years
and to prepare ITI staff for a handover at the end of three years. The success of the two pilots led
the State Government to create five more centers of excellence after project completion.

From the trainees’ perspective, a successful training outcome should not be limited to
employment as the outcome may consist of pursuing further education and training as well
as employment. The project objective to improve the quality and relevance of training was
measured by labor market outcomes in terms of job placement and enrolment in labor-market
relevant trades. Although females appeared to have relatively underperformed with respect to their
male counterparts in terms of employment in labor market trades, tracer studies revealed that, at
completion, more female ITI graduates were pursuing higher education or vocational training
compared to male ITI graduates.

Complementarities between national and state-level interventions can offer mutual benefits
and opportunities for the exchange of experiences to continuously improve results. Under
this operation, notable examples of complementarity between projects consisted of digital
advancements, outreach activities promoting industry engagement and collaboration, and the
identification of priority sectors for training based on district-level skills mapping, all of which were
facilitated by activities undertaken by other World Bank-assisted projects. While central level
initiatives provided the overall policy framework to guide the states, the autonomy available to the
state to leverage various interventions based on state-specific context supported this
complementarity.




13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Uttarakhand Workforce Development Projec (P154525)



The ICR was clearly written and outcome oriented. It presented a candid and substantiated critique of the
project experience. The theory of change was adequately illustrated with logical links in its results chain. The
ICR’s narrative and observations were aligned with the stated objectives and supported the theory of change
and available evidence. The quality of analysis was adequate. The ICR explained skills development aspects
within the larger national context. The lessons were specific and directly derived from project experience. The
ICR was internally consistent and generally aligned with the guidelines with occasional lapses in some areas.
The ICR was concise with a main text of 15 pages.




  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 18 of 18
