     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024334

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P163699                                    PREP II - SPC

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Pacific Islands                            Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D1820                                  30-Nov-2022                                           3,635,541.29

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 09-May-2017                                31-Mar-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            4,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             4,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         3,954,044.70                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero       Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 5) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, after paragraph
   18), the Project Development Objective (PDO) of this Pacific Resilience Project Phase II under the Pacific
   Resilience Program was to strengthen early warning systems and climate resilient investments in shoreline
   protection in the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI).

   This review will assess project performance against the PDO parsed into two sub-objectives:


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



         To strengthen early warning systems in shoreline protection in the Republic of the Marshall Islands
          (RMI).
         To strengthen climate resilient investments in shoreline protection in the Republic of the Marshall
          Islands (RMI).



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had 4 components:

   1: Institutional Strengthening, Early Warning and Preparedness (US$1.06 million at appraisal, US$0.64
   million, actual). This component was to finance three activities; first, a capacity building program for the
   National Disaster Management Office (NDMO) designed to (i) improve impact forecasting (including
   typhoon, storm surges, and flooding); (ii) strengthen its assessment capacity, prepare an action plan, with
   position descriptions, and operating procedures; and (iii) integrate a disaster response and system for all
   emergency services, incorporating best practices in coordination, preparedness, and response. Second,
   finance a scholarship program where applicants obtain academic or vocational trainings or pursue degrees
   in fields relevant to climate and disaster resilience and coastal risk management. Third, plan and conduct a
   Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), as needed.

   2: Strengthening Coastal Resilience (US$2.33 million at appraisal, US$2.17 million, actual). This
   component was to finance activities to strengthen the government’s integrated coastal risk management
   capacity by conducting coastal vulnerability assessments, employing geospatial analysis and other tools to
   generate coastal management plans, a strategic roadmap, and a workplan. An increased understanding of
   current and future risks was to facilitate the prioritization of future disaster resilient investments. The
   component was also to finance studies of sustainable sources of aggregates in the Majuro and Kwajalein
   atolls.

   3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million at appraisal, US$0 million, actual). This component
   was to be triggered by the national government to finance a response to an emergency by reallocating
   uncommitted funds of the project. This component will give RMI immediate access to financing following a
   disaster if the event (e.g., droughts and tropical storms) does not trigger the PCRAFI.

   4: Project and Program Management (US$0.61 million at appraisal, US$0.77 million, actual). This
   component was to finance SPC’s Program Support Unit (PSU) to assist RMI to manage and implement the
   national project. This component was to finance project management activities in procurement, financial
   management, monitoring, and evaluation (M&E), and operational technical assistance.



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)




e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project Cost: The original total project cost was US$4.0 million. The grant disbursed US$3.6 million. The
   balance was cancelled.

   Financing: The International Development Association funded this grant.

   Borrower Contribution: None.

   Dates: The grant was approved on May 9, 2017, and made effective on September 15, 2017. The Mid Term
   Review (MTR) was conducted on June 17, 2021. The original closing date was on November 30, 2022. The
   following level 2 restructurings extended the closing date by 16 months to close on March 31, 2024:

         On May 17, 2023 to extend the closing date by six months from November 30, 2022 to May 31,
          2023. Delays in procuring an experienced firm in aggregate studies and delays in NDMO in-country
          training caused by COVID-19 mobility restrictions justified this extension. SPC requested a 16-
          month extension. The World Bank task team and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)
          agreed a two-stage extension, with the second subject to progress achieved by this first extension.
         On October 31, 2022 to extend the project closing date by an additional ten months from May 31,
          2023 to March 31, 2024 to complete committed works.

   Split Rating: No split rating of the outcome will be conducted. The PDO remained unchanged. Targets of
   outcome indicators and components were also unchanged.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context:

The Pacific Resilience Program (PREP) was a multi-phased Series of Projects (SOP) first started in 2015 to
reduce disaster risks and foster resilience in the Pacific Island Countries (PIC). The following pillars
governed the regional and national activities: (i) strengthen early warning, (ii) strengthen resilient
investments, and (iii) strengthen financial protection.

PREP Phase I (2015–2025) consisted of two components. The first, covered the implementation of four
early warning and resilient investments in Samoa, Tonga, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), and
Vanuatu. This component was implemented by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) and referred
to as PREP I-SPC. The second, covered the implementation of two regional technical assistance (TA)
activities in participating PICs. This component was implemented by the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat
(PIFS) and was referred to as PREP I-PIFS. PREP I PIFS also managed overall coordination and financial
protection. PREP I-PIFS included RMI in financing premiums of a regional disaster risk insurance scheme.

PREP Phase II was to finance two additional activities: (i) a national activity implemented by RMI (PREP-II
RMI) to strengthen early warning, climate-resilient investments in shoreline protection, and immediate
responses to an eligible crisis or emergency; and (ii) a regional activity implemented by SPC (PREP II-

                                                                                                  Page 3 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PREP II - SPC (P163699)



SPC), to provide TA to RMI to implement the first two pillars of the overall PREP – i.e., strengthen early
warning systems and implement resilient investments. PREP I and II overlapped. PREP II was to start two
years into PREP I implementation and was to rely on the same regional platform managed by SPC (ICR,
footnote 4).

Regional and National Plans: The PDO was relevant to the regional plans of the Pacific Island Countries
(PICs) particularly its 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, the 2017-2030 Framework for Resilient
Development in the Pacific (FRDP), and SPC’s Strategic Plan for 2022-2031. In 2022, the Pacific Island
Forum Leaders endorsed the Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent and prioritized ‘Climate Change and
Disasters’ as one of seven thematic areas. The strategy identified innovative research to address climate
change and disaster risks and promoted regional cooperation to build community capacity and resilience to
disaster and climate impacts. The strategy called for mobilizing resources to support end-to-end multi-
hazard early warning systems and community preparedness to implement Phase I. The PDO supported two
of three goals of the FRDP: (1) ‘Strengthened Integrated Adaptation and Risk Reduction to Enhance
Resilience to Climate Change and Disasters,’ and (3) ‘Strengthened Disaster Preparedness, Response and
Recovery.’ The PDO supported FRDP priority actions that called for “strengthening of capacities (including
humanitarian coordination mechanisms) and planning arrangements … to better prepare for, respond, and
recover from disasters,” and to strengthen end-to-end early warning systems, and interoperability among
response agencies. The PDO was also relevant to Key Focus Area 1of the SPC 2022–2031 Strategic
Plan’s ‘Resilience and Climate Action.’

The PDO was also relevant to RMI national plans to enhance its resilience to the impacts of climate change
and natural disasters under the Environment Climate Change and Resilience pillar of its National Strategic
Plan (2020 to 2030). Under this pillar, the PDO was relevant to two of the three policy objectives of its
Disaster Risk Management Strategic Area: ‘Enhanced resilience to disasters and risks’ and ‘Strengthened
disaster preparedness, response and recovery.’ In 2023, RMI adopted its National Adaptation Plan (2023–
2040) for climate change adaptation and resilience. The PDO supported the NAP’s near-term adaptation
plan to prioritize low-risk adaptation actions informed by science, such as upgrading coastal protection to
protect urban centers in Majuro and Ebeye.

World Bank Country Partnership Framework: The World Bank, working with the 12 countries and Papua
New Guinea in the Pacific, framed its working relations under a regional partnership framework. The PDO
was relevant to the World Bank Group Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for FY2017-FY2021. The
World Bank extended the period covered because of the COVID-19 disruption. The PDO contributed to
achieving the RPF’s Focus Area 3, ‘Protecting Incomes and Livelihoods,’ and was specifically PREP as a
priority under Objective 3.1 ‘Strengthen Resilience to Natural Disasters and Climate Change.’ The RPF also
specified PREP II and the ‘additional investments in early warning preparedness, coastal resilience, and
financial protection’ in RMI (RPF, page 54). The RPF cited PREP as commitment “to support regional and
single country activities that help PICs strengthen their resilience against natural disasters and climate
change.” The PDO was relevant to the 2024 World Bank Pacific Atoll Countries Climate and Development
Report (CCDR). The PDO complemented the report’s emphasis on emergency response, multi-hazard
early warning systems, and recommendation to develop “standard operating procedures for drought
preparation and response, like those in RMI” in other Atolls. The PDO was also relevant to CCDR priority
action C.2, support to strategic and operational plans in sourcing aggregates. The Australian and New
Zealand governments, through the PNG and the Pacific Islands Umbrella Facility (PPIUF) also support the
World Bank work in the Pacific and Papua New Guinea.




                                                                                                  Page 4 of 22
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                      Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      PREP II - SPC (P163699)



               World Bank Experience in the Sector and in the Region and in the Country: The World Bank is
               working with RMI to address the significant challenges presented by climate change, sea level rise, and
               distance to markets. The World Bank experience in climate resilience and disaster preparedness consists
               of both the first and second phases of (PREP). The program would help communities in RMI better prepare
               for the impacts of climate change, by strengthening early warning systems, improving climate resilience and
               shoreline protection, and immediate response to a crisis or emergency. Other World Bank assistance in the
               region include the US$30 million Marshall Islands Urban Resilience Project to improve climate resilience in
               densely populated parts of the atoll nation to protect important infrastructure in the capital.

               The PDO was narrowly pitched at an outcome level to address the development problem faced by the RMI
               shoreline as result of climate change. This outcome level is appropriate considering the progressive design
               of the program interventions in the region contributing to the achievement of the overall PDO under the
               Pacific Resilience Program. The inputs and outputs reasonably linked to the expected outcome in
               protecting the RMI shoreline.

               Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated High. The PDO contributed to the objectives of the country, the
               region, and the World Bank, to address disaster preparedness and implement disaster resilient investments
               in the islands.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To strengthen early warning systems in the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI).

                             Rationale
                             THEORY OF CHANGE: (TOC) The PAD did not include a Theory of Change (TOC) because one was not
                             required at the time but one was prepared for the ICR. The national early warning systems were to be
                             strengthened, complemented by the region-wide technical assistance activities. According to the World
                             Meteorological Organization (WMO) four elements comprise early warning systems: (i) disaster risk
                             knowledge; (ii) detection, monitoring, analysis and forecasting of hazards and consequences; (iii) warning
                             dissemination and communication; and (iv) preparedness and response capabilities. RMI already had well
                             established systems relating to detecting, forecasting, and early warning of natural hazard events. This TOC
                             was to focus on other aspects of early warning systems— the last mile communications to remote locations
                             and promote preparedness and enhance response capabilities. The training and technical assistance inputs
                             would strengthen the National Disaster Management Office (NDMO) capacity, improve both its operational
                             procedures for preparedness and response, and its impact forecasting. Additional inputs were to finance
                             scholarships for academic and vocational training and plan and conduct Post Disaster Needs Assessments
                             (PDNAs) following a disaster. These inputs and outputs were to enhance early warning systems and build

                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PREP II - SPC (P163699)



NDMO capacity. The TOC established a reasonable causal link from the capacity built and early warning
systems adopted to the expected outcome that RMI would become more resilient to climate change and
extreme events. The outcomes were to be the strengthened early warning system, following a disaster or
through simulated drills (see Section 9 M&E Design below).

INPUTS: were to consist of training and technical assistance that would strengthen institutions in RMI that
focus on risk governance, early warning system, and modernizing the National Disaster Management Office
(NDMO). Other inputs were the financing of NDMO to conduct a Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA).

OUTPUTS: were to consist of a design of an integrated governance mechanism to address disasters and
climate change; having in place early warning communication systems for the outer islands; the number of
trained NDMO staff; operational procedures for preparedness and response in place; impact forecasting
developed; a scholarship program for academic or vocational training funded; and planned PDNA conducted.

OUTCOMES: were to consist of a strengthened integrated governance mechanism based on an updated
structure that addresses the disparate segments of the agencies responsible for early warning systems, an
improved early warning systems for the outer islands based on the reach and response from simulation drills
reported, strengthened institutional capacity of NDMO, improved operational procedures for preparedness
and response, better impact forecasting, recipient scholars becoming members of the RMI Emergency
Operations Center (EOC) national council, and the investments financed as identified by the PDNA following
a disaster. The World Bank Task Team in their response to IEG on February 16, 2025, did confirm that
simulated drills using improved procedures were conducted during the project period.

The following CRITICAL ASSUMPTIONS, if realized were to increase the likelihood of achieving the
objective: (i) that RMI institutions would collaborate effectively in transmitting early warning messages to end
users, and end users would translate early warning into better preparedness; and (ii) that NDMO staff would
apply training, procedures, and tools acquired. However, this assumption could more appropriately have been
identified as an expected outcome with relevant indicators to measure the results.

Overall, the TOC lacked outcome indicators that could be attributed to provide a causal link between the
inputs (training and technical assistance) to the outputs (design, number of staff trained) and to the expected
outcome to achieve a strengthened early warning system for RMI and the outlying islands.

OUTPUTS: In their February 16, 2025 response to IEG’s request for clarification, the World Bank Task Team
provided the following achievements (but without target values) for the outputs noted below. These training
sessions were to be conducted as needed. Without target values, the degree of achievement of these outputs
cannot be assessed.

      56 percent of staff were trained on new procedures in early warning and preparedness, almost
       achieving the original target of 60 percent. All courses included emergency simulations and/or
       application of emergency scenarios.
      Completed the following studies:
            o Gap analysis and two-year capacity action plan for emergency management staff
            o A guide for emergency response training and standard operating procedures or SOPs
      Conducted the following training events:
            o 54 staff from Majuro and Ebeye were trained in emergency response planning and SOPs
            o 50 staff from Majuro and Ebeye were trained in coordination of Emergency Operation Centers
              (EOCs)

                                                                                                  Page 6 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PREP II - SPC (P163699)



         o 15 staff from the fire department and aircraft rescue teams were trained in emergency rescue
            simulation
         o 21 staff were trained in national emergency response validation and rescue simulation, with
            actual field drills.
         o 26 staff from Lae Atoll participated in disaster planning workshops with actual field drills.
  Completed SOPs for preparedness and response:
      o 144 from 26 cluster and partner agencies were trained in the updated National Emergency
              Response Program (NERP, or the NDMO Operations Manual cited in the PAD). These
              included all four NDMO staff, representatives from major agencies in the eight emergency
              response clusters, key nongovernmental organizations, and emergency management staff
              from Kwajalein atoll and Lae community. At closing, the ICR acknowledged some capacity
              erosion because of high staff turnover at RMI institutions: out of the 39 members, advisers and
              support staff listed under the national EOC in 2024, only 22 (56 percent) remained from those
              trained, almost achieving the 60 percent target. The target was achieved because the number
              was underestimated – not counting those trained in Kwajalein, Lae, and members of the
              Council of Nongovernmental Organizations who were also engaged in emergency
              management.
            o 15 agencies in Majuro and 10 agencies in Ebeye developed and assessed their SOPs
            o The Ministry of Education and Public Schools completed a School Disaster Risk Reduction
              Handbook and trained 14 staff on its use.
            o The Water and Sanitation cluster developed a Drought Contingency Plan.
            o The NDMO and the National Weather Service developed, assessed, and integrated early
              warning and preparedness protocols into the NERP.
            o The Search and Rescue Committee received emergency rescue equipment and trained in its
              use.
            o Lead cluster agencies helped NDMO, and the National Weather Service disseminate early
              warning to end users.
            o Applied Common Incident Management System to EOC training.
    Developed ocean current modeling for inundation scenarios for Majuro.
    Achieved a 13 percent graduation rate where 3 graduates received certificates (Certificate IV) in team
     leadership course in disaster risk management.
    Trained 27 staff in the use of initial damage assessment field forms in the local language. No PDNA
     was conducted.
    Approved a new Disaster Risk Management Act in October 2023.
    Subnational early warning systems aligned their operational systems with regional standards to
     facilitate assistance from other PICs. Other agencies—the United Nations Office for the Coordination
     of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM)—were
     assisting RMI with DRM capacity, while SPC managed the Pacific Islands Emergency Management
     Alliance (PIEMA). This project aligned both the new procedures and training with those of the Pacific
     Islands Regional Strategic Roadmap for Emergency Management (SREM 2021–25), so that RMI
     could benefit from a region-wide response to disasters.
    The ocean current modeling for inundation improved impact forecasting by developing sea level rise
     scenarios for 3D Laura Model and dashboard platform; and generated more precise tsunami hazard
     and evacuation zones.
    The academic and vocational training scholars did not become members of the EOC national council,
     not achieving the target. This is another intermediate outcome or output. The outcome indicator would


                                                                                                 Page 7 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PREP II - SPC (P163699)



       have been that these scholars, after receiving their training have then implemented the risk
       management policies for shoreline protection in RMI.

OUTCOMES:

      The 100 percent of staff trained in the new procedures in early warning and preparedness using the
       updated NDMO Operations Manual, called NERP, to operationalize the new Disaster Risk
       Management Act served as evidence of a strengthened early warning systems in RMI. Absent a
       disaster, this disaster response training was used on simulated drills (exceeding the original target
       outcome of 50 percent (number of staff trained in the new procedures)).
      The outcome indicators of the strengthened systems indicating improvement in interagency
       collaboration between NDMO and ‘cluster’ emergency agencies were reported below following the first
       completion survey SPC conducted 2-18 months following the training. In addition, the World Bank
       Task Team recommended on February 16, 2025, that the NDMO conduct more frequent simulation
       drills to strengthen the systems further. RMI’s 2023 Disaster Risk Management Act defined a cluster
       as “a group of people representing government and nongovernment entities working on a specific
       sector whose role is to coordinate and plan disaster response within their sector.” These were clusters
       in (i) Education; (ii) Agriculture and Food Security; (iii) Gender and Protection; (iv) Health, (v) Water,
       Sanitation, and Hygiene; (vi) Infrastructure; (vii) Shelter; and (viii) Logistics.
              o 94 percent of staff surveyed reported that they applied training they received to their work.
                Some cited their enhanced capacity as a weather forecaster for emergency communications;
                some reported using their training in emergency responses and planning; some conducted
                training of school communities on safe school management; and several reported training staff
                in other islands, e.g., NDMO staff facilitated two emergency management courses in Ebeye in
                2022.
              o Skills learned were applied to three emergencies, evidence of improved emergency response:
                       (i) COVID-19 outbreak in August 2022, two weeks after the training at the national
                         Emergency Operations Center (EOC) in Majuro, coordinated by NDMO and the
                         Ministry of Health. The MOH later led the disaster response. A COVID-19 after-action
                         review in October 2022 found that the national response was well structured. Key
                         agencies were aware of their roles in planning, resourcing, and coordinating the
                         response.
                       (ii) Trainees in conducting initial data assessment used their training five months later
                         to determine the extent of the damage and plan a response to the September 2023
                         Coconut Rhinoceros Beetle (CRB) outbreak in Majuro. The standard initial damage
                         assessment forms used in the September 2023 CRB outbreak in Majuro was an
                         important tool for initial response to local events. The CRB was a major coconut pest in
                         the Pacific.
                       (iii) Following coordination and capacity challenges in responding to the 2015–16 and
                         the 2022 droughts, where the PDNA of the 2016–17 drought noted a lack of clarity of
                         roles, responsibilities, and empowerment of decision-making individuals, 16 members
                         of the Kwajalein EOC were trained, and the Kwajalein EOC completed their 2024
                         drought assessment and obtained Japanese funding for a new Ebeye emergency
                         operations building that was completed in April 2024.

Due to the lack of relevant indicators at outcome level, additional information was used to provide the
evidence to conclude that the objective was substantially achieved, with moderate shortcomings (see Section


                                                                                                   Page 8 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PREP II - SPC (P163699)



M&E Design below). In addition, there was a lack of targets for the outputs reported making it difficult to
assess the degree of achievement against targets and goals. As a result, the efficacy of the project to achieve
this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. Despite the weaknesses in the RF, the
additional information provided shows some improvements in the early warning systems.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
The surveys reported on the evidence to support the effective use of the training received, and the systems
adopted improved capacity for early warning.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen climate resilient investments in shoreline protection in the Republic of the Marshall Islands
(RMI).

Rationale
THEORY OF CHANGE: The regional elements of this project were to complement the national activities to
strengthen RMI’s resilience to climate change and extreme events. The TOC was to strengthen the coastal
planning capacity of RMI, increase their understanding of current and future risks, and help prioritize future
investments in shoreline protection. The inputs were to be the training and technical assistance focusing on
coastal risk management. These inputs were to generate outputs, measured by prioritizing disaster resilient
investments. The outcomes were to be the actual investments in disaster resilient projects that would protect
the RMI shoreline. The causal link between the inputs and outputs to the expected outcome was weak. The
outputs were plans and tools and not priority investments. Hence, the outcomes did not demonstrate that
disaster resilient shorelines were achieved. Other inputs, such as investment financing of priority climate
resilient investments, from other sources were not acknowledged and were not part of the TOC.

INPUTS: were to be the training and technical assistance in coastal risk assessment and planning disaster
resilient investment priorities. The input resources were limited and were not designed to finance actual
investments.

OUTPUTS: were to be the vulnerability assessments, the completed workplans and roadmaps, coastal risk
planning and monitoring tools, plans of priority coastal protection investments, the number of training
sessions conducted, the number of people trained, and the completed study on sustainable sources of
aggregates.

OUTCOMES: were to be the strengthened capacity to undertake vulnerability assessments of coastal areas
and the adoption of coastal risk planning and monitoring tools to inform the implementation of priority coastal
protection investments. This outcome could have been measured by the investments that implemented these
policies. However, no related indicator was identified in the Results Framework (see Section 9, M&E Design
below). In addition, the outcome would be the adoption of policies to strengthen sustainable sources of
aggregates. The link between sustainably sourcing aggregates and shoreline protection was weak. There
was no justification for how sourcing aggregates would protect the shoreline. The outcome indicator for

                                                                                                   Page 9 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PREP II - SPC (P163699)



planning shoreline protection investments was the number of sector agencies that used the new coastal risk
assessment tool to inform planning and decision-making. This outcome indicator was at an intermediate
rather than at an outcome level (see Section 9, M&E Design below).

The following critical assumptions, when realized, were to enhance the achievement of this objective: (i)
that plans, assessments, and investments were effectively implemented; and (ii) resilient investments and
capacity were adequate to respond to the magnitude of climate change and disasters encountered. These
critical assumptions addressed a longer- term outcome and could have benefited from a shorter-
term assumption to link the expected outcome (planned investments) from the technical assistance inputs,
and the outputs (tools).

Overall, the TOC supported the causal link between the inputs and the outputs. However, the link between
the outputs and expected outcome was narrowly focused on strengthening the planning for future shoreline
protection investments, rather than actual investments. This appears to be a shortcoming of how the PDO
was stated. 99 percent of the population of RMI lived in the coastal area which was the justification for the
focus on shoreline protection.

OUTPUTS:

      Completed a detailed methodology for the preparation of a roadmap and workplan (the target indicator
       was that these plans were prepared (Yes/No) and the target was achieved). The World Bank
       approved the detailed methodology and workplan developed in September 2018, and geodetic and
       oceanographic baseline measurements to validate vertical references in 2018–19, covering water
       levels, waves, and currents at strategic areas in Majuro and Ebeye.
      Completed the development of coastal risk planning and monitoring tools.
            o Collected topographic and bathymetric light detection and ranging (LiDAR) data and Digital
               Elevation Models for Majuro atoll and the eastern part of Ebeye Island, covering 293.45 km2
            o Completed the following tools for Majuro
                     A probabilistic model of coastal inundation hazard, to forecast coastal flood events and
                      projected sea level rise. SPC experts developed this product based on a two-
                      dimensional circulation model for Majuro lagoon in combination with a high-resolution
                      wave and inundation model (Time-Varying Emulator for Short and Long-Term Analysis
                      of coastal flood hazard (TESLA-flood)
                     The University of Cantabria developed TESLA-flood, a time-varying emulator which
                      generates thousands of hourly conditions for waves, sea level, and wind, enabling for a
                      robust estimation of coastal flooding risk. It can also be used for forecasting tropical
                      cyclone and storm event impacts.
                     A three-dimensional flood inundation model for the Laura area, the Environmental
                      Protection Agency (EPA) was to use as resource custodians. The model showed
                      coastal inundation impacts of projected sea level rise on groundwater and key
                      infrastructure. The Laura area holds the only remaining useable groundwater lens for
                      emergency use.
                     The RMI Dashboard, launched April 2023, showing inundation levels for sea level
                      scenarios and risks to population and buildings.
      Relevant, understandable, and usable disaster risk information were made available to national and
       local agencies (the target indicator was that this information was made available (Yes/No) and the



                                                                                                 Page 10 of 22
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  PREP II - SPC (P163699)



     target was achieved). Feedback from trainees indicate that the information was relevant,
     understandable, and usable.
          o 55 RMI staff from 25 agencies were trained on coastal risk management applications. The
             target indicator was these staff from these agencies were trained (Yes/No) and the target was
             achieved. Trainings were based on an assessment of national geospatial capacity. Six
             specialized courses were on shoreline change analysis, risk assessment and drone pilot
             licensing, provision of a drone, and applied maps for coastal risk monitoring. Two EPA staff
             were assigned to SPC for a month for hands-on training with the tools. Training also helped
             RMI staff manage their own geospatial data, using simple handheld data collectors such as the
             Trimble TDC 600 (TDC650) a smartphone with a built-in global navigation satellite system
             which acts as a handheld data collector. The free software applications and open access
             storage platforms Kobo Collect and Kobo Toolbox collected field data.
          o Trained staff on coastal risk planning:
                    17 staff on the application of Geospatial Information Technology
                    11 staff on basic GIS for shoreline change analysis and asset data collection
                    13 staff on Certificate IV in Climate Resilience (Coastal Management)
                    28 staff in shoreline change analysis, risk assessment and QGIS
                    2 staff in coastal inundation risk and 3-D model
                    5 staff in drone pilot license
          o Identified alternative construction aggregate resources in Majuro and Ebeye. The findings were
             shared with the government and stakeholders (the target indicator was that these findings
             were shared (Yes/No) and the target was achieved). The studies included:
                  o an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), completed in 2022, complemented by
                     an assessment of environmental and social risks and mitigation measures
                  o geotechnical mapping, sampling, and testing of aggregates in the lagoons of Majuro
                     Atoll and Ebeye Island
                  o a market assessment of aggregates in Marshall Islands
                  o a consolidated report, summarizing the above studies and recommended options

OUTCOMES:

    4 RMI sector agencies used the coastal risk assessment tool to assist in decision planning of
     investments (original target was 2 agencies): (i) the Climate Change Directorate (CCD); (ii) the
     Ministry of Works, Infrastructure, and Utilities (MWIU); (iii) EPA; and (iv) the RMI Ports Authority. Other
     agencies such as the Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority (MIMRA) and Kwajalein Atoll
     Development Authority (KADA) expressed plans to use the tool.
    Survey respondents (trainees) confirmed that training received were relevant, understandable, and
     usable. Of the agencies trained, fourteen were national, and three were local (with others from civil
     society, academia, and international agencies).
          o Overall, 80 percent of respondents surveyed at completion found the trainings ‘highly valuable’
             and ‘greatly applicable’ to their work, although only 60 percent admitted to applying it.
          o At the conclusion of training sessions—80–100 percent expressed that the training was ‘very
             or extremely effective,’ 77–80 percent that it ‘met expectations,’ and 67 percent ‘strongly
             agreed’ that it was relevant to their needs.
          o Trainees applied skills in the use of:
                   geographic information system (GIS) skills to map out water quality assessment;
                   remote sensing to map vegetation;

                                                                                                 Page 11 of 22
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   PREP II - SPC (P163699)



                     drones to map landfill and dredging areas;
                     GIS software to analyze shoreline change;
                     flood risk inundation models for outer island communities; and
                     TDC 600, Kobo Collect, and Kobo Toolbox to capture, use, and store data.
      The project tools and data were used for resilient coastal plans and policies to design resilient coastal
       investments. The ICR acknowledged that contribution was indirect and long term.
            o EPA staff used risk mapping skills.
            o LiDAR data was used for an Atoll study to define adaptation strategy of the 2023 NAP, under
              the CCD.
            o The probabilistic inundation modeling was used to visualize wave exposure in the NAP and
              supported the parameters adopted in RMI’s 2023 Sea Level Rise Adaptation Policy. According
              to SPC, RMI Climate Change Ambassadors further used the Laura model at the
              2023 Conference of the Parties in Dubai (with NDMO input), and at the United Nations
              Criminal Court of Justice, to highlight expected inundation impacts from sea level rise.
            o For future resilient coastal investments, LiDAR data, was used for the modeling design of the
              2.1 km Ebeye seawall managed by the Ministry of Works, Infrastructure, and Utilities (MWIU)
              to protect the oceanside against sea level rise, for completion in 2026.
            o LiDAR data was used to complete the 2022 Majuro Coastal Vulnerability Assessment (CVA) to
              determine coastal resilient investments in Majuro under a World Bank-financed, MWIU-
              implemented RMI Urban Resilience Project (P177124).
      The reports on construction aggregates sourcing were presented to stakeholders in Majuro and Ebeye
       in March 2024. Further assessments (including appropriate legislation) were acknowledged needed
       before sustainable aggregate extraction can be developed in RMI. The studies recommended:
            o Prohibit beach and reef mining and nearshore dredging, four sites in Majuro lagoon and
              potential offshore dredging in six Ebeye sites.
            o Use preferentially identified lagoon aggregates to support the NAP strategy of fortifying
              shoreline barriers in Majuro and Ebeye; require opting for locally mined or imported aggregates
              in any new protection works, allowing importation when quality cannot be met locally.
            o SPC sent questionnaires to 27 stakeholders following the presentation:
                     54–62 percent rated the study reports as ‘highly valuable’ and
                     38–46 percent ‘valuable to some extent’ (with the geotechnical reports rated highest
                      and the market and consolidated reports lowest).

There is some evidence of achievement of some outcomes (insofar as the investments in shoreline protection
was strengthened). However, there is a lack of relevant outcome indicators to fully measure and demonstrate
the project’s expected outcomes. This makes it difficult to assess the degree to which the outcomes were
achieved and hence how fully the objective was achieved. Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this
objective is rated Modest. Outcome indicators did not fully reflect how investments protected the shoreline
since no actual investments were funded. The standby priority investments were noted to have adopted the
findings of the training and technical assistance provided by the inputs and the outputs. The ICR reported that
further assessments of the recommendations and appropriate legislation would be needed to achieve resilient
shoreline investments in the future. The project strengthened the planning capacity of key RMI staff in
shoreline protection and provided important tools to help inform future resilient shoreline investments, plans,
and policies.




                                                                                                 Page 12 of 22
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                PREP II - SPC (P163699)




                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The overall efficacy of the project to achieve the objectives is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.
                            Resilient shoreline investments—informed by the project’s outputs—were expected to be implemented in the
                            future. Project output indicators were met although relevant indicators to assess the achievements at the
                            outcome level were missing. Over the short to medium term, preparedness, and response of RMI’s early
                            warning system were strengthened, by extending NDMO capacity to involve other cluster agencies and
                            enable them to work better together by clarifying SOPs. The project outcome provided important tools to
                            strengthen planning capacity of key RMI staff in shoreline protection and help inform future resilient shoreline
                            investments, plans, and policies.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic Efficiency: At appraisal, a cost benefit analysis was conducted for the proposed investments in
   coastal structures (intended under the PREP II-RMI, not PREP II-SPC) to reduce the risk of inundation from
   major weather events (swell waves, typhoons, and tsunamis) on the lives and livelihood of Ebeye. PREP II-SPC
   outputs were not linked to any investments. Benefits were from training and technical assistance delivered –
   acquired capacity, tools, and studies. These benefits lacked a quantifiable market value. Economic efficiency
   used cost-effectiveness measures.

   At closing, the technical assistance delivered was cost-effective because (i) the costs of key deliverables were
   reasonable compared to their original cost estimates; (ii) unit costs compared to similar costs in the region were
   reasonable, and (iii) SPC experts delivered technical assistance rather than external consultants. Comparing
   final project costs to appraisal estimates, the Institutional Strengthening, Early Warning and Preparedness
   technical assistance used 61 percent of appraisal costs, scholarships showed a unit cost of US$19,864 per
   graduated trainee, or 2.4 to 10 times that of the same training for graduates from Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, and
   Vanuatu under PREP I. Unit training costs were cost effective, at US$17–692 per trainee-day compared to the
   US$120–862 per trainee-day for comparable trainings conducted by PREP I-SPC during similar periods. The
   Strengthening Coastal Resilience technical assistance used 93 percent of appraisal costs. There were two cost
   overruns, primarily due to the COVID-19 mobility restrictions: (i) the LiDAR survey cost 27 percent more
   because the RMI survey plane traveled longer distances, and (ii) the aggregates study cost 76 percent more

                                                                                                                               Page 13 of 22
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      PREP II - SPC (P163699)



than originally estimated because a survey boat was procured and a Marine Geophysics Advisor, rather than
SPC experts, was hired.

Administrative and Operational Efficiency: Protracted negotiations on reimbursement procedures for SPC
staff costs led to the delay in finalizing the Project Operations Manual (POM) and the Service Agreement with
RMI. This led to delays in complying with both legal covenants. However, the project proceeded with a draft
budget and work plan, and prior agreed procedures between SPC and RMI. Staff turnover was high. The initial
Emergency Management Specialist (EMS) resigned after only three months. The project was extended by 16
months to consider initial procurement delays (see Section 10 Other Issues, Procurement below) and the impact
of COVID-19 mobility restrictions. RMI was closed to outside travel from March 2020 until September 2022
affecting in-country training and the survey for the aggregates study. The delay increased the share of
administrative costs. Project and program management costs were 21.4 percent of total costs at closing, higher
than the 15.3 percent appraisal estimate. At closing, major outputs were delivered with 89 percent of the funds
spent. The SPC shared the Program Support Unit of both PREP I and PREP II SPC, sharing costs of key staff
(such as the Finance and Administrative officers) and technical staff when practicable. Based on PREP-I
experience with unmet salary expectations and competition from other projects in filling specialized positions a
disbursement category was added to reimburse SPC for “reasonable and necessary costs of expenditures
incurred by SPC for salaries and travel of technical staff working on the project, but excluding bonuses, sitting
fees, and honoraria or equivalent payments, based on annual work plans and budgets approved ex ante by (the
World Bank).”

Overall efficiency is rated Modest. The project delivered mostly cost-effective technical assistance. Overall
implementation and administrative efficiency were modest. Substantial cost overruns in LiDAR and
the aggregates study, and high unit costs of the scholarships compared to those in the region contributed to this
modest operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                    0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                     Not Applicable
                                                                                    0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                     Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of objective is rated High. The efficacy of the project to achieve the first objective is rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings with relevant additional information showing a reasonable achievement

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



of the outcome. The lack of relevant outcome indicators under the second objective made it difficult to measure
and demonstrate expected achievements at outcome level. The efficacy of the project to achieve the second
objective is therefore rated Modest. The ICR noted that expected outcomes would be achieved in the
future. The overall efficacy of the project to achieve both objectives is rated Substantial with moderate
shortcomings. Efficiency is rated modest because of administrative and operational inefficiencies from
procurement delays and component cost overruns. Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the expected development outcomes:

      Institutional risks: There is a risk that capacity improvements introduced by the project through staff
       trained may not be sustained RMI institutions were observed to have high staff turnover. By the time
       the project closed, staff of the National Emergency Operations Center (EOC) had already rotated.
       This reflected the scarce human resources, geographical isolation, and frequent out-migration of
       skilled staff in RMI. To mitigate this erosion of capacity, the World Bank Task Team confirmed on
       January 20, 2025 that SPC will continue to focus on emergency management capacity building in the
       country through the European Union-funded Building Safety and Resilience in the Pacific Phase II
       Program (€14 million, 2022–2027), and the Australia and New Zealand-funded Pacific Islands
       Emergency Management Alliance Phase II (€3.6 million, 2023–2028). RMI is also implementing the
       Japan-funded Enhancing Disaster and Climate Resilience Project and building a new Emergency
       Operating Center in Ebeye.
      Technical risk: There is a risk that technologies adapted under this project may not be sustained
       and updated. Technological development is rapid and the new technologies that have been adopted
       under this project will require periodic updating. RMI may not have adequate resources to dedicate to
       this operating expense. In addition, population and asset changes in Majuro and Ebeye would require
       refinements in climate change models. New data are likely to be required. Capacity development
       would require renewed attention to consider technological changes and new data. To mitigate this
       risk, ocean and coastal risk modeling fall within the mandate of SPC’s Geoscience, Energy, and
       Maritime Division. SPC and other partners are expected to continue to offer technical and financial
       support to strengthening coastal protection in RMI. In addition, the World Bank Urban Resilience
       Project (P177124, 2023–2028) is expected to conduct further assessments on coastal risks in areas
       outside Majuro, building on the CVA methodologies and models developed under this project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry



                                                                                                  Page 15 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



  The World Bank team designed this project to be strategically relevant to the country’s plans to reduce
  disaster risks from climate change and foster resilience. The approach was to provide technical
  assistance to strengthen the last-mile communication needs in early warning systems for the atolls of
  RMI. The team captured the lesson from PREP I and identified a PDO for each project of PREP II based
  on two implementing entities and coverage. RMI implemented PREP II-RMI to cover the national
  activities and SPC implemented the regional technical assistance of PREP II SPC. Each PDO had a set
  of performance indicators. However, design did not specify which aspects of early warning systems (the
  last-mile connection), or the shoreline protection would be the focus of the technical assistance. Not all
  outcome indicators were useful (see Section 9, M&E Design below) and called for collecting additional
  information at closing to provide evidence of outcomes (see Supervision below) and relevant indicators at
  outcome level were lacking. This necessitated the collection of additional information at closing to provide
  evidence of outcomes (see Supervision below). The Bank team designed a simplified and flexible
  approach where implementing regional activities bolstered national efforts. The Bank team prepared an
  initial Procurement Plan with annual post procurement reviews and an intensive oversight plan to address
  the compliance risks of meeting environmental and social safeguards. However, key implementation
  benchmarks such as the Project Operations Manual (POM), a Service Agreement between SPC and
  RMI, and clarification of procedures for use of SPC’s recurrent staff were only completed in 2019, more
  than a year and a half after effectiveness.

  Overall, the quality of the Bank’s performance at entry is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.
  Shortcomings came from insufficiently assessing the readiness to implement. Some design
  considerations including adoption of adequate outcome indicators to guide project implementation were
  missing. These shortcomings were expected to be addressed at supervision.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 13 supervision missions, including virtual ones, over the 7-year implementation
 period. The Bank team took advantage of the simplified design to seamlessly include cluster entities
 introduced by the 2023 Disaster Risk Management Act to receive training. The innovative disbursement
 category led to protracted negotiations on the reimbursement process. However, a draft budget and work
 plan, and prior agreed procedures between SPC and RMI allowed the project to proceed during
 the negotiations. The Bank team addressed the inefficient initial procurement and resource planning (e.g.,
 finalizing terms of reference and specifications, delayed procuring LiDAR procurement, two-year delay in
 contracting an Emergency Management Specialist, critical to initiating Part I activities) with intensified
 training, holding regular calls with the RMI project manager and more regular meetings with World Bank
 staff. COVID-19 delayed in-person training and field surveys for the aggregates study. The Bank team and
 SPC adjusted the mixture of SPC technical experts and external consultants for the same study. However,
 the Bank team was unable to address the low participation rate of RMI in the scholarship program because
 of three factors: one, SPC did not conduct a skills gap assessment for RMI to determine the skills to match
 the offered scholarships; second, the University of South Pacific (USP) did not promptly notify the project of
 lack of RMI participation; and third, RMI choosing other training over the offered scholarships.



                                                                                                   Page 16 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



 Overall, the quality of Bank supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory. There were moderate
 shortcomings in proactively identifying opportunities that would resolve challenges. The team also did not
 take the opportunity offered by the restructuring to strengthen the outcome indicators of the technical
 assistance.

 With a Moderately Unsatisfactory rating for quality of entry and a Moderately Satisfactory quality of
 supervision rating, the Overall Bank performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory, following the overall
 outcome rating.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The overall causal logic linking the inputs, outputs and expected outcomes in the TOC was lacking. The
 results framework did not specify adequate and relevant indicators at the outcome level to achieve the
 PDO. Most, if not all indicators identified as outcome indicators were at output or at the intermediate
 outcome levels, rather than outcomes. The PDO was simply stated. The ICR acknowledged that the PDO
 was not specific enough to have identified the focus of the early warning systems – preparedness and
 response – or the aspects of shoreline protection to be strengthened – climate-resilient ‘planning,’ not
 ‘investments.’ (ICR, paragraph 56). The results framework specified adequate indicators but did not
 encompass all outcomes to capture what the project was to achieve because of the less than specific PDO
 statement. The link to the last mile communications as part of the national effort to strengthen the early
 warning system to remote locations was weak. The results framework in the PAD clarified the focus of the
 project but did not specify how to measure some of the indicators. The intermediate results indicators did
 not adequately capture the contribution of the activities and outputs toward achieving PDO-level outcomes.
 Some of the indicators were specific, measurable, achievable, and time bound. Some were unclear (for
 example, PDOI-1 – ‘staff trained in early warning and preparedness applied knowledge they have acquired
 during disaster response or simulated drills’ did not specify which staff, trained in early warning and
 preparedness, would ‘apply knowledge they acquired during disaster response or simulated drills’ and IRI-2
 – did not define what ‘relevant, understandable, and usable disaster risk information available to national
 and local agencies’ meant, and target was expressed as a simple ‘Yes/No,’ leaving a subjective measure of
 the indicator. These unclear definitions lead to confusing interpretations during implementation. Gender
 disaggregation was only envisaged for IRI-1 – ‘staff involved in early warning and preparedness are trained
 on new procedures’ without specific target. The Program Support Unit (PSU) was to share an M&E expert
 with PREP I SPC, but the Procurement Plan only budgeted for extra data collection and analysis without
 noting the one and a half months per year required to share the M&E expert.




                                                                                                  Page 17 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)



b. M&E Implementation
  SPC implemented the M&E system as designed by hiring an M&E adviser in early 2018 (for 14 months)
  and another M&E consultant in 2020 (using PREP I funds). M&E reports covered both PREP I and PREP
  II activities. At the Mid Term Review, implementation issues were highlighted. Corrective measures were
  identified to improve the measurement of project indicators—e.g., specifying ‘relevant, and usable’
  disaster risk information to achieve the target for IRI-2, and tools to count to achieve PDOI-2 – sector
  agencies using new coastal risk assessment tool to assist with planning and decision making.’ SPC
  partially implemented these recommendations: improved how the indicators were reported, but without
  changing the original indicators. Achievements of targets under the outcome and output indicators under
  the first objective remained incorrectly based on the assumption that ‘staff trained’ meant only NDMO
  staff (4 staff members). The PAD defined the indicators to refer to all staff trained, and the MTR clarified
  this to include staff from ‘NDMO and other agencies involved in disaster management.’ SPC implemented
  additional surveys – both trainee and stakeholders and final evaluation – to collect evidence of project
  impact. These included (i) trainee feedback forms, (ii) October 2023 survey of 23 trainees to find out how
  they had applied skills learned to their jobs, (iii) March of 2024 survey of 27 stakeholders on their
  perceptions of the aggregate study, (iv) ‘success stories’ of impact, and (v) interviews with key project
  stakeholders (project team, SPC and RMI officials, and project consultants). SPC currently employ an
  M&E officer within its Disaster Risk and Community Program and was expected to maintain M&E after
  project closing.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E data, including success stories and survey results, were shared with key stakeholders. M&E data
  was used in the conduct of the MTR, in designing corrective measures associated with the unclear
  indicators of the results framework, and in justifying the extension of the project period to complete the
  aggregate study. M&E data was used to support the project outcomes.

  M&E quality is rated Modest. There were significant shortcomings in the M&E system design (specific
  objectives and well defined indicators). Additional evidence was collected at completion to support the
  achievement of the project objectives.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental Safeguards: This project, appraised with the national projects under PREP II-RMI
   (P160096), received an environmental category of “B” requiring a Partial Assessment and triggered the
   following environmental safeguards: (i) Operational Policies (OP)/Bank Procedures (BP) Environmental
   Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); (iii) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
   4.11), and (iv) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). SPC prepared an Environmental and Social
   Management Framework disclosed locally in RMI on January 14, 2017, and through the World Bank
   InfoShop on January 26, 2017. This was a technical assistance project. The main potential social and

                                                                                                    Page 18 of 22
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    PREP II - SPC (P163699)



  environmental impacts were expected to come from the aggregates study. The ESMF specified that any
  aggregate sourcing needed for coastal protection under the national project was to be imported, but that
  the study was to also explore the lagoon aggregate resources for potential future use (ICR, footnote 77).
  The project complied satisfactorily with all its safeguard policies (ICR, paragraph). In 2022, SPC hired a
  consultant to prepare an Environmental and Safeguards Assessment (ESA) report, and a Stakeholder
  Engagement Plan. SPC engaged with RMI’s EPA to ensure compliance with national requirements and
  safety protocol. Survey sites were selected to avoid protected areas as designated by the Historical
  Protection Office, and a dive master was hired to ensure underwater safety for the biophysical survey.
  Potential stakeholders in the aggregate sector were consulted on use and extraction. Representatives from
  EPA, MIMRA, and the safeguard team from the PREP II-RMI project formed a Steering Committee to
  oversee the study.

  Social Safeguards: SPC prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, disclosed locally in RMI on January
  14, 2017, and through the World Bank InfoShop on January 26, 2017. The project maintained a grievance
  redress mechanism. No complaints were received. The World Bank conducted a follow-up review in May
  2024 and found that the social safeguards component of the reports required strengthening the institutional
  and strategic arrangements to sustainably extract aggregates.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial Management: The project complied with World Bank financial policy (ICR, paragraph 73).
  Biannual Interim Financial Reports (IFRs) and external annual audits were submitted on time. There were
  no qualified findings. Financial management relied on a Senior Financial Officer, assisted by an
  Administrative Officer (both shared with the PREP I-SPC project), and used SPC’s own financial
  management, controls, and accounting (Navison). World Bank financial reviews found the financial
  management system to be acceptable, with sound internal controls, adequate budgets, and annual work
  plans. The last financial management review (dated June 20, 2023) found that all actions recommended
  previously had been successfully completed.

  Procurement: The project was approved under the World Bank 2016 Procurement Regulations and used
  Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement (STEP). PREP I-SPC and PREP II-SPC shared
  procurement functions. Procurement weaknesses included under-programming and contract management.
  Contracts were delayed. Records in STEP were incomplete. Complex SPC corporate procedures, weak
  procurement planning, and delays in finalizing technical inputs for terms of reference – the TOR for the
  EMS consultant, for example, took 289 days to finalize (ICR, Footnote 84) characterized the procurement
  system. Changes in procurement specialists caused initial procurement inefficiencies. The PREP I-SPC
  procurement specialist was hired until December 2018, followed by a short-term international procurement
  specialist (August to December 2019) and finally a procurement specialist in January 2020. Procurement
  efficiency improved afterwards. Two ex-post procurement reviews conducted in March 2021 and March
  2023 did not find noncompliance or governance issues (ICR, paragraph 74).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---

                                                                                                Page 19 of 22
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     PREP II - SPC (P163699)




d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
                               Moderately
Bank Performance                                     Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                 Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The operations offered the following lessons:

      Clear and specific objective statements may help define attribution of the outputs to
       expected outcomes. In this project, the objective was to strengthen early warning systems,
       but the activities were narrowly focused on strengthening the capabilities in preparedness
       and response. The PAD indicated this narrow focus. The second part of the broad objective
       statement noted ‘investments’ but only intended to strengthen climate resilient shoreline
       ‘planning.’ These unclear statements remained throughout the project period. At the MTR
       corrective measures were introduced but not all were adopted. As a result, additional
       information was collected at closing to provide evidence of the project’s impact. If the PDO is
       broad, appraisal documents need to articulate the project’s contribution to specific parts of a
       system.
      Embedding technical experts in counterpart agencies may increase the likelihood of
       customizing capacity building. In this project, the EMS consultant was deployed to Majuro
       for a 19-month period, working not only with NDMO but with all the cluster emergency
       agencies to develop and implement a tailor-made, two-year capacity-building plan. The
       training delivered benefited staff in 26 agencies—essential in a country with sparse capacity
       and high staff turnover. Training sessions were short, practical, and face-to-face. Emergency
       simulations were used for agencies to work together under a common system. Core staff
       trained were used as trainers for subsequent sessions, and at the subnational level to
       address capacity erosion. Certificate IV in DRM training was not customized to RMI. Staff
       were to commit to long periods of online learning. Standardized online training with lengthy
       demands on staff time proved ill-suited to the RMI context. To build capacity within a system
       of numerous agencies, with high staff turnover, customizing the content, length, and delivery
       form to the local context are necessary ingredients. Deploying long-term, in-country experts
       works best.
      Using a combination of in-house technical experts and external consultants for newer
       fields may contribute to efficient delivery of technical assistance. In this project, a new
       disbursement modality was piloted to cover SPC’s technical staff costs. This proved efficient

                                                                                                   Page 20 of 22
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       PREP II - SPC (P163699)



         for activities that SPC had in-house technical expertise in — e.g., baseline and geotechnical
         surveys, and developing coastal risk assessment tools. The modality offered a flexible
         adjustment when faced with unforeseen challenges, such as calibrating the LiDAR data.
         Areas less familiar to SPC, e.g., the aggregate’s market study, could be supplemented by
         external experts. The outcome of this project showed that the main value-added by SPC was
         its specialized technical, institutional, and regional integration expertise. Disbursement
         modalities such as cost sharing of staff of highly specialized technical assistance projects like
         this may consider covering the implementing agencies’ technical staff costs where the
         agency has comparative and long-standing technical advantages, complemented by external
         experts to improve efficiency.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report followed the guidelines and was internally consistent. The report focused on results and followed the
TOC to justify the ratings. Additional studies were conducted although only mostly along the lines of beneficiary
perceptions and not to independently fortify the achievement of the outcome. A lack of outcome indicators in
the results framework meant that evidence was not collected to measure and demonstrate achievements at
outcome level. The report was candid and identified the shortcomings of the indicators used. Lessons were
clear and useful, illustrating the challenges encountered by the operation, such as the various surveys to
supplement the inadequate indicators of the TOC and the benefit of introducing flexible disbursement
arrangements to achieve outcomes. The annexes provided additional justification for the outcomes achieved.
The results mutually reinforced various parts of the report and clearly indicated the impact of the project
activities on strengthening the capacity of RMI for early warning and planning for shoreline protection. The
quality of the report is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 21 of 22
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
PREP II - SPC (P163699)




                                                                  Page 22 of 22
