     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



                                                                           Report Number: ICRR0024383

1. Project Data



 Project ID                           Project Name
 P128887                              IFLMP

 Country                              Practice Area(Lead)
 Congo, Democratic Republic of        Environment, Natural Resources & the Blue Economy


 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 TF-16869,TF-A5081                    31-Dec-2022                                         70,320,502.62

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)
 24-Jun-2014                          31-May-2024

                                      IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                     64,147,383.00                                    64,147,383.00

 Revised Commitment                      64,113,845.09                                    64,113,845.09

 Actual                                  64,113,845.09                                    64,113,845.09




 Prepared by              Reviewed by               ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Shashidhara Laxman       Fernando Manibog          Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




 P160182_TBL
 Project ID                           Project Name
 P160182                              IFLMP (GEF AF) ( P160182 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                     Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                             6206657.53

 Bank Approval Date                   Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                            Page 1 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



 07-Jun-2019

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                   6,210,046.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                   6,210,046.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                   6,206,657.53



 P162837_TBL
 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P162837                                    PIREDD Mai Ndombe under CAFI ( P162837 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                                0

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Jun-2017

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                                  0.00                                             0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to test new approaches to improve community livelihoods and
   forested landscape management, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest
   degradation in selected areas.

   For this review, the PDO is parsed into three subobjectives:

   Subobjective 1: to test new approaches to improve community livelihoods in selected areas

   Subobjective 2: to test new approaches to improve forested landscape management in selected areas, and


                                                                                                 Page 2 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



   Subobjective 3: to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in selected
   areas

b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval


c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The project had four components:

   Component 1: Integrated REDD+ Projects in the Mai Ndombe Province (Approved: US$46.13 million,
   of which appraised amount US$14.2 million and Additional Financing US$31.93 million; Actual:
   US$46.13 million)

   This component aimed to cover a large territorial entity to apply the reduction of emissions in a systematic
   manner, including by piloting a coherent and coordinated territorial approach to combat deforestation. The
   activities included, i) supporting the development and implementation of coherent development policies in
   the project zone, ii) building the capacity of three ministries in charge of village land (Agriculture,
   Environment/Forest, and Rural Development) to provide decentralized technical services, iii) financing
   investments, such as road repairs, iv) supporting joint efforts to establish land-use plans, v) supporting the
   implementation of land use plans, vi) financing contracts or making results based payments to maintain
   project linked efforts and implement natural resource management plans.

   Component 2: Facilitation of Private Sector Activities to Reduce Fuel Wood Emissions (Appraised:
   US$8 million; Actual: US$8 million)

   This component aimed to address urban biomass energy needs from the supply and demand sides. The
   activities included i) supporting agroforestry investments through matching grants and ii) financing activities
   aimed at improving the performance of cookstove technology available in DRC, supporting the scaling up of
   cookstove businesses and supporting sector development.

   Component 3: Promote Small-scale Agroforestry Systems to Reduce Land-use Emissions
   (Appraised: US$10.5 million; Actual: US$10.5 million)

   This component aimed to promote agroforestry and innovative production systems as both an alternative to
   slash-and-burn agriculture and a sources of sustainable firewood. The activity included provision of
   technical assistance directly to smallholder farmers, farmer communities, and women’s organizations.




                                                                                                      Page 3 of 17
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    IFLMP (P128887)



  Component 4: Knowledge Management and Program Coordination (Approved: US$5.73, of which
  appraised amount US$4.2 million and Additional Financing US$1.53 million; Actual: US$5.73 million)

  This component provided the operating costs for implementing the project, knowledge management, and
  dissemination of lessons learned.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

  The total approved cost was US$70.36 million (Appraised: US$36.90 million + AF: US$33.46 million), and
  the actual cost was US$70.36 million.

  Financing

  The project was funded by three sources: a grant of US$36.9 million from Forest Investment Program, a
  program of the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF); US$27.25 million from Central African Forest Initiative (CAFI);
  and US$6.21 million from Global Environment Facility (GEF)

  Borrower contribution

  The borrower was not expected to contribute.

  Dates

  The project was approved on June 24, 2014 and became effective in April 29, 2015. Mid-Term Review was
  conducted in February 2018. The project was originally scheduled to close in December 31, 2022, and it
  closed in May 31, 2024.

  Additional Financing (AF) and Restructurings

  June 2017: AF to scale up integrated REDD+ model to a larger area (the entire Mai-Ndombe province)
  through additional financing from CAFI.

  April 2019: AF to implement new activities aimed at enhancing project's contributions to biodiversity and
  conservation through additional financing from GEF. It entailed only changes to institutional arrangements.

  December 2020: To expand the scope of the Partnership Agreement to include GEF AF activities to ensure
  more efficient and cost effective implementation through DIA.

  August 2022: restructuring to allow for the full utilization of CAFI AF approved in 2017. It entailed i)
  changes to the allocated amounts, ii) extension of project closing date, and iii) revisions to RF.

  Revisions to Results Framework (RF)

  Targets for the three PDO indicators were revised upwards during the two additional financings:



                                                                                                     Page 4 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



         GHG emission reductions (and removals) generated under the project: from 3,250,000 tons to
          11,500,000 tons
         People in forest and adjacent communities with monetary/monetary benefit from forest: from
          120,000 beneficiaries to 260,000 beneficiaries
         Land area where sustainable land management practices were adopted as a result of project: from
          105,000 has to 368,000 ha

   Intermediate indicators: the targets for several were revised.

   Split Evaluation

   As the revisions to the RF and additional financing made the project more ambitious, a split evaluation will
   not be conducted.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country Context

Although the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) was endowed with the world’s second-largest
contiguous tropical rainforest, abundant agricultural and mineral resources including fertile land, and
hydroelectric potential, the living conditions of its population did not reflect the potential. At the time of
appraisal, 63.4 percent of the population lived in extreme poverty, 71 percent were food insecure, and 57
percent lacked basic health services (ICR, para 1). Forests critically contributed to livelihoods of about 40
million people by providing them with food, household energy, medicine, building materials and cash
income. The country was also beginning to face significant threats from commercial agriculture and mineral
exploration and mining (PAD, paras 7 and 8). Its deforestation rates were below global average, but its loss
of absolute forest cover placed it among the top ten (ICR, para 2). The primary drivers of deforestation --
concentrated around large cities and densely populated pockets -- were subsistence activities, particularly
slash-and-burn agriculture and timber harvesting for fuel wood and charcoal (ICR, para 2).

Country Strategy

The PDO was consistent with the National Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation (REDD+) that the DRC adopted in 2012. The strategy aimed to stabilize the forest cover on
two-thirds of the country’s land by 2030 (ICR, para 2). The PDO was also consistent with DRC’s Poverty
Reduction and Growth Strategy Paper of 2011 as it sought to protect the environment and sustain the fight
against climate change (PAD, para 35). The PDO remains consistent with DRC’s 2022-26 National
Adaptation Plan, the revised Nationally Determined Contribution, and its 2030 commitment to restore 8
million hectares (ha) of degraded land (ICR, para 20 and 21).

World Bank Strategy

The PDO aligned with two pillars of the 2013-2016 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) of the World Bank
by contributing to employment creation and increasing competitiveness and strengthening resilience of rural

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 17
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      IFLMP (P128887)



               communities (PAD, para 35). The PDO remains relevant to Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY22-26
               of the World Bank for DRC as it supports the overall objective to address drivers of fragility and conflict in
               the DRC by improving livelihoods and land use governance (ICR, para 20). Additionally, it is relevant to
               recommendations of the Country Private Sector Diagnostic (IFC 2022) and Country Climate and
               Development Report to reduce pressures on DRC’s forests (ICR, para 20).

               Level at which the PDO is pitched

               The PDO was pitched at outcome levels, as it sought to improve livelihoods and forested landscape
               management and reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emission from forest degradation. The first part of the
               PDO “to test new approaches,” however, was unneccessary as the project did not test the approaches
               against certain benchmarks or compare outcomes with that of other approaches.

               Summary: DRC is endowed with tropical rainforests and abundant agricultural and mineral resources
               including fertile land, but nearly two-thirds of the population lived in extreme poverty with high levels of food
               insecurity. The forests were also under pressure from people who depended on them for their livelihood,
               food, household energy, and cash income. The country aimed to stabilize forest cover and protect the
               environment. The PDO to improve livelihoods and landscape management and thereby limit forest
               degradation to reduce GHG emissions was substantially relevant to the country’s strategies and World
               Bank’s plans to support the country in improving its livelihoods and land governance.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               Substantial


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To test new approaches to improve community livelihoods in selected areas

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change

                             The retrospectively articulated ToC in ICR (para 5) and expected outcomes of activities identified in PAD
                             (Annex 2, para 4) broadly state that investing in integrated REDD+ activities (designed to implement results
                             based payments to communities/countries for reducing emissions when they reduce deforestation),
                             supporting private sector activities that sustainably use forests, and supporting communities to establish small
                             agroforestry systems would improve community livelihoods and forested landscape management, thereby
                             reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from deforestation and forest degradation.

                             In more detail, project activities/inputs, such as i) supporting territorial development planning along with
                             incentive based payment for sustainable land use, ii) supporting private enterprises to sustainably produce

                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IFLMP (P128887)



charcoal and make improved cookstoves available, and iii) offering farmers and communities technical
assistance to initiate agro-forestry systems, producing project outputs, such as, i) performance based
incentive mechanisms established, ii) agro-forestry projects that receive technical support, and iii) number of
ICS produced and distributed, would lead to outcomes, such as increased livelihood benefits to forest
communities, sustainable management of forested landscapes, and reduced emission of GHG.

The ToC was plausible. The key assumptions that needed to be held for short term outcomes were, i)
performance-based payments would offer adequate incentives to communities to implement their plans and
adopt sustainable management practices, and ii) support to private enterprises would be adequate to
demonstrate the viability of sustainable practices, such as improved ways to produce charcoal.

Outputs

      Performance based incentives and investment mechanisms were in place with 89 percent of
       chiefdoms, falling behind the target of 93 percent
      2 community subprojects were registered as REDD+ subprojects, meeting the target of 2

Outcomes

      248,500 people in forest and adjacent communities received monetary or non-monetary benefits from
       forests, nearly meeting the target of 260,000
      Of them, 84,024 were female, falling short of the target of 115,000
      Of them, 1,616 belonged to ethnic minorities or indigenous communities, falling short of the target of
       15,000

Other outcomes reported

      2,596 new permanent jobs created

The key indicator to measure the achievement of this objective is the number of people receiving monetary
and non-monetary benefits from forests. It measures the extent to which local people have benefited from
livelihood improvements as a result of project interventions. It included direct beneficiaries of activities under
component 1 and 3, including payments from PES and additional benefits households generated (through
sales and consumption) from goods produced with techniques and means acquired from the project (Clarified
by the project team in exchanges on February 21, 2025).

The indicator suggests that the project nearly met the target of 260,000 people receiving benefits as 248,500
obtained increased monetary or non-monetary benefits from forest through project activities. Household
surveys commissioned showed the household revenues had increased to various degrees in different areas
(from 8 percent 63 percent) from the pre-project period, to exceed the 5 percent originally assume in the PAD
(ICR, para 24). In qualitative interviews, the beneficiaries attributed the livelihood improvements to project
investments (ICR, para 25).

The new approaches the project implemented were to help communities develop plans and offer them
incentives to implement them through a payment for environmental services (PES). The project supported the
establishment of Local Development Committees (LDCs) and helped them participatorily develop land use



                                                                                                    Page 7 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IFLMP (P128887)



plans. In 89 percent of the chiefdoms, which overlapped with LDCs, the project established PES to reward the
communities for developing sustainable agroforestry.

According to the ICR, a 2024 household survey commissioned by the PIU showed that that 7 out of 10
households in the PIREDD Mai-Ndombe area and in Kongo Central had adopted agroforestry practices,
compared to 3 out of 10 before the project started. The project created jobs and increased the sale of
agricultural produce by beneficiary families. Project activities resulted in 2,596 new permanent jobs (para 25).
A survey showed that the households had decreased the share of agricultural production they consumed;
they used the additional income from sales to pay for children’s education and improvements to their houses
(para 25).

The project nearly reached the targeted number of people that would receive monetary or non-monetary
benefits from project activities. Surveys also showed that household revenues of beneficiaries had increased
to various degrees during the project, which they attributed to project activities. Whether the project-driven
benefits were significant enough to motivate the households to abandon their unsustainable ways of
benefiting from forests is not clear. The efficacy with which the objective is reached is rated Substantial but
with moderate shortcomings, given the lack of clarity regarding the nature and significance of the benefit
stream.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To test new approaches to improve forested landscape management in selected areas

Rationale
ToC

The ToC for the achievement of Objective One also applies here.

Outputs

       Achieved a score of 28 (based on the number of new approaches implemented, the number of years
          over which they were implemented, and the number of years of satisfactory implementation) in
          designing and implementing new approaches, exceeding the target of 8
         25,117 ha of new agroforestry plantations received technical support from the project, falling behind
          the target of 35,000 ha
         Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT) score for Tumba Lediima Natural resources was 43
          percent, falling short of the target of 55 percent.
         286,781 individuals participated in consultation activities during project implementation, exceeding the
          target of 90,000
         Of them, 86,034 were female, exceeding the target of 30,000



                                                                                                    Page 8 of 17
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   IFLMP (P128887)




       40,970 farmers from the targeted villages adopted an improved agroforestry technology promoted by
        the project, exceeding the target of 36,875
       Of them, 11,593 were female, almost achieving the target 12,000

Outcomes

       376,565 ha were brought under sustainable land management practices, exceeding the target of
        368,000 ha

The key indicator of improvements in forested landscape management was the area brought under
sustainable management practices. The area exceeded the target. A 2024 household survey showed that 7
out of 10 households in the PIREDD or the integrated project area, had adopted agroforestry practices,
compared to 3 out of 10 before the project (ICR, para 27). The beneficiaries interviewed stated that the
project had taught them that cultivating in degraded lands is possible and many reported having partially or
fully shifting their agricultural production to savannas (ICR, para 27).

The new approaches implemented were i) sustainable agroforestry in savannas, to discourage cultivation in
forests and to produce charcoal sustainably, ii) agro-forestry in degraded forests to discourage new forest
degradation, and iii) forest regenerated through exclosures and firebreaks (ICR, para 26). The project offered
matching grants to support sustainable charcoal production and gave technical support and equipment to
individuals and communities to introduce agroforestry practices.

An area larger than the target was brought under sustainable land management practices. The outcome
could be attributed to project activities. There is evidence of farmers adopting the agro-forestry practices
recommended by the project. The efficacy with which the objective was achieved is rated Substantial.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in selected areas

Rationale
ToC

The ToC for the achievement of Objective One also applies here.

Outputs

       Improved cookstoves (ICS) were produced, as planned
       80,625 ICS were produced and distributed, exceeding the target of 70,000



                                                                                                    Page 9 of 17
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                IFLMP (P128887)




                                  The level of organization of the sector was scored at 5, falling behind the target score of 7 (The
                                   indicator is a score of capabilities that reflects on whether the sector is organized nationally with
                                   sustainable funding and its level of engagement with consumers.)
                                  2,355,309 metric tons (MT) of biomass was produced in a sustainable manner, exceeding the target of
                                   2,100,000 MT

                            Outcomes

                                  29,494,168 MT of GHG emission reductions (and removals) were generated under the project,
                                    exceeding the target of 11,500,000 tons

                            The estimated contribution of project to emission reductions were more than two and a half times the target.
                            The emissions were reduced through i) avoided deforestation as a result of sustainable land use activities, ii)
                            carbon removals generated from afforestation and reforestation, and iii) production and distribution of ICS
                            (ICR, para 28). The project exceeded the target in making ICS available and producing biomass sustainably.

                            Whether the use of ICS, an important intervention to reduce emissions, would be sustained is critical. An
                            informal survey of beneficiaries suggested that they are likely to continue using and purchasing ICS because
                            they reduce costs. In another survey, respondents highlighted the disadvantages which included their high
                            costs and limited lifetime of some of the models (ICR, para 28). The ex-post analysis which considered
                            private benefits as well as fuel savings, assumed gradual retirement of ICS, beginning with 25 percent in the
                            third year, 38 percent in the fourth year, and 28 percent in the fifth, and 9 percent in the sixth (ICR, Annex 4,
                            para 13).

                            The project contributed to reducing and/or removing GHG emissions to a greater extent than targeted. The
                            sources of reduction were project activities that increased the use of sustainable practices, introduced
                            improved stoves and increased sustainable biomass production. The efficacy with which the objective is
                            achieved is rated Substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ToC stated that supporting REDD+ activities and private sector initiatives that sustainably use forests and
                            helping communities establish agroforestry systems would lead to improved livelihoods and forest
                            management, thereby also leading to reduced GHG emissions. Livelihoods in terms of number of people that
                            benefited from forests increased from project efforts. The efficacy with which the project achieved objective
                            one was rated substantial with moderate shortcomings because it is not clear whether the benefit stream is
                            significant enough to influence how the communities exploited forests. Improved landscape management in
                            terms of area that was under sustainable management practices also increased from project efforts that
                            helped communities develop management plans and offered incentives to implement them. The efficacy with

                                                                                                                               Page 10 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IFLMP (P128887)



  which the second objective was achieved was rated substantial. The achievement of the first two objectives,
  in addition to making improved cooking stoves available, enabled the project to reduce emissions at levels
  significantly higher than targeted. The overall efficacy in achieving the project objective is rated Substantial.



  Overall Efficacy Rating
  Substantial



 5. Efficiency
The ex-ante analysis did not estimate an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR). It estimated that the project
would yield a Net Present Value (NPV) of US$45.9 million and a Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) of 2.45, applying a 5
percent discount rate over 15 years with a carbon value of US$1/tCO2e. The PAD noted that even if the carbon
benefits generated by the project were not considered, the project is likely to lead to positive economic
outcomes (para 100). The testing of economic feasibility of individual project components yielded positive
returns. For example, the analysis found that the component supporting the introduction of ICS would be
economically viable as a separate component, even if benefits are purely based on private net benefits,
excluding carbon related benefits (PAD, para 102).

The ex-post analysis compared with and without project scenarios to quantify the incremental net benefits, and it
accounted for all costs associated with the project including the additional financings. Repeating ex-ante
analysis using the same parameters (5 percent discount rate over 15 years with a carbon value of US$1/tCO2e)
while incorporating some additional benefit streams generated a NPV of US$216.4 million, a BCR of 4.91, and
an EIRR of 71 percent (ICR, para 31). Extending the analysis to 20 years, the NPV rose to US$290.7 million
with a BCR of 6.26. With a higher shadow price of carbon at US$35 per tCO2e and growing at 2.25 percent
annually, the NPV increased to US$1 billion with BCR of 19.18.

Some factors influenced the outcomes.

DRC’s poor transport infrastructure and remoteness of project locations increased costs and complexity of
implementing and monitoring activities. Limited digitalization of transactions between banks also delayed PES
transfers (ICR, para 44). Covid restrictions delayed project activities (para 46).

The ex-post analysis of benefits from the project indicated an NPV and a BCR significantly higher than
forecasted; the EIRR was significantly higher than cost of capital at 71 percent but without an ex-ante estimate
to compare with. The implementation was delayed by nearly two years. The efficiency of implementing the
project is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial




                                                                                                      Page 11 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IFLMP (P128887)



a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     0
Appraisal                                                   0
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     100.00
ICR Estimate                                               71.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO to improve livelihoods and management of forested landscape along with reducing GHG emissions
was substantially relevant to DRC where forest degradation resulted from the population’s dependence on
forests for livelihoods. The efficacy in achieving the objective was rated substantial (with shortcomings) as the
project improved forest-based livelihood opportunities and the management of forested landscapes. The
achievements, along with promotion of the use of ICS, contributed to reducing/removing GHGs. The efficiency
with which the project was implemented was also rated substantial (with shortcomings) as the estimated NPV
and BCR were higher than forecasted and the EIRR was higher than cost of capital although implementation
was delayed by two years. The outcome of the project is rated Satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identifies several risks to development outcomes from systemic challenges and structural
weaknesses (para 57).

Weak agroforestry value chains: Weakly developed agroforestry value chains may not enable households
to maintain their revenues from agroforestry activities once PES payments are discontinued.

Limited local technical capacity: Without local government commitment and adequate incentives for civil
servants, households may not receive technical assistance to maintain their agroforestry activities.

Fragile security situation: The situation in Mai-Ndombe province could trigger conflicts forcing beneficiaries
to abandon their land and regress to less sustainable practices.

Incomplete training in natural regeneration and charcoal production techniques: The implementing
organization was not able to complete the training before project closure. Traditional techniques were still
being practiced in some areas.




                                                                                                    Page 12 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



Limited technical and financial resources for maintenance: Limited maintenance of roads, bridges,
berths and ferryboat may erode the benefits from improved evacuation of agricultural produce and reduced
travel time achieved through the project.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The project was designed with the objective of improving community livelihoods and forested landscape
  management and reducing GHG emissions, which could help DRC meet its environmental commitments.
  The activities/components supported communities to develop and implement landscape plans, supported
  private enterprises to sustainably use forest resources, and aided communities to practice agroforestry,
  which could be expected to achieve the project objectives. The concepts employed were based on
  lessons learned from operations in the DRC, in a post-conflict environment, in forestry, and in natural
  resource development in Africa.

  The project made robust implementation arrangements, by giving the responsibility to the Forest
  Investment plan coordination unit set up by the government (ICR para 54). Several partners, including
  seven NGOs rooted in the project area, were brought in as implementing partners.

  The M&E system was adequate, with appropriate PDO indicators to measure the outcomes and
  adequate intermediate indicators to monitor progress and test links in the ToC.

  As the project design could achieve objectives that were aligned with country strategies, and the
  implementation arrangements and the M&E system were appropriate, the Quality-at-entry is rated
  satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The bank provided adequate supervision through its missions, 20 in all.

 The Bank team proactively introduced measures to strengthen financial management to address fiduciary
 transgressions related to cash flow (ICR, para 55). Although three different leaders headed the project
 team over the ten-year implementation period, the bank provided uninterrupted support as the transition
 between them was smooth. The Bank team also organized a safeguards mission and requested the PIU to
 prepare an action plan.

 As the Bank team provided adequate supervision and intervened proactively to address issues, quality of
 supervision is rated Satisfactory.



                                                                                                Page 13 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



 Beginning the project with a suitable design, M&E framework, and implementation plan, the team was able
 to proactively address issues as they emerged. The overall Bank Performance is also rated Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E framework was adequate to measure the outcomes, monitor project activities and test the links in
 the ToC. The PDO indicators were appropriate and measurable. However, the PDO indicator on “People in
 forest and adjacent communities with monetary/non-monetary benefit from forests,” to measure improved
 livelihood would have been better if it had measured the benefits rather than just the number that benefited
 (ICR, para 48).

 The Results Framework had ten intermediate indicators. Seven of them measured intermediate outcomes,
 or responses of individuals and institutions to project outputs delivered. Only three measured project
 outputs or activities (subprojects registered as REDD+ subprojects, technical support to agroforestry
 plantations, and individuals consulted during implementation). The RF could have benefited from more
 intermediate indicators. For example, something as important as payouts from PES were not tracked. The
 ICR notes that the PIU tracked important outcomes outside the RF (para 48).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project employed appropriate approaches to track progress, modifying them as required (ICR, para
  49). For example, to track emission reductions, the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and the Bank
  agreed to rely on land use monitoring data and the Ex-Ante Carbon Balance Tool (EX-Act) model instead
  of relying on payout information from Emission Reduction Payment Agreement (ERPA), which was
  approved as a separate project. The data collected were verified by experts from the Delegated
  Implementing Agency (DIA) and the PIU (ICR, para 50).



c. M&E Utilization
  The data collected through the system informed the payments for environmental service, an important
  aspect of the project, and the restructurings that included additional financing and revisions to RF (ICR,
  para 50).

  Overall, the system was adequate to monitor and evaluate, although at least one of the PDO indicators
  could have been better specified and more intermediate indicators could have been included. The

                                                                                                    Page 14 of 17
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     IFLMP (P128887)



  system was implemented as designed and it informed implementation of critical aspects of the project.
  With minor shortcomings, the M&E quality is rated Substantial.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Assessed as a category B project, it triggered Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Natural Habitats
   OP/BP 4.04, Forests OP/BP 4.36, Pest Management OP 4.09, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11,
   IPs OP/BP 4.10, and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The project developed an Environmental and
   Social Management Framework, an Integrated Pest Management Plan, and a Cultural Resources
   Management Framework. The project implemented its activities with no major environmental and social
   (E&S) issues. The PIU submitted quarterly E&S monitoring reports detailing the implementation of E&S
   safeguards and an E&S closure report. The project recorded and reported 16 incidents, mainly traffic
   accidents, through the E&S Incident Response Toolkit and closed them properly. Drawing on this
   experience, the following FOREST program developed a code of conduct for driving and a checklist tool to
   mitigate the risk of accidents.

   Furthermore, the project operated a Grievance Redress Mechanism based on the one developed at the
   national level for the REDD+ process. It received a total of 232 complaints, all of which it resolved to the
   satisfaction of complainants. The project complied with all the triggered safeguards policies, and the
   safeguard performance of the project was rated Moderately Satisfactory at closure (ICR, para 53).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   At project closure, construction involved in some of the largest contracts, such as that of berth was 50
   percent complete due to insecurity and high-water levels (ICR, para 53). The PIU received a commitment
   from provincial authorities to invest part of their ERPA share to complete the construction. This action was
   appropriately closed in line with the Bank’s fiduciary management guidance to avoid post-project reputation
   risk. The project’s FM and procurement were both rated Moderately Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
    ---

d. Other
   Mobilization of private finance



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 17
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       IFLMP (P128887)



   Matching grants to private investors in agroforestry plantations mobilized US$4.03 million of private funds.
   The model has been adopted to scale up mobilization of private funds for agro-forestry in Forest and
   Savanna Restoration Investment Program (ICR, para 37). The seven firms that received support to produce
   and distribute ICS invested US$186,165 of their own resources.



11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                    IEG
                                                                               Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                        Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Bank Performance               Satisfactory          Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered four lessons, which have been synthesized into the following two.

Investing in the development of agricultural value chains, particularly of perennial crops, has
the potential to improve the prospects of communities securing revenues in the long-term
from their agroforestry investments. While Improved Forested Landscape Management Program
invested in infrastructure aimed at facilitating the evacuation of agricultural produce, more could
have been done to strengthen the value chain to reduce the risks of revenue losses after the
incentive-based payments of the project came to an end (ICR, para 59). The integrated REDD+
programs of Plateau and Mai-Ndombe showed that five years were insufficient for establishing
plantings and generating revenues; projects need to be longer to stabilize returns to investments
(ICR, para 61).

Projects need to develop new carbon market mechanisms to encourage communities to
reduce emissions, as One-off REDD+ payments have limited impact. The project succeeded in
Mai-Ndombe largely due to the Emissions Reduction Payment Agreement (ERPA), which was put in
place as a separate project, providing an avenue to reward the emission reductions in the project.
There is need to foster long-term revenue sources such as carbon credits or other market or results-
based payments to fund forest management and incentivize sustainable land use practices.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                 Page 16 of 17
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      IFLMP (P128887)




The report comprehensively covers the planning, restructuring, implementation, and outcomes of the project. It
uses information from the M&E system and surveys and impact assessments conducted at the end of the
project. The information is presented in considerable detail. The approach taken to assess the outcomes and to
attribute them to project activities is reasonable. The report candidly notes deficiencies and identifies
meaningful lessons. The writing is detailed with considerable information presented in footnotes.

The quality of ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                Page 17 of 17
