     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0024432

1. Project Data



 Project ID                              Project Name
 P125574                                 LR-Road Asset Management FY11)

 Country                                 Practice Area(Lead)
 Liberia                                 Transport


 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                          255,994,472.95

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 07-Jun-2011

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                       157,700,000.00                                108,900,000.00

 Revised Commitment                        157,700,000.00                                108,900,000.00

 Actual                                    147,094,472.95                                108,900,000.00




 Prepared by              Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan              Avjeet Singh               Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




 P161939_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P161939                                 Additional Financing to LIBRAMP ( P161939 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)             Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                            0

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)


                                                                                             Page 1 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



 08-May-2017

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                  0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                   0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                               0.00                                             0.00



 P129654_TBL
 Project ID                              Project Name
 P129654                                 LR-Road Asset Management Add'l Financing ( P129654 )



 L/C/TF Number(s)                        Closing Date (Original)              Total Project Cost (USD)
                                                                                                             0

 Bank Approval Date                      Closing Date (Actual)
 20-Sep-2012

                                         IBRD/IDA (USD)                                    Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                  0.00                                             0.00

 Revised Commitment                                   0.00                                             0.00

 Actual                                               0.00                                             0.00




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 4) and
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 5) is:

   " To support the Recipient's efforts to reduce transport costs along the road corridor from Monrovia
   to the Guinea border and to maintain the road in good condition over a 10 - year period ".

   Although the PDO was unchanged, the project scope was expanded with the Additional Financings (AFs)
   approved for the project in 2012 and 2017.



                                                                                              Page 2 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)




b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  14-May-2012

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   There were two original components (PAD, page 6). The figures for the estimated cost and actual cost are
   from ICR (page 29)

   a. Design, Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Monrovia - Ganta - Guinea Border Road. The estimated
   cost at appraisal was US$235.3 million. The actual cost was US$267.8 million. This component planned to
   finance ten-year output and performance-based road contracts (OPBRC) for two roads (lot 1) Monrovia -
   Gbarnga and (lot 2) Gbarnga - Ganta to Guinea border. The scope of this component was expanded
   through the AF1 to include: (i) rehabilitation of 6.1km of the urban section of the corridor in Monrovia (not
   under OPBRC contract): and (ii) TA for developing of a Multi-modal transport plan.

   b. Consultant Services, Operating Costs and Training. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$22.3
   million. The actual cost was US$26.8 million. This component planned to finance consultancy services for
   monitoring OPBRCs and technical assistance (TA) for preparing feasibility studies and developing sector
   institutions through hiring skilled staff and conducting staff training programs.

   These two components were added with AF2 for the project.

   c. Road Safety and Right- of Way Protection Measures. The estimated cost was US$4.1million. The
   actual cost was US$5.0 million. Activities planned to provide road safety enforcement equipment and
   training staff for reviewing the National Road Safety Act and amending the 1972 Vehicle and Traffic Safety
   Law.

   d. Resettlement Compensation. The estimated cost was US$4.8 million. The actual cost was as
   estimated. This component planned to provide resettlement compensation.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Project cost. The estimated cost (inclusive of price contingencies) was US$ 339.4 million. The actual cost
   was US$255.9 million.

   Financing. The original Project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) credit
   of US$67.7 million. US$90.0 million was provided through the two AFs in 2012 and 2017. With this, the
   Bank financing for the Project was US$157.7 million. US$147.0 million was disbursed. There was co-

                                                                                                    Page 3 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



   financing of US$108.9 million from the Liberia Reconstruction Trust Fund (LRTF) grant administered by the
   Bank. The LRTF grant was fully disbursed.

   Borrower contribution. Borrower contribution of US$72.8 million was planned at appraisal. There was no
   borrower contribution during implementation.

   Dates. The Project approved on June 7, 2011, became effective on October 31, 2011 and was to close on
   June 30, 2022. The first AF was approved on May 2012 and the second AF in 2017. The Mid-Term Review
   was held on October 10, 2016. The Project closed two years behind schedule on June 30, 2024.

   Changes. There were four restructurings (including two AFs and two level 2 restructurings).

   The first AF was approved in May 2012 to cover the cost increases, increase the scope of component
   one activities and revise the targets for intermediate indicators in view of the increase in project scope.

   The following changes were made with the second AF for the project in 2017:

         The counterpart financing requirement was reduced by US$25.0 million to US$47.8 million.
         Financing was provided for two new components (component three and four) added to the Project.
         The closing date was extended by two years from June 30, 2022 to June 30, 2024.

   The closing date for the LRTF Grant was extended by a year from June 30, 2020, to June 30, 2021, to
   utilize the remaining fund of about US$4.84 million through the a level 2 restructuring on June 29, 2020.

   The following changes were made through the second level 2 restructuring on December 20, 2023;

         Some intermediate indicators which were not unachievable such as citizen complaint recording on
          the Argo platform and right-of-way (ROW) were dropped.
         The activities of periodic road routine road maintenance from the eighth year were dropped due to
          the lack of counterpart funding.

   Split rating. The project scope was expanded with the AFs. As the level of ambition increased, this
   assessment is not based on the split rating methodology for determining the outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country and sector context. Despite post-war political stability and steady economic growth following the
Civil War, Liberia is one of the poorest countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). Extensive destruction of
infrastructure and deferred road maintenance, had contributed to the collapse of productive activities. In the
road sector, a major part of Liberia's 10,000 Kilometers (Km) of roads were in extreme disrepair and
impassable in the rainy season.




                                                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



               Government strategy at appraisal. Liberia's first Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) of 2009 articulated the
               government's priorities for reestablishing basic infrastructure and identified road rebuilding as a priority.
               Liberia's National Transport Policy and Strategy of 2008 set medium and long-term goals for revamping the
               road sector through focusing on contracting arrangements, routine and periodic maintenance and
               institutional strengthening of the sector.

               Current government strategy. The PDO is well-aligned with the Government's National Development Plan
               for 2018 - 2023. The Plan articulated the need for increasing connectivity through rehabilitating critical
               roads under its pillar 2 - economy and jobs.

               World Bank (WB) strategy at appraisal. The 2009 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) responded to the
               core areas affected by the civil war. The third strategic theme of the CAS articulated the need for
               rehabilitating infrastructure. The CAS also identified road rehabilitation and asset preservation as
               prerequisites for the long-term objectives of improving service delivery, sustaining growth and social
               cohesion.

               Current WB strategy. The PDO remains consistent with the WB's current Country Partnership Framework
               (CPF) for 2019 - 2023. The PDO was aligned with the third pillar of the CPF of "narrowing the infrastructure
               gap to foster more equitable development nationwide" . The objective seven of the CPF highlighted the
               need for "improving access to utilities, markets and community services".

               Previous Bank experience and the current project scope. Unlike Bank's past engagement in Liberia
               which had been on emergency response following the civil war, the Bank's recent projects shifted towards
               activities that would aid Liberia in moving towards a normal development path. This project aimed at
               rehabilitating the Monrovia- Guinea border road corridor. This road, connecting four of Liberia's biggest
               cities (including Monrovia) and providing critical cross-border connection, was of strategic importance to
               Liberia's reconstruction. Much of the road corridor had deteriorated during the civil war undermining
               transport efficiency. The project aimed at rehabilitating the road and maintaining the road through OPBRC
               contracts for ten years. The design entailed rehabilitating the road during the first two years, providing
               annual routine road maintenance during the entire period of the contract and periodic road maintenance
               during the eighth year. The level of ambition of the project was expanded to include rehabilitation of an
               urban road and road safety activities on the road corridor with the AFs.

               Relevance of the PDO. The PDO is highly relevant in the country context, as it entailed rehabilitating and
               maintaining a strategically important road corridor. The project responded to the development challenge of
               improving connectivity, that in turn could aid in improving service delivery. The PDO is highly relevant to the
               Government strategy and the current Bank strategy for Liberia. The relevance of PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)




OBJECTIVE 1
Objective
PDO # 1. To reduce transport costs along the road corridor from Monrovia to the Guinea border;

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs such as rehabilitating/constructing and maintaining the Monrovia - Guinea
border road corridor and institutional strengthening of the Infrastructure Implementation unit (IIU), were likely
to help in improving the condition of the road corridor. Rehabilitating urban roads in Monrovia were likely to
improve their condition. These outputs were likely to aid in realizing the outcome of reducing transport costs
of road users and to the long-term development of outcome of improving connectivity. The causal links
between inputs, outputs and outcomes were logical. The intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      253 km of rural roads on the Monrovia-Guinea border road corridor were rehabilitated as targeted.
         Two km of rural roads on the corridor were constructed as targeted.
      249 km of rural roads on the Monrovia - Guinea were provided with annual routine maintenance as
         targeted.
        1,500 hours of IIU staff were trained under the training program and the Managing Consultant (MC)
         provided 500 hours of on-the-job training as targeted.
        Speed guns and breadth analyzers were provided to the Liberia National Police and school books
         were distributed in counties to raise road safety awareness as targeted.
        1,109 staff (including 693 women) of the various road agencies were trained on road safety aspects
         as targeted.
        The female staff increased from zero to 47% when the project closed.

Outcomes. The outputs described above were expected to lead to two outcomes: First, reducing travel times
for road users, measured by the International Roughness Index (IRI). The IRI is at best a partial indicator. It
would have been more appropriate to use savings in vehicle operating cost and the monetary value of time
savings. Second, outcome was in terms of the road users benefitted from road improvements.

      The road's IRI improved from 12% at the baseline to less than 3% (exceeding the target of 3), when
       the project closed. The last IRI measured in November 2024, showed an average IRI of 2.19. Given
       that IRI is a proxy, it would have been more appropriate to use savings in vehicle operating cost and
       the monetary value of time savings.
      A road user survey conducted before project closing indicated that of the 1,000 survey respondents,
       two-thirds (62%) indicated a decrease in their travel time. There were no targets for this indicator.
      362,905 road users benefitted from road improvements as per the revised target. About two thirds
       (63% of the survey respondents) indicated that the roads have made it convenient for them to access
       basic amenities like schools, workplace, markets and hospitals.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial with moderate shortcomings. Even though the intended outcomes
were realized, the project could have used more appropriate indicators for reduced transport costs such as
reduced vehicle operating costs.



                                                                                                    Page 6 of 15
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
PDO # 2. To maintain the road in good condition over a 10 - year period.

Rationale
Theory of change. The outputs such as rehabilitating roads in the first two years, providing annual routine
road maintenance for ten years and periodic maintenance in the eighth year using OPBRCs and capacity
building aimed at providing a reliable basis of funding for maintenance activities, were likely to help in
maintaining the roads in good condition. The causal links between the inputs, outputs and outcomes were
logical and the intended outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      249 km of rural roads on the Monrovia - Guinea were routinely maintained annually as targeted.
       Routine maintenance works included vegetation control, desilting and cleaning of drainage facilities to
       preserve the roads.
      A ten-year Multimodal Transport Development Plan and five-year strategic plan for 2022 to 2027 were
       developed as targeted. The strategic plan, endorsed by the sector institutions, outlined a maintenance
       plan after project closure. The project aided in enacting and operationalizing of the Road Fund Act
       (2016). This law was to ensure dedicated funds for road maintenance activities.
      The Project supported the enactment of the Axle load law in 2015. However, the government had not
       established axle load stations when the project closed.
      The Project aided in hiring staff for four key competence areas in the IIU: (a) planning and budgeting;
       (b) financial management; (c) procurement and contract management; and (d) monitoring and
       evaluation.

The following activities were not completed.

      The routine road maintenance work which was to be implemented throughout the ten-year contract
       period was suspended in 2022 due to lack of payment by the Government.
      The periodic road maintenance work in the eighth year was not undertaken.

Outcomes. The outputs described above were expected to contribute to two outcomes: 1. increase the share
of roads be in good/fair condition; and (ii) increase the share of rural population with access to an all-weather
road.

      Roads in good/fair condition as a share of the total classified roads increased from one percent at the
       baseline to 34.5%, slightly exceeding the target of 34%.
      The share of rural population with access to an all-weather roads increased to 11%, exceeding the
       target of 10%.


                                                                                                   Page 7 of 15
                               Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                               LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



                            Efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest given that the project did not achieve the objective of maintaining the
                            road in good condition over a 10 - year period. The routine road maintenance work which was to be
                            implemented throughout the ten-year contract period was suspended in 2022 due to lack of payment by the
                            Government.



                            Rating
                            Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall efficacy is rated as substantial, with moderate shortcomings. Even though most outcomes were
                            realised, the road maintenance activities were not completed and more appropriate indicators could have
                            been used for measuring reduced transport costs.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. A cost-benefit analyses (CBA) was conducted for activities pertaining to rehabilitating and
   maintaining two road lots: Monrovia - Gbarnga (lot 1) and Gbarnga - Ganta to Guinea border (lot
   2). The methodology entailed comparing the benefits of OPBRC contracts as compared to using the traditional
   input-based road maintenance contract. Under the traditional approach, the contractor would be responsible for
   only road rehabilitation, whereas under OPBRC the contractor would be responsible for rehabilitating the road
   and providing routine and periodic maintenance for ten years. Further, OPBRC was administratively convenient
   to implement, as only one contract had to be prepared, as opposed to three contracts under the traditional
   approach (for road rehabilitation, periodic maintenance and annual routine maintenance). The economic
   benefits to road users were assumed to come from: (i) savings in vehicle operating cost; (ii) monetary value of
   passenger time savings; and (iii) lower accidents.

    The economic analysis at appraisal showed that a Net Present Value (NPV) at 12% discount rate of US$128.4
   million for road lot 1 and US$28.5 million for lot 2. The ex-post analysis showed a NPV of US$73.8 million for lot
   1 and US$20.3 million for lot 2.

   The ex-ante Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) for road lots 1 and 2 were 27% and 22% respectively.
   The ex-post EIRR for lots 1 and 2 were 21.9% and 19.1%. The ex post EIRR for the urban road was 17.3%, as
   compared to the ex-ante EIRR of 14.9%.



                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



The average ex post EIRR for the road segments was 19.4%, as compared to the average ex ante EIRR of
24.5%.

The economic analysis demonstrated the project to be viable, although the ex-post EIRR was lower than the ex-
ante EIRR. The reasons for the difference in ex ante and ex post EIRR were due to factors such as higher unit
costs roads and lower actual traffic growth than initially projected at appraisal.

Operational and administrative issues during implementation. The operational issues in the initial
years were due to lack of planned counterpart financing, delays in contract management decisions and
difficulties in implementing resettlement plans. There were cost overruns, with actual project cost exceeding
initial estimates for both road lots due to factors such as inflation, exchange rate changes and financing gap
arising from higher bid prices.

The implementation deadline increased by 20%, resulting in a two-year extension. The time overruns were due
to factors such as inadequate estimation at the design stage and unforeseen shocks such as the outbreak of the
Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) and restrictions in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The project closed with non-
completion of the routine and periodic road maintenance activities.

Although there were operational issues during implementation, overall efficiency is rated, in view of the
economic justification for the project.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?               Point value (%)            *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                         0
 Appraisal                                                   24.50
                                                                                          Not Applicable
                                                                                         0
 ICR Estimate                                                19.40
                                                                                          Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The relevance of the PDO to the government strategy and current WB strategy is High. Overall efficacy is
substantial, with moderate shortcomings due to the outstanding periodic and routine road maintenance
activities. Efficiency is substantial, due to the economic justification for the project. Taking these ratings into
account, outcome is rated as moderately satisfactory.




                                                                                                          Page 9 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR rates the risk to the sustainability of development outcomes as High (ICR, 70), on account of the
following factors.

Macroeconomic risk. There is risk that the roads build may not be preserved due to the lack of road
maintenance, given the macroeconomic environment. The project closed with incomplete road maintenance
due to lack of counterpart funding. Liberia's road asset is valued at 73% of the Gross Domestic Product
(GDP), indicating that the investment required for rehabilitation and maintenance exceeds the governments
resources. The ICR notes that the government financing for maintenance is not reliable. This puts the
Monrovia-Guinea border road at risk of losing its current good condition rating.

Technical risk. There is risk that the road corridor may be exposed to deterioration. This project
recommended installation of an axle weighing station to check overloading of vehicles. The Government did
not build the weighing station. The absence of weighing stations along the corridor exposes the road to
uncontrolled overloading and early deterioration of road sections.

Institutional risk. The Government has established the road maintenance fund to provide a reliable basis of
funding for road maintenance. To date, a portion of funding raised by the road maintenance fund through fuel
levies is allocated for funding road maintenance. There is a risk that there may not be enough resources for
funding road maintenance, unless alternative measures such as raising revenue from tolls are implemented.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  As this project using OPBRCs was the first of its kind in Liberia, the Bank prepared this project based on
  Bank's past experiences with OPBRCs in Latin America, South Asia and SSA. Key lessons incorporated
  at design included: (i) combining road rehabilitation and maintenance in one contract; (ii) using a corridor
  management strategy where the service provider is responsible for managing road safety and roadside
  user facilities; and (iii) longer duration of OPBRCs that would allow the contractor to spread the risks.

  The implementation arrangements of the project were: The Infrastructure Implementation Unit (IIU), with
  the support of the Public Financial Management Unit (PFMU) in the Ministry of Finance (MOC),
  was responsible for implementation. The IIU was in charge of procurement and technical aspects, and
  the PFMU of financial management. The arrangements made at appraisal proved to be adequate during
  implementation.

  The Bank identified several risks including High risk with the weak implementation capacity for
  implementing OPBRCs and medium risks with technical design and donor coordination. Several
  mitigation measures were incorporated at design and with these measures, the project risk was rated as

                                                                                                    Page 10 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



  substantial (PAD, page 53). Appropriate arrangements were made at appraisal for safeguards and
  fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

  There were moderate shortcomings. One, there were cost overruns, with the initial lowest bids far
  exceeding the appraisal estimate. and two, the preparation team underestimated the macroeconomic risk
  at appraisal. The macroeconomic condition in Liberia was not conducive for the counterpart funding
  planned at appraisal (18% of the project cost). The inability on the part of government to contribute
  undermined the resettlement activities and compensation to the project-affected persons were
  outstanding when the project closed.

  Bank performance at Quality-at-Entry is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twenty four supervision missions were undertaken, implying on average twice a year supervision
 missions. The missions included people with the required expertise to guide the IIU staff and its
 management. In addition, there were technical missions to guide the IIU on pertinent issues like
 environmental and social safeguards and gender-based violence. The team proactively supported the
 government in the one year extension of the LRTF closing date to avoid losing US$4.84 million, securing
 US$90 million AF under the IDA credit and restructuring the project to achieve the objectives.

 There were moderate shortcomings. The decision to include rehabilitation of the 6.1 km urban road was
 debatable, given the challenges involving petty traders. The urban road section had no maintenance
 component which was inconsistent with the Project's OPBRC direction. The continuity of leadership was
 hampered with four task team leaders (TTLs) during the project lifetime.

 Bank performance during supervision is rated as moderately satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as moderately satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization




                                                                                                Page 11 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



a. M&E Design
 The Infrastructure Implementation Unit (IIU) was in charge of M&E and the data for monitoring component
 one activities were to be collected by the Monitoring Consultant (MC). The baseline and the targets for the
 indicators, data sources, methodology for collecting data and frequency of data collection were specified at
 appraisal. The results framework was clear and the key indicators were adequate for monitoring project
 performance. The targets of the indicators were appropriately modified, to reflect the increase in project
 scope following the AFs.

 There were M&E shortcomings: (i) for an indicator like the transport cost borne by road users, actual
 vehicle operating cost and travel time measurement were appropriate, given that International Roughness
 Index (IRI) is a proxy; (ii) The indicator on road maintenance failed to differentiate between periodic road
 maintenance from routine road maintenance; and (iii) there were no appropriate indicators for monitoring
 the road safety aspects of the project.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR (para 54) noted that data collection was robust till June 2022, when data collection and
  monitoring was halted due to project suspension.

  There were M&E implementation shortcomings: (i) There were shortcomings in the data collected by IIU.
  This resulted in inconsistencies in reporting on values; (ii) The IIU did not designate a M&E specialist to
  oversee data collection, despite the Mid-Term Review's recommendation; (iii) Although data on some
  indicators like "hired female staff in IIU" and "percentage of citizen complaints addressed within seven
  days" were measured, they were not reported; (iv) Though not part of the results framework, the project
  recommended collecting data on some economic and social indicators (like travel pattern, transport cost
  as a share of household income and other accessibility and mobility-related information) for future
  planning purposes. Data on these indicators was not collected: and (v) Although a road user satisfaction
  survey was undertaken in lieu of social and economic studies, it was undertaken eight years after
  rehabilitation raising doubts about the veracity of information.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data was utilized for overall decision-making, extension of the closing data, making payments
  to the CE and monitoring project progress when the project closed.

  Overall M&E is rated as Modest, due to the shortcomings in design and implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards

                                                                                                   Page 12 of 15
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



  The project was classified as a Category B (Partial Assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
  Three safeguard policies were triggered at appraisal (PAD, page iii): Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
  4.01); Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11); and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

  Environmental Assessment, Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) and Involuntary Resettlement. The
  adverse environmental impacts of the Project were expected to be minor. The safeguards on physical
  cultural resources was triggered to address "chance finds" of PCRs. An Environmental Mitigation Plan
  (EMP) was prepared and publicly-disclosed to address these safeguards. The safeguards on involuntary
  resettlement was triggered due to the presence of congested market areas along the urban road in which
  sellers had encroached on the right-of-way. These sellers had to be relocated, either temporarily or
  permanently. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared and publicly disclosed at appraisal to
  address the resettlement issues.

  The Project's environmental and social performance (E&S) was rated as Unsatisfactory (ICR, para 59).
  Several factors contributed to the Project's low E&S performance such as: i) Infrastructure Implementation
  Unit (IIU) faced difficulties in meeting the technical and operational requirements required for E&S
  compliance; (ii) failure of the contractors and sub-contractors to adhere to contractual obligations; (iii) delays
  in implementing resettlement plans; and (iv) insufficient regulatory oversight.

  During implementation, there were noncompliance issues. These included nonpayment of compensation to
  the forcefully evicted petty traders, unresolved quarry site issues for the five quarry sites and delayed
  reporting and resolution of site accidents. Several of these issues were yet to be resolved when the project
  closed.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management (FM). The Public Financial Management Unit (PFMU)was responsible for FM. An
  assessment of the FM arrangements of PFMU, conducted by the Bank concluded that the FM
  arrangements were appropriate. FM risk was rated as moderate at appraisal.

  Although the FM performance commenced satisfactorily, the Project's financial performance during
  implementation was hampered due to the government's failure to fulfill its counterpart contribution which
  formed 18% of the project cost. During implementation, there were cases of ineligible expenses. In terms
  of legal covenants, the interim financial and audited reports were submitted, although with some delays.

  Procurement management. The Infrastructure Implementation Unit (IIU) was responsible for managing
  procurement. The procurement officials of the IIU had experience in managing IDA projects.
  The procurement risk was rated as moderate at appraisal.

  The Project's procurement performance was rated as moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 63). The project
  kept its procurement specialists throughout the Project. The IDA procurement procedures were adhered to.
  A post-procurement review conducted at closure, revealed no serious procure issues.




                                                                                                     Page 13 of 15
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)



c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following main lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.

1. Financing rehabilitation/maintenance of roads through Output Performance-Based Road
Contracts (OPBRC) may be useful for preserving road assets, in countries with major
infrastructure and institutional capacity losses. The lesson is that the ten-year OPBRC can
provide the space for uninterrupted maintenance for the specified time period after rehabilitation, as
compared to the traditional method provided there are dedicated funds for all activities.

2. It would be useful to ensure that counterpart funds are available before including them in
the financing matrix. In this project, activities were undermined due to lack of counterpart
funding. The lesson is a careful analysis of the macroeconomic environment is required to ensure
that project activities are not stymied due to lack of counterpart funding.

3. Continuous engagements with stakeholders and government officials by the World Bank
can aid in safeguards compliance. In this project, petty traders were evicted by the Liberian
Government. The lesson is Bank needs to engaged with the government officials for ensuring
compliance with social safeguards, since it is a reputational risk to the Bank as well.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

                                                                                                   Page 14 of 15
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     LR-Road Asset Management FY11) (P125574)




The ICR is clear and well-written. The evidence provided in the text is adequate for assessing project
performance. The ICR candidly discusses the issues associated with resettlement of petty traders along the
project-intervened areas. The photographs provided in Annex 8 enable the reader to visualize the changes in
the project-intervened areas. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.

There was one key shortcoming. Even if the PAD does not have a theory of change, per OPCS guidelines the
ICR needs to formulate a theory of change showing clearly the causal links between project activities, outputs
and intended outcomes and explicitly state the assumptions underlying the theory of change.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Modest




                                                                                                  Page 15 of 15
