     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



                                                                            Report Number: ICRR0024364

1. Program Information



 Country                                Practice Area (Lead)
 Samoa                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Programmatic DPF

 Planned Operations                      Approved Operations
 2                                       2

 Operation ID                            Operation Name
 P171764                                 Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO




 L/C/TF Number(s)                       Closing Date (Original)                 Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D7390,IDA-D7400                    30-Nov-2023                                        25,090,785.00

 Bank Approval Date                     Closing Date (Actual)
 03-Dec-2020                            30-Nov-2023
                                        IBRD/IDA (USD)                             Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                         25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Revised Commitment                          25,000,000.00                                            0.00

 Actual                                      25,090,785.00                                            0.00




P174498_TBL
 Country                                Practice Area (Lead)
 Samoa                                  Macroeconomics, Trade and Investment

 Operation ID                           Operation Name
 P174498                                Samoa Second Recovery & Resilience DPO ( P174498 )




                                                                                             Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)




 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)                  Total Financing (USD)
 IDA-D7390,IDA-D7400,IDA-E0500             30-Nov-2023                                           13827500.92

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 17-Jun-2022                               30-Nov-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                              Co-financing (USD)

 Original Commitment                           14,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            14,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Actual                                        13,827,500.92                                              0.00



 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                 ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Jose Roberto Lopez          Vandana Chandra             Donna Kaidou Jeffrey           IEGEC
 Calix



2. Program Objectives and Pillars/Policy Areas
EVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives

The program development objective (PDO) of the Samoa First and Second Response, Recovery and Resilience
DPOs, including a Catastrophe-Deferred Drawdown Option (Cat-DDO) was: (1) promoting an inclusive economic
response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19; (2) strengthening macro-fiscal resilience; and (3)
enhancing resilience to climate change, natural disasters, and health risks (Project Document—PD, para 1).
Whereas the first and second PDOs remained unchanged for the second operation, the third PDO was
reformulated as “enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience,” (PD2, para 1).

For the purposes of this Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICRR), the PDOs against which
achievements are assessed are taken as:

      PDO1: To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19;
      PDO2: To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience; and
      PDO3: To enhance climate, disaster and social resilience.


b. Pillars/Policy Areas
The DPO series was structured around 3 pillars which correspond to the three objectives of the PDO as follows:




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



Pillar 1: promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19 through
measures to protect the livelihoods of households and workers adversely affected by the crisis.

Pillar 2: strengthen macro-fiscal resilience through reforms to strengthen the medium-term fiscal position by
improving revenue administration, and to mitigate fiscal risks, through closer assessment and monitoring of
government on-lending to State-Owned Enterprises (SOEs).

Pillar 3: increase resilience to climate change, natural disasters, and health risks through reforms to strengthen
early warning systems (for climate, natural and health risks), ensure that builders meet minimum standards, and
promote child vaccinations.

Pillar 1 measures supported the State of Emergency declared in March 2020 that contracted tourism-related jobs
and services and delayed construction activities (ICR, para 2). Pillar 2 contributed to rebuilding fiscal buffers that
helped the government mitigate the impact of the pandemic with a fiscal response package (ICR, para 3). To
preserve fiscal sustainability, those buffers were financed by better management of SOEs fiscal risks, enhanced
tax compliance and added tax measures (ICR, para 15). Pillar 3’s mutually reinforcing measures
formalized institutional arrangements to coordinate hazard monitoring and early warning dissemination in case of
disasters, and urgent measures to cope with infectious diseases (ICR, para 18).


c. Comments on Program Cost, Financing and Dates

The first operation with a CAT DDO (DPO1) was approved for an IDA Grant of US$ 25.0 million, of which
US$15.0 million was a development policy grant and US$10 million was for a Cat DDO on grant terms,
available for full or partial disbursement in the event of an eligible catastrophic event. The amounts disbursed
were US$15,410,889.00 and US$9,679,896.00 respectively. The total amount disbursed was US$25,090,785,
with the difference from the original approved amount explained by exchange rate changes.

The second operation was an IDA grant of US$14.0 million of which US$13,827,500.92 was disbursed with the
difference explained by exchange rate fluctuations.

Overall, for both operations in the series, a total of US$38,918,285.92 was disbursed compared to the approved
amount of US$39,000,000.00. These two operations were a part of WBG’s comprehensive support package to
the Government of Samoa for its response to COVID-19. WBG also disbursed US$8.5 million in additional
funding through the previous CAT DDO (approved in November 2018), the Contingent Emergency Response
Component (CERC) of the Pacific Resilience Program – Samoa Project (PREP—P154839) for US$495,000,
and the COVID-19 Emergency Response Project (P173920) for US$2.9 million.

DPO1 was approved on December 3, 2020, became effective on December 18, 2020, and was closed as
scheduled on November 30, 2023. DPO2 was approved on June 17, 2022, became effective on June 28, 2022,
and was closed as scheduled on 30 November 2023.


3. Relevance of Design

a. Relevance of Objectives



                                                                                                       Page 3 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



Country Context. Samoa’s long-term economic growth has been shaped by its capacity to build resilience to
climate change and natural disasters. As one of the smallest and most remote countries in the world – less
than 200,000 people and a GDP of less than US$1 billion in 2019 (PD2, para 4) – its high trade costs and
difficulties in realizing economies of scale limit private sector incentives to invest. Since 2009, climate change
and natural hazards -- heavy rainfall, floods, droughts, tropical cyclones, storm surges, earthquakes, and
tsunamis - have produced high economic and social cost during disaster years, with economic losses of
about a third of the annual GDP (PD2, para 56). Catastrophic risk modelling suggests that Samoa has an
average annual GDP loss of about US$10 million because of earthquakes and tropical cyclones (PD2,
footnote 28).

Measles outbreak and COVID-19 impact. At the time of the first operation, Samoa was trying to recover
from twin shocks that severely impacted its tourism and services: a measles outbreak in November 2019,
which infected around 2 percent of the population, and the COVID-19 pandemic. The government
implemented a State of Emergency between March 2020 and May 2022 to contain the spread of COVID-19.
While the full closure of international borders saved lives and livelihoods, it also brought major economic
challenges to Samoa’s heavily tourism-reliant economy. In FY21, GDP contracted by 7.1 percent; inflation
reached 4.1 percent (10.9 percent in FY22), and the current account deficit reached double digits at 14.6
percent of GDP (ICR, para 2).

The government’s response balanced a sizable fiscal stimulus to maintain macroeconomic stability, offset the
impact of COVID-19, and leveraged the CAT DDO trigger to mitigate the high economic and social costs of
future climate change and natural disasters. The large fiscal stimulus contained strong public health
measures and financial support to the poor, vulnerable and the private sector. In percentage of GDP, it was
equivalent to 3.1 in FY20 and 4.2 in FY21 and supported, inter alia, measures in the health (medical
response and moratorium on pension contributions) and education systems, subsidies to loan repayment by
small businesses, and temporary reduction in rents and utility bills (PD2, Table 1). This was feasible because
of budget support from the DPO, support from other donors, and exceptional grants from development
partners. Public debt rose from 43.3 percent of GDP in FY20 to 46.3 percent of GDP in FY21 but was
projected to fall to 43.7 percent of GDP in FY22 (ICR, para 3).

The impact of the pandemic was also mitigated by the steady flow of remittances which averaged 26.3
percent of GDP in FY19-21 and reached four out of every five households. This is believed to have helped in
containing a sharp increase in Samoa’s poverty rate of 20.3 percent in 2018 (PD, para 5).

Relevance of Objectives. PDO1 was directly relevant as it promoted an inclusive economic recovery
through a mix of short-term support to formal workers and vulnerable individuals, and medium-term reforms
to the labor market and investment policy to improve Samoa’s lagging attractiveness to foreign direct
investment (FDI) after the crisis abated. PDO2 was relevant as it aimed to strengthen debt management and
revenue mobilization by focusing on fiscal risks and measures modernizing business compliance of VAT
payments and raising excise taxes on unhealthy products (alcohol, tobacco etc.) that contributed to the
growing incidence of non-communicable diseases. PDO3’s relevance lay in introducing mutually reinforcing
measures to enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience against shocks. It strengthened early warning
systems (for climate, natural and health risks), ensured that builders met minimum standards and promoted
child vaccinations.

Alignment with the Development Strategy and the CPF. The three PDOs were aligned with the
government’s development plan: Pathway for the Development of Samoa (PDS) FY21/22-FY25/26. They
were also aligned with the policy reform agenda in (i) the Strategy for the Development of Samoa (SDS)


                                                                                                      Page 4 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



FY17-FY20: “Accelerating Sustainable Development for All,” which contained three areas: (1) economic
sustainability and business development; (2) improved health outcomes and (3) climate and disaster
resilience (PD, paras 37,49); and (ii) the National Action Plan for Disaster Management (NAPDM) 2017-2020
which outlined the roles and responsibilities of government entities and communities in the event of a
disaster. The SDS and NAPDM were developed by the government in collaboration with WBG and other
development partners.

Alignment with the CPF. The DPO series was closely aligned with the WBG’s COVID-19 Crisis Response
Approach Paper (June 2020). In line with the latter, the DPOs included policy measures critical to the
immediate relief stage of the response as well as medium-term reforms for a resilient recovery. The four
pillars of the Approach Paper – the health response, the social response, the economic response, and the
strengthening of policies, institutions, and investments – were each addressed by one or more reforms
supported by the DPO series. The DPOs also focused on debt management and fiscal sustainability (ICR,
para 8), and were aligned with WBG’s overall engagement with Samoa as laid out in the Regional
Partnership Framework FY2017-FY2021 which was extended to FY23.

Alignment with Development Partners. The DPO series was part of a joint response package by several
development partners. The WBG worked closely with Australia, New Zealand, and the Asian Development
Bank to align development partner general budget support under a Joint Policy Action Matrix (JPAM). The
resulting financial support in grants was sizable. In percentage of GDP, it amounted to 8.7, 6.8 and 9.4 in
FY20, FY21 and FY22 respectively (IMF, Article IV, Table 3b).


b. Relevance of Prior Actions

Rationale

Rationale and Results Chain. DPO1 consisted of 7 Prior Actions (PAs) and 8 Indicative Triggers (ITs). Two
ITs were dropped and two were replaced at the time of DPO2. Dropped and replaced triggers made space for
other parts of the reform agenda. Two ITs had already been achieved and two others were not followed due
to changing circumstances or policy priorities. DPO2 consisted of 6 PAs. Overall, the 13 PAs can be grouped
under 7 policy clusters. A “Theory of Change” summarizing the Results Chain for each PA (drawing on the
PDs) was included in the ICR (Table 3).

PDO1: To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19

PDO1 was supported by 4 PAs, two in each DPO, spanning measures on unemployment and senior citizen’s
benefits, investment policy and labor markets.

PA1 provided temporary unemployment benefits and paid training to government-registered workers who lost
employment due to COVID-19. One-off payments between SAT100 and SAT300 (US$38 and US$114) were
delivered in October 2020 as an unemployment benefit to only registered workers by the Chamber of
Commerce and Businesses in tourism-related sectors and manufacturing. This measure was, at best, a
modest contribution to the broader objective of being inclusive by protecting all vulnerable workers (PD1,
para 58). It excluded non-registered and informal workers, estimated at about 37 percent of the total
employed (PD2, para 43) who also suffered income and job losses. The government's response was not
"inclusive" and diminished PA1's contribution to PDO1 which targeted an inclusive economic response. PA1


                                                                                                  Page 5 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



was only partly in line with good global practice that was inclusive as it included the most vulnerable
segments of the population. Relevance of PA1: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

PA2 addressed the impact of COVID-19 on senior citizens aged 65 and older with top-ups to the benefits
they received. Its rationale was based on the poor state of Samoa’s social protection system, which was not
geared towards addressing persistent vulnerabilities, especially among the elderly (ICR, para 16). Prior to
COVID-19, senior citizens received a benefit of US$55 per month. During COVID-19, the benefit was raised
by a top-up of SAT 300 in May 2020, SAT 100 in July 2020 and SAT 15 from August 2020 on a permanent
basis (PD1, para 66). This action was critical and effective in providing timely support to the elderly and, to a
lesser extent, their extended family due to their reliance on the falling incomes of family members and
declining remittances during the crisis. Relevance of PA2: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA3 addressed one of the medium-term objectives of Samoa’s development: attracting foreign direct
investment (FDI) as a key step to foster recovery from the pandemic. After initially aiming to revise the
Foreign Investment Act (FIA) of 2000 under IT1 (DPO1-IT1), PA3 (DPO2-PA1) approved an Investment
Policy that established equal treatment of domestic and foreign investors, which was a required first step
under a multi-phased approach towards improving Samoa’s lagging attractiveness to FDI (PD2, para 40).
While the task of completing the removal of barriers to transparency and predictability in the legislative
framework toward FDI is still pending, the approved Investment Policy enables the Ministry of Commerce,
Industry and Labor (MCIL) to proceed, inter alia, with the drafting of the revisions to the FIA. In short, the
adoption of this policy served to foster an economic recovery in the short term and attract higher flows of FDI
over the medium term. Relevance of PA3: Satisfactory (S).

PA4 contributed to the PDO of inclusive recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic through a labor market lens
that would formalize a large proportion of the informally employed labor force in the domestic market and
reduce gender-based discrimination. Before COVID-19, informal employment accounted for approximately 37
percent of the labor force, with considerable variation across sectors (PD2, para 43). Given the rising
importance of informal work during the pandemic — 27 percent of formal employment fell between December
2019 and June 2020 (PD1, para 57) -- the Cabinet approval of the Labor and Employment Relations
Amendment (LERA) draft Bill in 2022, ratified by Parliament in 2023 (ICR, footnote 4) became relevant for
achieving the PDO of inclusive recovery, bolstering workers’ protection and labor inspections. Moreover,
Samoa had significant gender gaps in employment, with females accounting for 34.4 percent of the labor
force, and informal work particularly high amongst domestic workers (62 percent of employment, PD2, para
43). Hence, through the promotion of the formalization of domestic workers, PA4 also served to reduce
gender discrimination in the workplace. Relevance of PA4: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO2. To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience

PDO2 was supported by 4 PAs, two for each DPO, spanning reforms related to fiscal risks, debt
management, tax compliance and revenue mobilization.

PA5 and PA6 promoted macro-fiscal resilience, through strengthened management of fiscal risks associated
with on-lending to SOEs, a major source of contingent liabilities that raised public debt. Total Government on-
lending outstanding in March 2020 was equivalent to 7.6 percent of GDP mainly concentrated in 4 SOEs
(PD1, para 75). It featured multiple issues including limited risk assessments and due diligence for on-
lending arrangements which translated into: (i) several SOEs facing difficulties in meeting repayments; (ii) ad
hoc procedures and inconsistency in the terms and conditions for on-lending; (iii) the absence of a legal
provision for on-lending; (iv) unclear accountability frameworks; and (v) a lack of proper reporting and record


                                                                                                      Page 6 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



keeping (PD1, para 74). PA5 set out principles of SOE eligibility and outlined the risk assessment
requirements for such arrangements. Complementarily to this, PA6 adopted a new Government Guarantee
Policy (GGP) as government guarantees had increased during the COVID-19 crisis. A new credit risk
assessment framework was approved for applications from SOEs and other public trading bodies. PA6
replaced IT4 as the Medium-Term Debt Strategy (MTDS) for 2021-25 following the expiration of the previous
MTDS in 2020. Relevance of PA5: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA6: Highly Satisfactory
(HS).

PA7 and PA8 were positive steps towards strengthening macro-fiscal resilience. PA7 introduced a Tax
Invoice Monitoring System (TIMS) that was a relevant tool for improving business compliance with VAT
payment obligations through the use of electronic devices that would increase revenue through improved tax
collection efficiency and lower the costs of tax administration during the economic recovery. PA8 raised
excise taxes on a few unhealthy products -- alcohol, tobacco, as well as sugary and salty products. As this
reform on excise taxes happened in the aftermath of a recession, its impact on revenues was expected to be
modest in the short term but progressively reaching 0.3 percent of GDP per year in the medium term (PD2,
para 54). Relevance of PA7: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA8: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PDO3. To enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience.

PDO3 was supported by 5 PAs, three in the first DPO, and two in the second DPO spanning reforms on
disaster management, building regulations, disaster risk financing and children’s immunization.

PA9 and PA10 introduced critical regulations and institutions to enhance climate and disaster response
mechanisms to support PDO3. Through the Cabinet approval of the Meteorology, Geoscience and Ozone
Services (MGOS) bill, PA9 led to the 2021 establishment of the Samoa Meteorological Services Division
(SMD) in the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE). Following the approval of the bill in
2021, SMD became the leading agency that would synthesize, transmit and disseminate early warnings, and
coordinate the necessary hazard monitoring and analysis. PA 10 included a Multi-Hazard Early Warning
System (MHEWS) Policy for Meteorological, Hydrological and Geophysical Hazards as a complementary
reform to enhance the roles and responsibilities of key agencies in collecting hydrological, meteorological and
other data needed for developing an early warning system for the multiple and interrelated hazards that
Samoa faced (ICR, para.18). Relevance of PA9: Highly Satisfactory (HS). Relevance of PA10: Highly
Satisfactory (HS).

PA11 and PA12: PA11 was relevant for PDO3 as an initial step towards improving the resilience of buildings
and infrastructure to climate disasters. It set up the Building Practitioners’ Licensing and Registration Policy
(BPLRP) to ensure that building practitioners and contractors met appropriate standards and complied with
licensing and registration requirements. However, to be relevant, PA11 required prior legislative requirements
and inter-agency coordination gaps that were neither considered nor approved (ICR, para. 30). PA12
introduced the Disaster Risk Financing Policy (DRFP) as the key initial instrument to provide contingent
financial resources in response to disasters. PA12 was highly relevant for achieving PDO3 as it helped to
prioritize the use of different financing instruments in case of disasters by mandating that the budget included
explicit line items for contingent financing. Relevance of PA11: Unsatisfactory (U). Relevance of PA12:
Highly Satisfactory (HS).

PA13 was instrumental for enhancing health resilience by mandating the vaccination of children as a
condition of school enrolment. This was a critical response for not only the 2019 measles outbreak and
COVID-19 pandemic, but also to improve health outcomes in the medium term. In 2018, Samoa had one of


                                                                                                    Page 7 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



the lowest immunization rates for measles (first dose) in the Pacific (the rate for one-year-old children
dropped dramatically from 76 percent in 2012 to 31 percent in 2018). PA13 supported a mass vaccination
campaign against measles in December 2019 followed by the enactment of the Infant Amendments Act (IAA)
mandating compliance for children from birth to 5 years with vaccinations and immunizations requirements for
school enrollment. Reflective of the strong governance roles of villages, the Act also amended the Village
Fono Act 1990 and the Internal Affairs Act 1995 to incorporate these vaccination and immunization
requirements (PD1, paras. 94-95). Relevance of PA13: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Table 1: Objectives and Prior Actions for Samoa: Recovery and Resilience DPO
PAs under DPO1                                        PAs under DPO2
PDO 1: To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19
PA1 (DPO1-PA1): To support workers losing
employment in response to COVID-19, the
Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved the
introduction of an unemployment benefit and a
short-term paid training scheme as part of its
FY2021 budget.
PA2 (DPO1-PA2): To support vulnerable
individuals and households in response to COVID-
19, the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved and implemented top-ups of the senior
citizens’ benefit, as part of its FY20 supplemental
budget and its FY21 budget.
IT2: To promote the targeting of benefits to
vulnerable and affected households in response to
shocks, the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved a Social Protection Policy. (Dropped as
the newly elected Government required more time
to prepare it)
IT1: To reduce uncertainties faced by foreign
investors, the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
approved a revised Foreign Investment Act, which      PA3 (DPO2-PA1): To attract private investment, the
limits the scope for discretion and clarifies the     Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved an
criteria and process for amending reserved and        Investment Policy, which includes key principles to
restricted lists. (Replaced with PA5 as a required    facilitate equal treatment, transparency, and
previous step under a multi-phased reform)            adherence to environmental and social standards.
                                                      PA 4 (DPO2-PA2; also, DPO1-IT3): To improve
                                                      employment protections, the Recipient, through its
                                                      Cabinet, has approved the Labor and Employment
                                                      Relations Amendment Bill 2022, which formalizes
                                                      employment of domestic workers and strengthens
                                                      provisions against gender discrimination.
PDO 2: To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience
PA 5 (DPO1-PA3): To provide guidelines for            PA 6 (DPO2-PA3): To manage fiscal risks
eligibility, set monitoring and reporting             associated with Government guarantees, the
requirements, and establish a framework for the       Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved a

                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



terms and conditions of on-lending arrangements, Government Guarantee Policy, which establishes
the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved a and mandates the application of a credit risk
policy governing on-lending to state-owned              assessment framework for the issuance of
enterprises (SOEs).                                     Government guarantees to public trading bodies.
IT4 (DPO1-IT4]: To ensure prudent debt
management, the Recipient, through its Cabinet,
has approved and published a new MTDS covering
the period from 2021 to 2025. (Replaced with PA6
as it was achieved after expiration of MTDS in
2020)
PA7 (DPO1-PA4): To improve businesses’
                                                         PA8 (DPO2-PA4 and DPO1-IT5): To improve
compliance with their value-added goods and
                                                        revenue mobilization, the Recipient, through its
services tax payment obligations, the Recipient has
                                                        Cabinet, has approved excise tax increases on
enacted amendments to the Tax Administration
                                                        selected unhealthy products.
Act, and the Recipient’s Head of State has made
implementing regulations that facilitate the
introduction of a tax invoice monitoring system.
PDO 3: To enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience
PA9 (DPO1-PA5): To provide the Recipient’s
                                                        PA 10 (DPO2-PA5 and DPO1-IT6): To improve
Meteorological Services Division with the formal
                                                        preparedness and response for climate- related
authority to coordinate and transmit early warnings
                                                        disasters, the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
and request the information necessary to perform
                                                        approved a Multi-Hazard Early Warning System
this function, the Recipient, through its Cabinet, has
                                                        Policy for Meteorological, Hydrological and
approved the Meteorology, Geoscience and Ozone
                                                        Geophysical Hazards 2022-2032.
Services Bill 2020.
                                                        PA12 (DPO2-PA6 and DPO1-IT7): To guide the
PA11 (DPO1-PA6): To regulate the standard of
                                                        use of different sources of contingent financing in
building practitioners and contractors and improve
                                                        response to a natural disaster and to improve
the resilience of buildings, the Recipient, through its
                                                        climate and disaster resilience, the Recipient,
Cabinet, has approved a Building Practitioners’
                                                        through its Cabinet, has approved a Disaster Risk
Licensing and Registration Policy.
                                                        Financing Policy 2022- 2025.
PA 13 (DPO1-PA7): To protect Samoans from
infectious diseases, the Recipient has enacted the
Infants Amendment Act 2019, which mandates the
vaccination of children as a condition of school
enrolment.
IT8 (DPO1-IT8): To improve its capacity to prepare
for and respond to future health emergencies, the
Recipient, through its Cabinet, has approved a
National Epidemic and Pandemic Influenza
Preparedness & Response Plan, and one or more
key measures included in this plan has been
implemented. (Dropped as it was completed ahead
of schedule in December 2020, right after approval
of DPO1)
Rating

                                                                                                      Page 9 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)




Satisfactory

4. Relevance of Results Indicators

Rationale

This DPO series used 10 Result Indicators (RIs) to track the impact of 13 PAs in making progress toward the
objectives. Table 2 presents the 10 RIs, their relevance rating, the baseline, target values and achievement
ratings (ICR, Table 2).

PDO1: To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19

RI1 measured the share of unemployed people benefiting from government assistance through (RI1-i)
unemployment benefits and (RI1-ii) short-term training that were a part of the PA1 reforms. RI1-i and RI1-ii
measured the contribution of PA1 to PDO1. However, whereas RI1-ii was clearly defined and measurable, RI1-i
had measurement issues because a reliable baseline for unemployed workers nationwide was not available. Its
proper measurement required the following categorization: i) employees who were made redundant over the
period from February to May 2020; ii) employees who were placed on leave without pay; and iii) employees who
were forced to reduce their working hours in tourism-related sectors and in manufacturing. In practice, the
indicator was unreliable as it varied significantly by source depending on whether the data came from the
National Provident Fund or the Labor Force Survey (interview with the DPO team). Moreover, the authorities
acknowledged that the scope for the unemployment benefits could have been expanded to cover a broader
range of industries (PD1, para.58-i). Relevance of RI1: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI2 appraised the impact of PA3 on PDO1 by measuring the increase in foreign enterprises registered in
Samoa. An increase would indicate an improvement in the environment to attract private (foreign) investment by
removing restrictions and providing equal treatment, transparency, and adherence to environmental and social
standards. Although RI2 was clearly defined and measurable, since success in the achievement of its target
could not be entirely attributable to PA3 (the number of foreign firms could be impacted by several factors (e.g.,
external, political, legal, and economic factors), a better RI would have been the actual increase in FDI
inflows. Relevance of RI2: Satisfactory (S)

RI3 was an output indicator that sought to capture the impact of PA2, but it was too broadly defined and faced
difficult measurement challenges. RI3 could not precisely measure the link between an increase in top-ups for
senior citizens (PA2) and the share of the vulnerable households that benefited from it through trickle down
effects due to data unavailability. In addition, vulnerable households also benefited indirectly from other forms of
government assistance provided to offset the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The ICR suggests that
evidence from rapid rounds of sample surveys could have been used to assess the incidence of the COVID-19
crisis on households to track the adequacy of the PA in mitigating it. In this regard, the United Nations conducted
two surveys in June and July of 2020 (ICR, para.22). Relevance of RI3: Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU).

RI4 ((RI4-i) was made up of two sub-indicators (RI4-i) and (RI4-ii). Both sub-indicators aimed to capture the
impact of the new legislation that made progress towards labor market reform under PDO1 but faced major
challenges. The share of domestic workers with contracts registered with the MCIL (RI4-i) would reflect
increased employment formalization targeted by PA4. The strengthening of four provisions against gender
discrimination in the labor market (RI4-ii) would be reflected in the Women, Business and Law Equal Pay Index
(WBLEPI) as an upstream output indicator. However, RI4-i was not relevant as it could not be measured

                                                                                                     Page 10 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



because the MCIL did not register/monitor domestic workers' contracts. It only monitored the employment
contracts of foreign workers (ICR, para 23). Only in 2023, the LERA Act stipulated the requirements for clarity of
domestic workers’ employment contracts, making contract registration mandatory, but until the end of 2024, the
implementing regulations were still in draft form. The same issues applied to the provisions and regulations
embodied in the WBLEP Index which were not implemented by the end of 2024 (ICR, para 24 and interview with
the DPO team). Relevance of RI4: Unsatisfactory (U).

PDO2: To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience.

RI5 The adoption of a comprehensive risk assessment framework and its application was a significant first step
towards mitigating fiscal risks from future government guarantees and on-lending to SOEs, thus measuring the
contribution of PA5 and PA6 toward PDO2. This output-oriented indicator was measurable from the baseline of
nil, and a credible measure of a new strategy to strengthen debt and fiscal risks’ management but still fell short
of reducing actual fiscal risks and by the same token strengthening macro-fiscal resilience. In this regard, a more
relevant outcome-oriented indicator could have been used such as the reduction in the existing “stock (or
number) of Government guarantees,” which fell from 7.5 percent of GDP on average in FY20/21-FY21/22 to 3.7
percent of GDP at the end of 2023. Such a decline was partly due to the default of guaranteed Samoa Airways
loan, repaid by Government, and its removed guaranteed status equivalent to 2.3 percent of GDP (ICR, para
26). Relevance of RI5: Satisfactory (S).

RI6 This ratio sought to capture the impact of the amendments to the Tax Administration Act and the
introduction of the TIMS in 2020 and selected excise tax increases in 2023 on improvements in revenue
mobilization (PA7 and PA8), thus strengthening fiscal resilience. TIMS was a monitoring tool developed for
increasing compliance, reducing the grey economy, and fighting tax evasion. The use of GDP in the
denominator was, however, inappropriate as a large range of other factors beyond the control of the government
would determine its value, making such a ratio misleading. Moreover, in the event of a recession, such as during
the pandemic in FY21 and FY22, the nominal value of GDP could decrease thus artificially improving this ratio.
A more appropriate indicator would have been an index of the real value of tax revenue on goods and services.
Relevance of RI6: Moderately Satisfactory (MS).

PDO3: To enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience.

RI7 The approval of the 2020 MGOS Bill and the MHEWS Policy provided a framework for integrated hydro
meteorological and geophysical hazard early warning services by centralizing accountability within the Samoa
Meteorological Division (SMD). However, as the ICR indicates, many challenges remained in ensuring their
effective implementation including: the need for improved coordination among agencies, updating Standard
Operating Procedures, and addressing gaps in tactical situational awareness (ICR, para 28). Both indicators
were only preliminary necessary steps toward the intended ultimate result of enhancing climate resilience (PA9
and PA10). Relevance of RI7: Satisfactory (S).

RI8 This indicator sought to measure improvements in the quality of building practitioners (BPs) engaged in
delivering climate and disaster resilient infrastructure, thus supporting PA11. While well defined, RI8 was not
measurable because it required enabling (legal) and institutional policies for climate resilient infrastructure to be
functioning, but these had not yet been instituted. Design and implementation of the BPLRP remains challenging
in Samoa because of human resource shortages at the Ministry of Works, Transport, and Infrastructure (MWTI),
and legal gaps in the Ministry of Works Act 2002 that have prevented its timely implementation (interview with
the DPO Team and ICR, para 30). Relevance of RI8: Unsatisfactory (U).



                                                                                                      Page 11 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



RI9 This indicator was introduced to monitor fiscal risks and environmental disasters and offset losses in the
value of assets, thus addressing the objective of enhancing climate and disaster resilience (PA12). It was
considered a preliminary step in the process of shifting executed budgets in the direction of accommodating the
effects from climate change and disaster. From a baseline containing limited information in budget documents in
FY21/22, since FY23/24 it led two key budget documents — the annual Budget and the Fiscal Strategy
Statement — to include the fiscal risks that would arise from an eligible catastrophic event and budget
contingent financing flexible enough to respond to adverse economic shocks. Relevance of RI9: Satisfactory
(S).

RI10 This indicator measured the response to an alarming measles-outbreak and COVID-19-related pandemic,
thus contributing to improving health (and social) resilience (PA13). Drawing on a national catch-up campaign,
vaccination rollout and complementary activities such as risk communication and development of guidelines and
policies on infection prevention and control, epidemiology and surveillance moved ahead. The indicator was
clearly defined and easy to measure, and its outcome was attributable to the action implemented under this PA.
Relevance of RI9: Highly Satisfactory (HS).

Table 2: Results Indicators by Objective and PAs, baseline and target values, status, and achievement.

                                                                                            Actual
                                                                                            Change
                                                                                            in
                                                                             Actual Value          RI
Results        Associated RI                                                              RI
                                    Baseline             Target (FY23)                             Achievement
indicator (RI) PAs        Relevance                                                       Relative
                                                                             as of Target          rating
                                                                                          to
                                                                             Date
                                                                              Targeted
                                                                              Change
Objective 1: To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19
RI 1

(i) Share of
unemployed                                               (i) At least
people                                                                                      (i) 77.6%
                                                         37.9%
                                                                             (i) 29.4%
benefiting from                             i. 0                                            (ii)
government PA1             MU              ii. 0 (FY19) (ii) At least                                   [Substantial]
                                                                             (ii) 10.3%     271.1%
assistance                                               3.8%
through, (i)
                                                                             (August
unemployment
                                                                             2023)
benefits; (ii)
short-term
training
RI 2                       S           186 enterprises At least a            143 new       769%
                                       registered      10%increase =         enterprises
Increase in    PA 3                                    18.6 firms            registered in              High
foreign                                (FY21)                                FY22, FY23,
enterprises                                                                  FY24


                                                                                                        Page 12 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



registered in
Samoa


RI 3
                                                                           5%(SAT 300-
Share of total                                                             top-up)                  [High]
                                                                                         Over
population      PA 2       MU         0 (FY19)          At least 4.5%
                                                                                         100%
benefiting from                                                            5.3%(SAT
government                                                                 100 top-up)
assistance
RI 4

(i) Share of
domestic
workers with
contracts                                                                    (i) Not
registered with                                            (i) 45%                          (i) 0
                                    (i) No                                 measured
MCIL; and (ii)                      requirement
Number of
                PA4       U                                                                         Negligible
provisions
                                                        (ii) 4 of 4                      (ii) 0
included in the                                                            (ii) 3 of 4
Women,                              (ii) 3 (FY20)
Business and
Law Equal Pay
index
enshrined in
national labor
legislation
Objective 2: To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience
RI 5

Risk
assessments                                                             Credit risk
of all new on-                                          Comprehensive assessment
lending and                                             risk            framework of
government PA5                                          assessment      on lending
                                      Limited risk
guarantees                                              conducted for and
                                      assessment
conducted and PA6          S                            all new lending government 100%             High
accounted for                                           and             guarantee
                                      (FY20)
in deciding on                                          government      policies in
eligibility for                                         guarantee       place and
new                                                     proposals       tested in 4
government                                                              large SOEs
guarantees
and on-lending
proposals


                                                                                                    Page 13 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



RI 6
               PA7
Tax revenue                                                               18.5%in
                         MS         16.9% (FY19)      17.7%                            104.5%
on good and                                                               2023
               PA8                                                                               [High]
services (% of
GDP)
Objective 3: To enhance climate, disaster and social resilience
RI 7

Early warnings
for severe
                                                       (i) Contents of
weather: (i)
                                                       all severe
contents
                                                       weather early                  (i)
convey                                (i) Only general
                PA9                                    warnings                       Partly
potential                             potential impact                 (i) Work still
                                                       convey actions                  met
impacts and                           and guidance                     underway
                PA10       S                           to be taken in                           Substantial
provide                               included
                                                       areas likely to                (ii) 300%
guidance for                                                           (ii) 6
                                                       be most
actions                               (ii) 3 (FY20)
                                                       impacted
necessary in
high- impacted
                                                        (ii) At least 4
areas; and (ii)
are transmitted
through
multiple media
RI 8

Share of active
building        PA11       U          0 (FY20)          At least 60%      None         Unmet     Negligible
practitioners
licensed and
registered
RI 9                       S          Limited            Information      The FY23/24 100%       High
                                      information       included in       Budget has
Fiscal risks    PA12                  included in       budget            line items for
and external                          budget            documents         contingent
contingent                            documents (FY2                      financing.
financing                             2)                                  The Fiscal
sources                                                                   Strategy
included in                                                               Statement for
budget                                                                    FY23/24 also
documents                                                                 considers
                                                                          fiscal risks
                                                                          that would
                                                                          arise from
                                                                          health
                                                                          emergencies


                                                                                                 Page 14 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



                                                                                      and natural
                                                                                      disasters.
      RI 10

      Share of
      children for the
                                                                                      85%(FY23);
      cohort of 1–2-
                                                                                                   Over
      year-old         PA13             HS          59% (FY19)        At least 85%                            High
                                                                                      91%(January 100%
      immunized
                                                                                      -July 2024):
      against
      measles,
      mumps and
      rubella

  Note: RI achievement ratings in brackets have been adjusted downward due to their MU or MS relevance
  ratings.



  Rating

  Moderately Satisfactory

   5. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To promote an inclusive economic response and recovery from the impacts of COVID-19

               Rationale
               RI1: The objective of protecting livelihoods and vulnerable groups was partly achieved. The share of
               unemployed that received the one-off unemployment benefit was 29.4 percent in August 2023, about 22.4
               percent below the target of at least 37.9 percent. According to the MoF and the DPO team, the revision in the
               number of pre-COVID unemployed might have affected the denominator of the indicator, also accounting for
               its underachievement (ICR, para 20). (ii) The share of unemployed receiving assistance through short-term
               training reached 10.3 percent, overshooting the target of 3.8 percent. Overall, because of the MU relevance
               rating of RI1, the achievement rating is downgraded from Substantial to Modest. Rating RI1: Modest.

               RI3: The top-ups to senior citizen benefits were quickly disbursed at the onset of the pandemic: SAT 300 top-
               up in May 2020, and SAT 100 top-up in July 2020. The share of the population that benefited from the SAT
               300 top-ups reached 5 percent, and SAT 100 top-up reached 5.3 percent. Both RIs surpassed their 4.5
               percent target. However, due to the MU relevance rating, the achievement of RI3 is downgraded from High to
               Modest. Rating RI3: Modest.



                                                                                                              Page 15 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



RI2: The target for the RI was overachieved. By the end of FY24 the number of new registered foreign
enterprises had increased by 143 compared to the FY21 target of 18.6, representing a 769 percent increase
(Interview with the DPO Team). Rating RI2: High.

RI4: Both RI4 targets were unmet because of inadequate formulation and implementation of the reforms.
Data on the share of domestic workers registered with MCIL (RI4i) did not exist because MCIL only monitored
the employment contracts of foreign workers. Similarly, based on poor formulation, RI4ii was only partly
achieved as one provision out of four targeted (“equal remuneration for work of equal value”) was not
included in the WBLEP Index bill. According to the DPO Team, until the end of 2024, section 20(4) of the
LERA Act 2023 included provisions for equal gender pay for work of equal value, but its implementing
regulations were still in draft form and under review by the Attorney General’s Office (ICR, para. 24). Rating
RI4: Negligible.

Efficacy rating for PDO1: The achievement rating for PDO1 is Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) given that
three out of four RIs measuring various aspects of government’s effort at fostering an inclusive response and
recovery to the COVID-19 pandemic were rated Modest or Negligible, and one was rated High. Both Modest
ratings are a reflection of weak relevance ratings because the indicators could either not be measured
robustly or did not have any data, reflecting a design issue.



Rating
Moderately Unsatisfactory



OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To strengthen macro-fiscal resilience



Rationale
RI5. Until FY24, the credit risk assessment framework was not applied for new government guarantees or on-
lending proposals due to the absence of new requests from SOEs. However, according to the DPO Team, (i)
RI5 has dissuaded SOEs due to fear of being scrutinized, and (ii) RI5 has been fully applied to existing SOE
guarantees. Moreover, supported by the 2023 Samoa First Recovery and Resilience DPO (P180120), and
the FY23 Sustainable Development Finance Policy Performance and Policy Action, (i) two credit risk
assessments were actually conducted for the Development Bank of Samoa and Samoa Airways, which
accounted for the largest share of existing government guarantees in FY23; and (ii) assessments were
conducted for the Samoa Housing Corporation and the Samoa Airport Authority in FY24. Partly as a result of
these assessments and because the government also removed guarantee status of a Samoa Airways loan
(equivalent to 2.3 percent of GDP) prompting its default, the stock of government guarantees reversed to a
downward trend, declining from 7.5 percent of GDP on average in FY21-FY22 to 3.7 percent of GDP at the
end of 2023, thus effectively reducing risk for debt management (ICR, para 26). Rating RI5: High.



                                                                                               Page 16 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



RI6: With support from the rolling over of TIMS regarding VAT compliance in 2020 and the increase in excise
taxes on tobacco and other unhealthy products, effective on January 1, 2023 (ICR, para 27), tax collection
remained steady initially despite the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and later increased. Revenue from
taxes on goods and services reached 18.5 percent of GDP in FY23 (and 18 percent in 2024 according to data
from IMF, GFS), thus overachieving their target. However, due to the MS relevance rating, RI6’s achievement
rating is downgraded from High to Substantial. Rating RI6: Substantial.

Efficacy rating for PDO2: The achievement rating for PDO2 is Satisfactory (S) as both RIs were achieved
with minor shortcomings in the targeted results for macro resilience.



Rating
Satisfactory



OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To enhance climate, disaster, and social resilience

Rationale
RI7: While RI7-ii was overachieved, RI-i was partly met but according to the DPO Team, Samoa is on its way
to achieving it. On RI7-ii, early warnings for severe weather are transmitted through six media (radio,
television, Short Message Service text, social media, e-mail, and newspaper). Public forecasts and early
warnings can also be found in: http://www.samet.gov.ws/index.php/forecasting-services/new-public-forecast,
thus overachieving its target set for at least 4 media avenues. On RI7-i, however, more progress is needed.
The ICR (para.28) points out that several challenges remain in ensuring the effective implementation of the
MGOS Act and the MHEWS Policy, including (i) the need for improved coordination among agencies, (ii)
updated Standard Operating Procedures, and (iii) measures to address gaps in tactical situational awareness
and in needed operational improvements for Samoa's early warning systems. Besides, the DPO Team
clarified that the objective of the MHEWS policy was not to provide the operational actions at a policy level
because they depend on a specific risk assessment of the sort, magnitude and expected impact of the
hazard, e.g. for a cyclone the government has developed action tables for different categories, sectors and in
areas of Samoa based on their exposure and vulnerability. Thus, SMD is working towards ensuring early
warning contents, convey potential impacts and provide timely guidance for communities as already
demonstrated through impact-based warnings for recent flood events in June 2023 and king tides in January
2024 (ICR, para 28). Moreover, the government is trying to automate decision making and expects to
operationalize the impact-based forecast and warning system in CY2025. Based on this additional information
provided by the DPO Team, the achievement of RI7 is rated as Substantial. Rating RI7: Substantial.

RI9: The target for publishing full information on fiscal risks and external contingent financing sources
(including the CAT-DDO) in budget documents was fully achieved in two key budget documents, the FY23/24
Budget, and the Fiscal Strategy Statement for FY23/24. The FY23/24 Budget included line items for
contingent financing in response to natural disasters or health emergencies, as well as receipts and
expenditures of relevant funds from external partners: e.g. a new Contingent Disaster Financing approved by
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in February 2023 and a proposed CAT DDO for the second operation in

                                                                                               Page 17 of 25
                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



                  the follow-up DPO series approved in June 2023 by the World Bank (ICR, para 31). In reference to actual
                  budget execution, the DPO Team clarified that MOF is not required to provide information on how donor
                  financing (e.g., Cat DDO) disbursements are executed. Rating RI9: High.

                  RI8: According to the DPO Team, while there are building contractors registered under other government
                  agencies, there are no building practitioners (carpenters, bricklayers, concreters, etc.) registered yet under
                  MWTI due to several institutional and legal issues. As of December 2024, there were 40 building contractors
                  licensed to carry out civil works projects. Moreover, other registration schemes exist in the government for
                  building contractors such as plumbers and electricians. However, RI8 referred to the registration and licensing
                  of building practitioners (e.g., carpenters, bricklayers, concreters) under MWTI. Delays by MWTI are due to
                  two reasons (i) the lack of an updated legal framework to regulate their registration and licensing, as MWTI
                  intended to update the Ministry of Works Act 2002 and develop Building Regulations under the Act, and (ii)
                  the limited legal expertise within MWTI. According to the DPO Team, in November 2024 such building
                  regulations were drafted but still need to be finalized. A pipeline WB-financed IPF (Pacific Region
                  Preparedness, Adaptation and Resilience Project – PREPARE-Samoa – P507749) is also focusing on this
                  activity. Moreover, the Ministry faces challenges in licensing BPs due to lack of provisions to enforce
                  compliance of practitioners with the BPLRP (ICR, para 30). Rating RI8: Negligible.

                  RI10: The objective of protecting human capital to enhance social resilience was overachieved and sustained
                  through massive campaigns to vaccinate the cohort of 1 to 2-year-olds against measles, mumps, and rubella.
                  The target (baseline of 59 percent in 2019) reached 85 percent of children between 1 to 2-year-olds having
                  received their first vaccine dose against measles, mumps and rubella, and 66 percent of this cohort having
                  received their second vaccine dose by the end of FY23. A vaccination catch-up campaign was again
                  launched in 2023, which resulted in improved coverage for the measles vaccine at 87 percent for the first
                  dose and 74 percent for the second dose on average for the year (ICR, para 32 and footnote 16). Then, in the
                  first half of 2024, the vaccination rates reached 91 and 66 percent for the first and second dose,
                  respectively.[1] Efforts continue to ensure coverage of young children to 6-year-olds who are the most
                  susceptible (ICR, para 32). Rating RI10: High.

                  Efficacy rating for PDO3: The achievement rating for PDO3 is Moderately Satisfactory (MS) as three out
                  of four RIs were achieved with minor shortcomings in the targeted results. There were some delays in one RI,
                  but additional information from the DPO team confirmed that considerable progress was made soon after the
                  operation’s closing. Only one out of the four RIs was rated Negligible due to the data unavailability and did not
                  compromise the achievement of the remaining RIs in anyway.

                  [1] Source: UNICEF (https://www.unicef.org/pacificislands/press-releases/samoa-receives-its-first-ever-
                  vaccine-delivery-vehicle-transport-lifesaving-vaccines).



                  Rating
                  Moderately Satisfactory




OVERALL EFF TBL OLD




                                                                                                                    Page 18 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



Overall Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
Rationale

The overall efficacy rating is Moderately Satisfactory (MS). The operation did well (S) in achieving the objective
related to macro resilience (PDO2) and moderately well (MS) in achieving PDO3, the objective related to
climate, disaster, and health resilience. However, overall efficacy rating is pulled down by a moderately
unsatisfactory (MU) rating for PDO1 related with the government's inclusive response and recovery efforts
following the COVID-19 pandemic. At least three quarters of the RI achievement ratings for PDO1 were pulled
down by missing data and measurement issues.



Overall Efficacy Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

6. Outcome

Rationale

With the relevance of PAs rated Satisfactory and overall efficacy rated Moderately Satisfactory, the overall
outcome of the operation is rated as Moderately Satisfactory.


a. Rating

Moderately Satisfactory

7. Risk to Development Outcome

The ICR identified two risks to development outcomes (ICR, paras 42-43).

Macroeconomic risk. Samoa suffered a three-year recession between FY20 to FY22, before starting to recover
in FY23. While growth is projected to remain above trend through FY25 as tourism inflows pick up and the
domestic economy normalizes, slow growth can undermine the development outcomes related with PDO1 and
PDO2 if any of the following risks materialize: lower remittance flows or high global commodity prices could
pose downside risks to the medium-term growth outlook and could affect the sustainability of PDO1 by reducing
the tax revenue the government has available for transfers to the vulnerable. Higher inflation would dent
households’ real incomes and make the recovery less inclusive. Weaker-than-expected global growth and
higher inflation would also affect the sustainability of PDO2 by eroding the gains Samoa has made in achieving
macro resilience. This could happen through lower tax revenues that squeeze fiscal space, or higher inflation
that hurts tourism competitiveness and compromises macro resilience. These risks to the sustainability of the
development outcomes are mitigated by the DPO program’s measures to enhance Samoa’s attractiveness to
FDI (to raise revenues) and to strengthen debt management and revenue mobilization.



                                                                                                    Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



Environmental and social risks. A potential major natural disaster or health shock such as another pandemic
could threaten the sustainability of all three PDOs in several ways: (i) create additional hardships on the
population, especially the vulnerable, through unemployment and loss of income, putting at risk the sustainability
of an inclusive economic recovery; (ii) disasters would reduce fiscal revenues while recovery and reconstruction
would require large expenditures that could erode macroeconomic stability and raise the public debt burden,
compromising macro resilience (PDO2). While the new early warning systems for climate and disaster resilience
will help to mitigate some of the impact of future natural disasters, significant progress, capacity building and
fiscal spending still is needed to complete the agenda of achieving adequate climate, disaster and social
resilience launched by this operation. The impact-based warnings issued for recent flood events in June 2023
and king tides in January 2024 demonstrate the progress made but also highlight the need for continued efforts
to achieve the remaining desired outcomes.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Bank Performance – Design

Rationale

Bank performance was strong in ensuring that the design of the DPO series was well informed by both lessons
from previous WBG operations and analytical work. The DPO drew on lessons established by several DPOs that
the WBG delivered in Samoa over the past 13 years. The DPO series was structured around government
priorities supported by a strong reform momentum, particularly on fiscal and climate resilience. It was also built
on the reforms supported by previous operations (IPFs) and technical assistance (TA).

The PAs of this operation drew on TA, available analytical work (e.g. WB Policy Notes on Early Warning System
Needs (undated), IMF 2019 and 2021 Article IV and Policy Paper on Electronic Fiscal Devices, WB Policy
Research Working Papers on Credit Risk and Contingent Liabilities, and WB Global Assessment Report on
Disaster Risk Reduction (PD1, page 56 and PD2, page 58)), and collaboration with development partners. The
new Investment Policy, supported by PA1-DPO2 was prepared with WBG TA that reviewed the overall
investment climate and shortcomings in Samoa’s investment legislation. The Disaster Risk Financing Policy was
developed with support from parallel WBG TA, including the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
Financing Initiative TA (P161700) and through the IDA-financed Pacific Resilience Project (PREP—P154839).
The Draft Early Warning System Needs Assessment and Investment Plan for the Pacific Islands informed the
corresponding PAs on the MHEWS.

The PAs were also informed by TA provided to the government by other development partners — especially by
the IMF on PDO2 and by the Australian TA facility that reviewed the Employment and Labor Relations legislation
that underpinned PA2-DPO2 (PD1, Annex 4 and PD2, Annex 6).

The operation benefited from substantial stakeholder consultation and coordination with development partners
(DPs). The WBG worked closely with Australia, New Zealand, and the ADB to align DP general budget support
under a Joint Policy Action Matrix (JPAM), developed jointly by the government and its DPs. The momentum of
policy dialogue established by the DPOs the WBG in Samoa facilitated the design of the DPO series, as well as
the Government’s buy-in in the JPAM mechanism established in collaboration with the other DPs.


                                                                                                   Page 20 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



Risks were well identified (PD1 and PD2, Section 6) with offsetting measures to mitigate them. Examples
include new sources and collection measures for boosting fiscal revenues in the event of climate, disaster or
social or global shocks.

There were weaknesses in the design of key RIs. The selection of several RIs was inadequate for measuring
progress in the PAs as there was either no data available to gauge them, or the indicators focused on aspects of
the reform that were not yet legislated, or not ready for approval or not yet implemented. PAs related to the
inclusiveness of the government’s response and recovery efforts (PDO1) shared this weakness. An example is
PA2 which focused on top-ups in senior citizen’s benefits. Instead of an RI that measured the share or number
of seniors who benefited from the reform (for which data was available and easy to measure), RI3 sought to
measure the share of total population benefiting from government assistance through trickling down. RI3 was
impossible to measure in the absence of reliable household surveys conducted prior to and post-pandemic to
assess how many household members in a senior’s household benefited from the trickle-down effects of the top-
ups. The ICR (para 22) suggested that conducting a rapid survey might have been preferable to tracking
progress in mitigating the incidence of the COVID-19 crisis. Similarly, RI4 measured the ‘Share of domestic
workers with contracts registered with MCIL,’ when MCIL only monitored the employment contracts of foreign
workers. Finally, RI8 measured the ‘Share of active building practitioners licensed and registered.’ However, at
the time of the operation’s closing, there were no building practitioners (carpenters, bricklayers, concreters, etc.)
registered/licensed under MWTI due to several institutional and legal issues. Due to such quality-at-entry issues,
the achievement rating of the operation was compromised.

Another weakness was that some PAs would not be effective, unless some prior inputs (regulatory and
operational) were adeqately legislated or implemented. As an example, PA11 that would foster the construction
of climate- and disaster-resilient buildings by licensing building practitioners qualified to construct them was
undermined because the category of ‘building practitioners’ was not yet defined and approved by the Cabinet.



Rating

Satisfactory

b. Bank Performance – Implementation

Rationale

The successful implementation of the DPO series was achieved by making swift adaptations to the reform
agenda and ensuring adequate monitoring of results and responding to implementation issues. The DPO series
demonstrated that WBG support through investment project financing operations and parallel TA was critical for
the implementation of this operation’s reforms, impact on the ground and continuity of reforms by solving
practical problems.

DPO2 rightly reformulated two ITs (IT1 and IT4) and dropped two ITs (IT2 and IT8), thus ensuring timely
responsiveness to critical needs as they emerged during implementation. IT1 and IT4 were updated by PA3 and
PA6 respectively due to changing priorities: PA6 on Government guarantees further strengthened debt
management, after IT4 was met following an early publication of the MTDS. PA3 refocused the original intention
to pass a hard-to-approve bill on Foreign Investment (IT1) to operationalize reform approving a new Investment
Policy. The planned IT2 on the approval of a social protection policy was appropriately dropped as the new

                                                                                                     Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



government needed more time to advance on a comprehensive social protection agenda. Similarly, IT8 related
to a National Epidemic and Pandemic Influenza Preparedness and Response Plan was appropriately dropped
after the approval of DPO1 as it was already achieved.

The DPO program was complemented by other ongoing World Bank operations. The reforms to enhance
climate, disaster, and social resilience (Pillar 3) were informed by ongoing investment projects in Samoa
including: the IDA-funded PREP which supports the strengthening of the multi-hazard early warning system; the
Samoa Health System Strengthening Program (P164382); and the Samoa COVID-19 Emergency Response
Project (P173920). The WBG kept promoting private investment-related reforms (Pillar 1), improving monitoring
and management of government guarantees (Pillar 2), and enhancing climate and disaster resilience (Pillar 3)
through a First Recovery and Resilience DPO, a June 2023 series (P180120).

However, as the ICR notes (para 41), monitoring progress in the DPO could have been followed more closely.
Progress in the implementation of the DPO program and the status of the RIs was monitored only after
completion of the program in October 2023 (Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR)). While Bank staff
discussed program implementation issues during regular Joint Policy Action Matrix (JPAM) meetings, more
frequent ISR missions could have been conducted during the 3-year period of the DPO series.




Rating

Satisfactory

c. Overall Bank Performance

Rationale

With both design and implementation assessed as Satisfactory, the overall Bank performance is evaluated as
Satisfactory.


Overall Bank Performance Rating

Satisfactory

9. Other Impacts

a. Social and Poverty

Several actions undertaken as a part of this operation are expected to have important social and poverty
impacts, some beyond those identified in the ICR (Section III).

The reforms supported under Pillar 1, including measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and
social risks should have positive impacts on the poor and vulnerable which are the most heavily impacted. Prior

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



actions under Pillar 1 protected the short-term purchasing power of the vulnerable through direct transfers to
unemployed registered workers and top-ups to the elderly pension scheme (PA1, PA2) thus benefitting directly
two of the most vulnerable groups of the population. Boosting private investment in tourism (PA3) and labor
market reform (PA4) are expected to create more formal jobs for poor and vulnerable men and women in the
recovery process.

The reforms supported under Pillar 2 (strengthening debt management and revenue mobilization) will contribute
to creating the fiscal space needed for the longer-term protection of the poor and vulnerable through safety nets.
In addition, higher taxes on unhealthy foods (DPO2-PA4) are likely to have a positive long-term impact on public
health by discouraging the consumption of unhealthy foods.

The reforms supported under Pillar 3 improved preparedness against climate change, natural disasters (PA9,
PA10, PA11, PA12), and risks from infectious diseases (PA13), and will benefit the poor disproportionately.
Samoans engaged in subsistence agriculture and fisheries for their livelihoods are most likely to benefit from
PAs (DPO1 PA5 and DPO2 PA5) that increase resilience to climate change and natural hazards, given that
agricultural and coastal areas are often severely damaged or destroyed by cyclones and floods. Early warnings
through mass text messages and radio will reach poor households giving them time to prepare. By reducing the
potential spread of communicable diseases, the children’s vaccination reform supported by PA13 is expected to
benefit the poor and vulnerable who tend to be the most exposed and are less able to cope with the effects of
such diseases.



b. Environmental

The PAs supported by this DPO series are not expected to create negative environmental impacts. Support to
vulnerable workers and households, provided by Pillar 1 PAs, may have a positive effect on the environment
reflecting reduced demands on ecosystems for food and livelihoods and lower risk of over-exploitation of
ecosystems. Measures aiming to strengthen Samoa’s attractiveness to FDI include a clause regarding
adherence to environmental regulations, while Environmental Assessments become a legal requirement. TA is
being provided to Samoa by the Secretariat of the Pacific Regional Environmental Program (SPREP) and the
WBG to revise the Codes of Environmental Practice.

Pillar 3 policy reforms to enhance climate and disaster resilience are likely to have positive effects on natural
resources. Some risks to the environment may stem from medical waste management related to vaccination
programs under PA13 which are recognized and managed under the National Health Care Waste Management
Strategic Plan (2019-2023). To mitigate these risks, the government has procured appropriate waste
management infrastructure and equipment through the Samoa COVID-19 Emergency Response Project
(P173920).



c. Gender

Gender-based discrimination is expected to be reduced through the creation and formalization of jobs in a
gender-equitable way. PA4 aimed to “reduce both direct and indirect discrimination against women in Samoan
workplaces (registered in the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Labor), and ensure equal pay for work of
equal value.” Approval by the Cabinet of the Labor and Employment Relations Amendment (LERA) bill 2022 for


                                                                                                   Page 23 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



submission to Parliament should facilitate formalization of the employment conditions of domestic workers, a
high proportion of whom (75%) are women, thus bolstering their protection and reducing wage gaps.



d. Other

None



10. Quality of ICR

Rationale

The ICR provides a comprehensive analysis of the context, core aspects of the operation’s analytical
underpinnings, and extent of the operation’s achievements and some shortcomings. It effectively presents a
comprehensive Theory of Change (ICR, Table 3) which was missing in both PDs. The ICR discusses challenges
faced during implementation and offers some suggestions on what might have been done better.

The ICR could have been better in presenting several key disaggregated insights underlying the PAs that were
later collected from the DPO team. Examples include some perceived legal gaps and operational pre-
requirements that affected the relevance and achievement of the RIs. The identification of risks to development
outcomes section was incomplete. Finally, the ICR could have pointed out the dominance of output-based over
outcome-based-RIs.


a. Rating

Substantial

11. Ratings
                                                                               Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                               Disagreement/Comments
                                Moderately
Outcome                                              Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Bank Performance                Satisfactory         Satisfactory
Relevance of Results
                                ---                  Moderately Satisfactory
Indicators
Quality of ICR                  ---                  Substantial


12. Lessons




                                                                                                  Page 24 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Samoa First Response DPO with CATDDO (P171764)



IEG concurs with the lessons in the ICR, especially the lesson that makes the case for budget support in crisis
circumstances despite the presence of fiscal surpluses as it helped finance the government's fiscal response to
the pandemic in Samoa.

IEG also offers a lesson emerging from its assessment of the ICR.

Properly assessing legislative, regulatory, inter-agency coordination gaps, data availability, as well as the
technical, institutional, and political capacity to overcome them ex-ante is quintessential when designing PAs,
RIs and setting realistic targets. This lesson was particularly critical as the Samoa First and Second Respnse,
Recovery and Resilience DPO with a CAT DDO was already heavy loaded with 13 PAs addressing 5 bills, and
whose technical and political feasibility was compromised in the middle of shifting reform priorities and resources
due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Shortcomings became evident in the poor formulation of a few PAs, with either
unfulfilled pre-requirements and/or unrealistic to achieve RIs, mostly on account of measurement issues related
to data availability.


13. Project Performance Assessment Report (PPAR) Recommended?

No




                                                                                                    Page 25 of 25
