     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024346

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P164551                                   Mozambique Land Administration Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Mozambique                                Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D4010                                 29-Mar-2024                                         72,856,604.61

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 04-Dec-2018                               29-Mar-2024

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                          100,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            76,617,324.45                                              0.00

 Actual                                        72,466,820.10                                              0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Ranga Rajan                Peter Nigel Freeman          Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Krishnamani




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) as stated in the Financing Agreement (Schedule 1, page 5) and in
   the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 13) is:

   " Strengthen land tenure security in selected districts and improve the efficiency and accessibility of
   land administration services ".



                                                                                                 Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



   The PDO was revised with the restructuring of the project on June 22, 2021. The revised PDO is:

   PDO 1: " Strengthen land tenure security in selected districts and improve the efficiency and
   accessibility of land administration services ".

   PDO 2: " Provide immediate and effective response to the emergency in Northern Mozambique ".

   For the purpose of this Implementation Completion Results (ICR) Review, the PDOs are taken to be:

   PDO 1. To strengthen land tenure security in selected districts.

   PDO 2. To improve the efficiency and accessibility of land administration services.

   PDO 3. Provide immediate and effective response to the emergency in Northern Mozambique.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  26-May-2023

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   There are four components: The actual cost of components is from ICR (page 3).

   1. Institutional Development and Strengthening of the Legal Framework. The estimated cost at
   appraisal was US$22.40 million. The actual cost was US$8.13 million. This component planned to provide
   technical assistance (TA) for operationalizing the Commission for the Revision of the National Land Policy
   (CPRINT) and the 1997 Land Law; strengthening land administration functions and quality of
   services; developing a business plan for establishing an autonomous land administration authority,
   improving the land information management system (SIGIT), renovating ten Provincial and District Land
   Offices, modernizing the geodetic network through establishing the Continuously Operating Reference
   Stations (CORS) network. The activity pertaining to renovating Provincial and District Land Offices was
   dropped with the second project restructuring.

   2. Systematic Land Regularization. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$64.90 million. The actual
   cost was US$42.58 million. This component planned to finance works on selected districts to implement the
   Delimitation of Community Land (DELCOM) (DELCOM refers to the process of marking land boundaries
   that belong to a community) and issuing Land Use and Benefit Rights (DUATs). Activities included a public



                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



  information and awareness campaign, acquiring imagery, and strengthening capacities of local communities
  to manage land and deal with land disputes.

  3. Project Management and Coordination. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$12.70 million. The
  actual cost was US$10.75 million. This component aimed to strengthen implementation capacity through
  setting up a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the National Fund for Sustainable Development (FNDS) and
  three decentralized PCUs for coordinating key stakeholders at subnational levels.

  4. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). No cost was estimated at appraisal. The
  actual cost was US$10.22 million. This component planned to provide an immediate ability to respond in the
  event of an emergency. This component was activated following the displacement of farmers following
  armed insurgency in the Cabo Delagado province and addressed its impact on the population of the Cabo
  Delgado and Nampula provinces. Activities in this component aimed to provide about 30,000 farmers with
  agricultural kits to enable displaced farmers to resume food production.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost. The estimated cost at appraisal was US$100.00 million. The actual cost was US$72.85
  million.        .

  Financing. The project was financed by an International Development Association (IDA) Grant of
  US$100.00 million. US$23.50 million was cancelled through the fourth project restructuring on March 2024
  (discussed below). The amount disbursed was US$72.85 million.

  Recipient Contribution. Recipient contribution was not planned at appraisal.

  Dates. The project was approved on December 4, 2018, became effective on October 2, 2019 and closed
  as scheduled on March 29, 2024.

  Changes. The project was restructured four times.

  A category to refund the Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of Special Drawing Rights (SDR) was added to
  the eligible table of the Financing Agreement through the first project restructuring in November 2019.

  The main changes made through the second project restructuring on June 22, 2021 were.

        CERC was activated following the armed insurgency in Northern Mozambique and the PDO was
         modified.
        The activity relating to constructing provincial and regional offices was dropped as the funds
         earmarked for these activities were reallocated for funding CERC.
        The safeguards on Pest Management was triggered.

  The following main changes were made through the third project restructuring on May 26, 2023.

        The targets relating to DELCOM and issuance of DUAT titles were reduced to reflect what could be
         realistically achieved by the closing date.


                                                                                                   Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



   The main change made through the fourth project restructuring on March 28, 2024 was.

         IDA Grant funds in the amount of US$23.50 million were cancelled in line with the decision to close
          the project on schedule.

   Split Rating. The June 2021 restructuring expanded the PDO but did not alter the PDO target
   values. However, targets were reduced during the May 2023 restructuring, which narrowed the project
   scope. Hence, this review uses the Split Rating methodology to determine the outcome rating.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context. Despite impressive overall economic growth in the years before appraisal, poverty in the
poorest 40% of the population of Mozambique remained a key concern. Most poor people lived in rural
areas of the North and Central regions and their livelihoods depended on the agricultural
sector. Strengthening land rights in rural areas was hence critical for Mozambique's development and
poverty reduction efforts.

Sector context. Mozambique had made progress before appraisal in improving land rights. Mozambique
adopted a National Land Policy in 1995 and a Land Law in 1997 for formalizing land tenure. Between 2008
and 2013, the Government implemented the Land Services Project financed by the Millennium Challenge
Corporation (MCC) for building capacity for issuing DUATs mainly in peri-urban areas. The government
implemented an automated system for managing DELCOM and issuing DUAT's. In 2015, the Government
carried out reforms aimed to rationalize the institutional framework by establishing a single entity - the
Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development - for managing land administration.

Despite these developments, by 2012, only 1.3% of the land of Mozambique had formal titles. The land law
and regulations had significant gaps with respect to the legal representations for managing communal land.
Consultation processes and community agreements as required by law were weakly enforced that resulted
in land conflicts especially in rural areas. The gaps were exacerbated in practice by weaknesses in
community capacity and inadequate land administration systems at subnational levels.

Government strategy at appraisal. The Five-Year Plan for 2015 - 2019 specified priority actions for
developing a National Land Cadastre, DELCOM, issuing DUATs and certifying community lands. In 2015,
the Government launched the Terra Sequra program with a goal of regularizing five million five million
DUAT's and completing delimitation of 8,000 communal lands by the end of 2019.

Current Government strategy. Mozambique adopted a new National Land Policy in 2022. This Policy
defined a series of implementation mechanisms and instruments, including preparation of a National
Investments Plan for the Land Sector and a National Program for Systematic Formalization of Land Tenure
under the second phase of the national Terra Sequra Program.

World Bank (WB) strategy at appraisal. The PDO was well-aligned with the broad key themes of the
Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 2017 - 2021 namely, improving agricultural productivity, rural


                                                                                                  Page 4 of 18
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



               development and spatial planning. Specifically, the project was aligned with two CPF Focus Areas namely "
               Promoting diversified growth and enhancing productivity " and " Enhancing Sustainability and Resilience ".

               Current WB strategy. The WB's CPF for 2023 - 2027 indicated that the Bank support for agriculture would
               be anchored to the 10-year Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA) Sustainable Rural Economy
               Program (MozRural) and that the Bank will continue to support regularizing land tenure.

               Bank experience. The activities of this project constituted the first phase of the Terra Sequra Program. The
               activities of this project complemented the activities of the ongoing Bank-financed projects - the Agricultural
               and Natural Resources Landscape Management and the Forest Management projects aimed at
               strengthening the Terra Sequra Program.

               Overall level of ambition. This project included a mix of regulatory and institutional reforms and carrying
               out systematic land regularization. Unlike the project funded by the MCC which focused on peri-urban
               areas, this project focused on rural areas with disproportionate concentration of poverty. Given that
               activities aimed at systematic regularization of land property rights in areas with disproportionate
               concentration of poverty, the project was pitched at an appropriate level.

               Relevance of PDO. The Bank's experience with land administration project demonstrated that such
               projects require years of detailed work to show the desired results. Given that the PDO was relevant to the
               Government strategy and the current Bank strategy, the relevance of the PDO is rated as High.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             PDO 1: To strengthen land tenure security in selected districts.

                             Rationale
                             Theory of Change. Activities such as facilitating multi-sectoral discussions on land policy and land regulatory
                             framework, capacity building of land administration institutions, modernizing the geodetic network and
                             developing the Land Information Management System (SIGIT), were likely to help in formulating reforms by
                             working groups on land policy and regulatory framework and increase the MTA's capacities to support
                             systematic land regularization. These outputs were likely to aid in strengthening SIGIT's capacity to maintain
                             a reliable record of land tenure rights and strengthen land security in selected districts. These outcomes were
                             likely to contribute to the long-term development outcome of improving the environment for enhancing
                             investment incentives for households, communities and private investors. The causal links between project
                             activities, outputs and outcomes were logical. The outcomes were monitorable.


                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



The intended outcomes were predicated on the following assumptions: One, a strong demand for land
regularization process in rural areas: Two, the needed reforms to be approved by Council of Ministry and
Parliament; and three, land users understand the benefit of formal land transactions. These assumptions
were considered realistic.

Intermediate Results Indicators.

      Community awareness and communication campaigns were implemented as intended.
      96% of land conflicts were addressed by the conflict resolution mechanism by the National Land
       Directorate of Lands (DINA), exceeding the target of 80%.
      54% of women participated in the consultation process, exceeding the target of 40%.
      910 Community Management Committees (CGS) consisting of 20,137 members (of which 51% were
       women) were trained as targeted.
      956 civil society and local government officials were trained in legal and safeguard aspects related to
       the land tenure registration process, exceeding the original target of 500. This included 27 women
       short of the target of 40.
      1,283,171 DUATs were recorded and regularized in SIGIT, well short of the original target of
       2,000,000.
      The land regularization process was finalized in 56 districts, short of the target of 80.

Outcomes.

The outputs described above were expected to contribute to the following outcomes: (i) The number of
DELCOM certificates recorded in SIGIT in the name of the community; and (ii) The number of beneficiaries
who received a DUAT registered in SIGIT (including the percentage of women registered in SIGIT).

      733 DELCOM certificates were recorded in SIGIT in the name of the community, well under the
       original target of 1,200.
      686,561 received a DUAT recorded in SIGIT, short of the target of 700,000. 44% of women received a
       DUAT recorded in SIGIT, either in their name or jointly, exceeding the original target of 40%.

Two outcome indicators were short of the original targets, one substantially, while three of the intermediate
results indicators were less than targeted. Efficacy of this PDO is hence rated before the project restructuring.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
This objective was not revised. However, the indicators were revised with the third project restructuring.

Revised Rationale
Intermediate Results Indicators.


                                                                                                   Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



In addition to the IRI mentioned above, this indicator was added with the project restructuring in March 2023.

      71 administrative territorial boundaries in the selected districts were delimited as targeted.

Outcomes.

      793 DELCOM certificates were recorded in the name of the community, exceeding the revised target
       of 764.
      685,561 beneficiaries received a DUAT recorded in SIGIT, exceeding the revised target of
       484,500. 44% of women received a DUAT recorded in SIGIT in their name of jointly, exceeding the
       revised target of 40%.

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, as the revised targets were exceeded.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the efficiency and accessibility of land administration services.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Activities such as updating base maps and geospatial information, constructing Ministry
of Land and Environment (MTA) buildings at provincial and district levels, conducting awareness campaign
and community consultation, capacity development for conflict resolution and awareness of land
law, conducting community delimitation and land use zoning. were likely to contribute to SIGIT recordings of
community delimitation of individual DUATs, strengthening local capacity for regularizing land tenure and
resolving land disputes. The outputs of these activities are likely to contribute to improved efficiency and
accessibility of land administration services in selected districts. The causal links between project activities,
outputs and outcomes were logical. The outcomes were monitorable.

Intermediate Results Indicators.

      The final draft of the land law and land policy reform was prepared and submitted to the Council of
         Ministers as targeted. The law was subsequently adopted in November 2022. The law included
         provisions for establishing an autonomous Land Administration entity. The final draft proposal and a
         business plan for creating the entity were submitted to the Council of Ministers after the project closed.
        SIGIT was upgraded, operational and available to use when the project closed as targeted. This
         included a Web portal that enabled public access to the national cadaster land data.
        Quality Assurance and Quality Control procedures for land regularization were implemented as
         targeted.
        No new provincial/ district offices were built as compared to the target of ten.
         One household survey was completed when the project closed, short of the target of three.


                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



Outcomes.

The project activities were intended to improve the accessibility and efficiency of land administration services.
Accessibility was monitored through a beneficiary survey and efficiency through reduction in the cost of
registering a DUAT in SIGIT.

      90% of the beneficiaries were satisfied with land tenure regularization, exceeding the target of 75%.
       88% of women beneficiaries were satisfied, exceeding the target of 75%.
      The cost of recording a DUAT in SIGIT under a systematic regularization process decreased from
       US$50.00 at the baseline to US$38.50, falling short of meeting the original target of US$35.00. The
       reduction was adopted through outsourcing part of DELCOM and DUAT issuance to the private sector
       and through streamlining of the land tenure formalization procedures (ICR, para 26).

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as Modest before the project restructuring, as two intermediate results indicators
and a PDO indicator were not achieved. Moreover, the project could have measured the number of users
rather than just the satisfaction rate to measure accessibility.



Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
This objective itself was not revised. However, the targets were revised with the project restructuring.

Revised Rationale
Intermediate Results Indicator.

The intermediate results indicator discussed above were relevant to this PDO.

Outputs.

      The SIGIT was deployed and operational on the centralized Information Communication Technology
       (ICT) infrastructure at the renovated at the National Land Directorate (DNAT). This indicator was
       added with the March 2023 restructuring.

Outcomes.

      90% of the beneficiaries expressed satisfaction with the land tenure regularization, exceeding the
       target of 75%. 88% of the women beneficiaries expressed satisfaction, exceeding the target of 75%.
      The cost of recording a DUAT in SIGIT under a systematic regularization process decreased from
       US$50.00 at the baseline to US$38.50, slightly short of the original target of US$35.00.




                                                                                                   Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



While the revised targets were achieved, the project could have measured the number of users rather than
just the satisfaction rate to measure accessibility. Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial with moderate
shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
PDO 3. Provide immediate and effective response to the emergency in Northern Mozambique.

Rationale
Theory of Change. Activities in this component aimed to alleviate the adverse impacts of internally displaced
people following the armed insurgency in Northern areas of Mozambique. Activities such as registering
beneficiaries with the National Institute for Social Action. preparing 300 hectares of agricultural land to settle
the displaced people, distributing agricultural kits and providing technical assistance for agriculture, were
considered likely to help the affected people. The causal links between activities, outputs and outcomes were
logical. The outcomes were monitorable.

Outputs.

      The CERC supported the preparation of 300 hectares of agricultural land to settle the Internally
       Displaced People (IDP) and the registration of beneficiaries with the National Institute for Social Action
       (INAS).

Outcomes.

      30,000 farmers were provided with agricultural assets as targeted. 54% of the beneficiaries were
       women, exceeding the target of 50%..

Efficacy of this PDO is rated as substantial, as the targets were met.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
PDO 3. Provide immediate and effective response to the emergency in Northern Mozambique.

Revised Rationale
Same as above.


                                                                                                    Page 9 of 18
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)




                              Revised Rating
                              Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Given the shortcomings in the achievement of the original PDOs, the original objective is rated as Modest.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                  Primary Reason
                            Modest
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Given the substantial achievement of the revised targets, the revised objective is rated as Substantial with
                            minor shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating
                            Substantial



    5. Efficiency
   Economic analysis. An economic analysis was conducted at appraisal and at closure for the project activities,
   which aimed to regularize the land registration process, reduce land conflicts and improve efficiency of land
   administration process and facilitate access to land information. The economic benefits were assumed to come
   from: (i) an improved environment for rural investments from individual households, communities and private
   investors; (ii) a reduction in cost of issuing DUAT's for the Ministry of Land, Environment and Rural Development
   (MITADER) and farmers; and (iii) an increase in tax collection and the time required for obtaining a DUAT. The
   other non-quantified benefits were assumed to come from benefits in terms of conflict resolution and an
   increased perception of tenure security. The ex-ante Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) was around 20%
   and the Net Present Value (NPV) at 8% discount rate was US$88.00 million.

   The ex-post analysis assumed a longer period of 20 years for the delayed project benefits. A new five percent
   discount rate was used, reflecting a recent review under the International Monetary Fund's (IMF) extended credit
   facility, supported by the WB. The NPV when the project closed was US$7.00 million and the ex-post EIRR was
   8%, indicating that although the ex-post EIRR was lower than the ex-ante EIRR, the project was economically
   viable. The lower EIRR than estimated at appraisal were due to factors such as: (i) delays in issuing DUATs
   resulting in not being able to reach the initial target; (ii) reduction in the number of DUATs to be issued as a

                                                                                                                              Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



result of the project restructuring and the area under certification; and (iii) the project management costs
remained almost the same despite the reduction in project targets.

The project demonstrated value for money. The project achieved most of the PDOs, within the original
duration and implementing activities under the CERC that was activated during implementation. The project was
successful in terms of outputs as compared to similar projects in Africa, such as the Madagascar Agriculture,
Rural Growth and Land Management Project and the Cote d'Ivoire Land Policy Improvement and
Implementation project. These projects had implementation periods of 8.5 years and 6.5 years respectively,
against 5.3 years for this project. The Madagascar Project reached 300,981 beneficiaries and the Cote d'Ivoire
33,878 beneficiaries, while this project reached 686,561 beneficiaries.

Administrative issues during implementation. The project experienced delays in the initial years only and the
project became effective 11 months after approval. The new Land Registration code introduced in August 2018
introduced legislation the obligation to register DUAT in the Real Property Register and pay registration fees that
many could not afford. The Financing Agreement therefore issued a directive stating that all DUAT under the
government program would be exempt from fees for first time registration of DUATs in the real property register.
Although delaying effectiveness to resolve the issue was essential to achieve the objective, it reduced the
implementation time. The Mid-Term Review (MTR) in April 2022 recommended that the target relating to SIGIT
was not likely to be achieved before the scheduled closing date and the Bank subsequently cancelled the
balance of the loan under the March 2024 restructuring.

Efficiency is rated as Modest given the ex-post EIRR was lower than the ex-ante EIRR. Even though the project
closed on time, the original scope of the project was narrowed as some of the original activities had to be
dropped and accordingly the loan reduced.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?              Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                       0
 Appraisal                                                  20.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable
                                                                                       0
 ICR Estimate                                               8.00
                                                                                        Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of the PDO to the Government strategy and the current Bank strategy is rated as High. Efficacy of
the original objectives was rated as Modest before the restructuring and substantial after restructuring.


                                                                                                      Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



Efficiency is rated as Modest. Taking the shares of disbursement before and after restructuring, outcome is
rated as Moderately Satisfactory.

Table: Split rating methodology.

                                                       Prior to May 23         Post-May 2023 Restructuring
                                                       Restructuring                     targets
            Relevance of PDO                                                   High
              Efficacy PDO
                  PDO 1                                   Modest                       Substantial
                  PDO 2                                   Modest             Substantial with shortcomings
                  PDO 3                                  Substantial                   Substantial
                Efficiency                                                 Modest
            Outcome ratings                                MU                              MS
  Numerical value of the outcome ratings                     3                              4
              Disbursement                            US$34.00 million              US$38.00 million
          Share of disbursement                            0.47                           0.53
   Weighted value of the outcome rating                    1.41                           2.12
  Final Outcome rating (1.41+2.12= 3.53)                            Moderately Satisfactory
a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Government commitment. The ICR (para 66) notes that the project achievements in terms of DELCOM
certificates and DUAT titles are likely to be sustained. However, the Ministry of Land and Environment (MTA)
has to ensure to scale up DELCOM and DUATs throughout the country.

Technical risk. There is the risk that SIGIT will not be adequately maintained and operational until MTA has
developed a new Land Information System, The ICR (para 66) notes that efforts were made under this
project to address outstanding SIGIT performance issues. However, given that for any Land Information
Systems, there is maintenance cost associated with SIGIT, the MTA's National Land Directorate (DNDT)
needs to ensure that it has the required human capacity and resource.

Stakeholder risk. There is the risk that existing mechanisms to transfer DUAT's are not known to the
beneficiaries accessible. MTA will have to mobilize resources to pursue this task. It originally planned to build
and equip selected districts with land offices, but this sub-component was dropped following CERC
activation. It could also consider registering DUAT transfers at at community level. (ICR, para 68).




8. Assessment of Bank Performance



                                                                                                     Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)




a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank prepared this project based on the experience from the land administration capacity building
  project funded by the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC). The lessons incorporated included: (i)
  focusing on participatory land regularization procedures and a simple technology that are affordable to
  the landholders; (ii) recognizing that cadaster and land regularization activities pay attention to social
  aspects, the design included a communication strategy and citizen engagement mechanism to promote
  awareness; (iii) given that land right regularization process could bring land conflicts, the design
  incorporated conflict prevention and mediation support; and (iv) recognizing that land governance
  relations at locals level require greater integration into the local development planning processes.

  The Bank preparation team included legal, technical, safeguards, fiduciary and economic experts to
  assess the current situation and future needs. The design included a Project Preparation Advance (PPA).
  This aided in financing studies pertaining to surveying, geodetic network, mapping, Information
  Technology (IT) Systems, the methodology for field work and economic returns. As discussed in section
  five, the Financing Agreement included an effectiveness condition to ensure that all DUATs under the
  Terra Sequa Program are affordable to the beneficiaries. While this condition caused delays in
  effectiveness, it helped in ensuring that DUATs under the program are affordable to the beneficiaries.

  The implementation arrangements made at appropriate were appropriate during implementation. The
  arrangements included: (i) The project was to be implemented under the leadership of the Ministry of
  Land, Environment and Rural Development (MITADER); (ii) The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in the
  National Fund for Sustainable Development Fund (FNDS) was in charge of coordinating the relevant
  government entities; and (iii) At the provincial level, the activities were to be implemented through three
  decentralized PCUs.

  The preparation team identified several risks including High social risk and substantial risks with technical
  design, weak implementation capacity at the subnational levels to support the cadaster process, lack of a
  fit-for-purpose methodology for the land regularization process and weak awareness of communities in
  rural areas of land rights. Several mitigation measures were incorporated. Even with mitigation measures,
  the risk was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, para 84). The measures proved to be adequate, as
  the project performance was not compromised with the risks identified at appraisal. The arrangements
  made at appraisal for M&E and safeguards and fiduciary compliance were appropriate (discussed in
  sections 9 and 10). There were minor shortcomings in M&E (Section 9a)

  Bank performance during quality-at-entry is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Twelve Implementation Status Results (ISR) were filed during the project lifetime. The missions during
 COVID-19 pandemic were virtual. The Aide Memoires addressed key technical issues. The continuity of
 leadership was satisfactory, with only two Task leaders during the project lifetime. They ensured a smooth
 transfer of responsibilities. The Bank activated CERC to support the internally displaced people, impacted

                                                                                                    Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



 by the armed conflict in the northern areas of Mozambique. FNDS designed and implemented a program
 that required new safeguards instruments and coordinated with the government agencies to define the
 composition of the agricultural kits. This added depth and breadth to the original project scope. The Bank
 mobilized technical experts through the technical partnership agreement between the WB and the Food
 and Agriculture Organization. During the two years of the COVID-19 pandemic and the restrictions on
 travel supervision missions were organized virtually and the communication between the WB and the
 implementing agencies remained fluid. Following the MTR in April 2022, the Bank cancelled the balance of
 the loan through the March 2024 restructuring. The support provided by the Bank team aided in safeguards
 and fiduciary compliance (discussed in section 10).

 Bank performance during supervision is rated as satisfactory.

 Overall Bank performance is rated as satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was clear. The targets of PDO 1a were appropriately measured by numbers of titles
 and beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender), and the satisfaction rate of beneficiaries. However, PDO 1b
 lacked specific indicators to measure the efficiency of land administration services, other than to show that
 DUAT registration costs had been reduced. For example, a measure of how many people were using the
 services of the institutions could have been included. Further, although there was an expected outcome to
 facilitate land tax collection, there was no indicator to measure this aspect.

 The Planning and Monitoring Department of the National Fund for Sustainable Development (FNDS) was
 responsible for M&E. Key outcome indicators were to be monitored through external evaluation. Baseline
 data to assess the perception of land tenure was to collected through field work on the ground. The M&E
 design envisioned three beneficiary surveys during implementation (one in the beginning, one during
 implementation and one during closure).



b. M&E Implementation
  When the CERC was activated, outcome indicators were added to monitor performance. The M&E also
  allowed to define achievable targets as part of the May 2023 restructuring. Of the three beneficiary
  surveys only one was completed due to the restrictions following the COVID-19 pandemic.




                                                                                                   Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)




c. M&E Utilization
  The ICR (para 50) noted that M&E records were constantly reviewed and utilized to monitor project
  performance during implementation.

  Overall M&E is rated as substantial, in view of the moderate shortcomings at design and
  implementation.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The Project was classified as a Category B (partial assessment) project under the WB safeguard policies.
   Five safeguard policies were triggered; : Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Natural Habitats (OP/BP
   4.01): Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): and Involuntary Resettlement
   (OP/BP 4.12) (PAD, page 4). Safeguards on Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) was triggered with the
   activation of the CERC.

   Environmental Assessment, Natural Habitats, Forests, Physical Cultural Resources and Pest
   Management. The adverse environmental impacts, including on natural habitats and forests, were
   expected to be site-specific. Although the project was not expected to register land rights in sites of cultural
   significance, safeguards on physical cultural resources was triggered, to address "chance finds". An
   Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and publicly-disclosed at
   appraisal to address the safeguards (PAD, para 75). Safeguards on Pest Management was triggered during
   implementation as the agricultural kits to be distributed to farmers under the CERC included fertilizers. A
   Pest Management Plan was prepared and publicly disclosed on April 22, 2021, to address issues relating to
   Pest Management.

   Involuntary Resettlement. The safeguards on involuntary resettlement was triggered, due to the possibility
   that the small-scale civil scale works could entail land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. A
   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to address these issues (PAD, para 79).

   Overall safeguards compliance was rated as satisfactory, with no major environmental or
   resettlement issues during implementation (ICR, para 52).




b. Fiduciary Compliance



                                                                                                     Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



   Financial Management (FM). The Bank conducted an assessment of the FM arrangements of FNDS at
   appraisal (PAD, para 70). FNDS had managed Bank-financed operations. The assessment concluded that
   the FM arrangements were adequate.

   FM was assessed as moderately satisfactory (ICR, para 53). The ICR notes that when the project closed,
   the Bank was informed about a miscalculation in the amount cancelled in March 2024, which in
   cancellation of about US$3.3 million linked to pending invoices, with no funds available under the
   Grant. The ICR notes this matter was under further review. The financial statements for the fiscal year
   ending in December 2023, were overdue for about three months.

   Procurement. The Bank conducted an assessment of procurement arrangements of FNDS. Although the
   FNDS staff had experience in procurement and were trained on using the Bank's New Procurement
   Framework (NPF), the staff did not have experience on using the new framework. The procurement risk
   was rated as substantial at appraisal (PAD, page 55).

   Overall procurement performance was rated as moderately satisfactory. Procurement timelines and
   procedures were delayed during the COVID-19 pandemic timelines and the weak procurement capacity of
   FNDS.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   There were no unintended impacts.



d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                        ICR                      IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
                               Moderately
Outcome                                                 Moderately Satisfactory
                               Satisfactory
Bank Performance               Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                 Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                 ---                      Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR draws the following three lessons from the experience of implementing this project, with
some adaptation of language.



                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)



1. Piloting an approach that can be replicated elsewhere, may raise the potential for success
of land management projects. This project piloted an approach to systematic land tenure
formalization rooted in Mozambique's 1995 Land Policy and 1997 Land Law, by supporting the
adoption and piloting of a streamlined methodology for mass land formalization combining public
information and mobilization campaigns, training of Community-based paralegals, outsourcing a
large part of DELCOM activities to the private sector, hiring firms to carry out an independent quality
assurance and introducing a mechanism to control the field data delivered by the private sector. The
experience of this project would likely be relevant for other WB financed projects in Sub-Saharan
Africa, such as in Cote d'Ivoire, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

2. The land management policy formulization needs to be participatory to be effective. The
land management policy formulated in this project included public consultations before and after the
draft policy was publicly released, extensive analytical works and thorough consultation with key
stakeholders.

3. A longer time period may be required for showing the desired results in land
administration projects. Experience from the WB projects involving significant investments in land
reform, land titling, institutional changes and developing information systems indicates that they
require a longer time than the 'typical five years'. This project was a originally intended as a pilot for
a larger program that would have to be implemented over ten years.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is clear and well-written. The theory of change articulated in the text, clearly shows the causal links
between project activities, outputs and the intended outcomes. The theory of change explicitly states the
assumptions underlying the project. The quality and the quantity of evidence is adequate for monitoring project
performance. The ICR draws good lessons from the experience of implementing this project.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Mozambique Land Administration Project (P164551)




                                                                                Page 18 of 18
