     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



                                                                                  Report Number : ICRR0024324

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P148435                                    STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Costa Rica                                 Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Program Cost (USD)
 IBRD-85930                                 30-Apr-2022                                          420,000,000.00

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 15-Mar-2016                                31-Jan-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                       Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           420,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Revised Commitment                            420,000,000.00                                                 0.00

 Actual                                        420,000,000.00                                                 0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                  ICR Review Coordinator           Group
 Aliza M. Belman Inbal       Denise A. Vaillancourt       Susan Ann Caceres                IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Loan Agreement between the Government of Costa Rica and the IBRD dated April 21, 2016
   (p.5), the objectives of the program were to contribute to: (i) improving the timeliness and quality of health
   services; and (ii) enhancing the institutional efficiency of the Costa Rican Social Security Administration
   (CCSS). These two goals were intended to contribute to the higher-level goal of enhancing the financial
   sustainability of the public health insurance system, which in Costa Rica includes under one institutional
   roof public health insurance revenue collection and pooling as well as provision of all public health services at


                                                                                                     Page 1 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



   all
   levels of care.

   The Project Appraisal Document (PAD) dated February 18, 2016 (p.13) further elaborates by stating that
   “these PDOs will in turn contribute to the higher goal of enhancing the financial sustainability of the public
   health insurance.” These objectives were fundamentally unchanged over the course of the project. The ICR
   (p.3) parsed the objectives as “to contribute to: (i) improving the timeliness of health services; (ii) improving
   the quality of health services; and (iii) improving the institutional efficiency of CCSS. In turn, these PDOs were
   to contribute to the higher goal of enhancing the financial sustainability of Costa Rica’s public health
   insurance.”

   This ICRR will assess the project against the objectives, as originally stated in the Loan Agreement and PAD.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The Government’s Strategic Agenda to Strengthen Health Insurance (SASHI). To improve the
   efficiency and quality of health care in Costa Rica, the technical staff and senior management of the CCSS
   developed SASHI, with the support of various national and international partners, including the World Bank.
   Approved by the CCSS Board of Directors in November 2014, SASHI was (and remains) a comprehensive
   and ambitious institutional capacity building program, which the Bank considered to be a unique opportunity
   for improving the CCSS’ universal health insurance and health care delivery model by operationalizing and
   harmonizing new and existing initiatives under the framework of a single national program (PAD, p. 8-9).

   SASHI was structured around three priority areas: (i) strengthening the health care model to better integrate
   PHC with secondary level care in a given catchment area and network of providers in order to improve
   prevention, early diagnosis, and timely management of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) and ensure
   more efficient use of health care resources; (ii) enhancing the institutional management of the CCSS while
   increasing accountability and responsiveness to users; and (iii) adopting international best practices
   relevant to Costa Rica to improve financial management of the public health insurance (Seguro de Salud).

   This Bank-financed Program-for-Results (PforR) operation was designed to support the implementation
   of Costa Rica’s SASHI by linking the disbursement of project funds directly to the achievement of specific
   activities, outputs, and outcomes, chosen jointly with Government and aligned with the three above-cited
   priority areas. Implementation of the PforR was to rely on the country’s own institutions and processes,
   deemed to be sufficiently strong, and well-poised for implementing SASHI. The PforR was slated to finance
   about one-third of the estimated program-wide SASHI expenditures (see Section 2e for details) for a six-
   year period (ultimately extended to seven years). Disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) aimed to incentivize

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 23
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



selected results under priority areas as itemized below. While SASHI outlined activities that would likely be
undertaken in order to achieve the DLIs, as briefly described below, the PforR by design left the financing
and implementation of these activities to the Government’s discretion, limiting its financing to DLI
achievements:

1) Strengthening the health care model with emphasis on improving PHC via the strengthening of integrated
health care networks and a more effective approach to prevention, early diagnosis, and control of chronic
NCDs. This priority area involved developing a strategy to shift surgery to ambulatory settings and improve
management of waitlists, integrating mental health treatment into primary health, piloting a new integrated
management approach, investing in upgrades and equipment for primary health care facilities, new clinical
guidelines to enhance quality of clinical control of diabetes and hypertension, creating 100 additional
primary healthcare teams in low-density areas, adopting an evidence-based medicine approach to be used
in all clinical guidelines, and introduce clinical guidelines to prevent and treat colon cancer.

      DLI1: Percentage of major surgeries from priority list conducted in outpatient settings according to
       CCSS institutional guidelines
      DLI2: Cumulative percentage of target population personally invited to undergo colon cancer
       screening in five (high-prevalence) priority counties
      DLI3: Percentage of individuals diagnosed with Diabetes Type 2 who are under optimal clinical
       control
      DLI4: Pilot project on integrated health networks approved by the CCSS Board and implemented
       for a selected population and territory and evaluated with the results publicly disseminated
      DLI5: Percentage of total number of health care units with the Unique Digital Health Record e-
       health package.

2. Improving institutional management of the CCSS, while increasing accountability and responsiveness to
users. This included: introducing a survey and strategic plan to improve working conditions, strengthening
human resources management, creating new mechanisms for grievances and conflict resolution,
implementing an institutional strategic intelligence system, introducing new policies and regulations to
enhance governance and inter-operability of E-Health technology, expanding coverage and scope of
existing E-Health modules, a functional review of central level management functions and centralization of
supply chain and digitization of procurement processes.

      DLI6: Redesign, implementation and use of data collected by the new annual survey to measure
       impact of new interventions to improve patient satisfaction.

3. Optimizing financial management. This was to be achieved by: designing, testing and implementing an
incentive system for healthcare services productivity, designing and launching a 10-year master plan for
investments, designing and approving a new financial sustainability strategy and operational plan, and
introducing new budget models using morbidity risk adjusted capitations for health care networks to
benchmark productivity of hospitals.

      DLI7: Development and execution of a comprehensive medium- and long-term plan to ensure the
       financial sustainability of the CCSS.

For each of the above DLIs, $60million USD was allocated and fully disbursed.



                                                                                                 Page 3 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
   Cost, Financing and Borrower Contribution. The total actual cost of the project was $420 million, the
   exact amount of the estimated cost. Each of the seven DLIs triggered the payment of $60 million, as
   planned at appraisal. This amount was 100 percent financed by an IBRD loan. The PforR represented the
   Bank's contribution to SASHI. In all, Bank financing represented 26.7% of the financing for SASHI,
   with Borrower financing amounting to $1.115 billion, or 73.3% of overall SAHSI financing.

   Dates. Strengthening Universal Health Insurance in Costa Rica was approved on March 15, 2016
   and became effective on April 21, 2016. Its original closing date of April 30,2022 was postponed to January
   31, 2024. The program was restructured three times.

        i. August 2, 2018 – The baseline and target for one of the DLIs, which also served as a PDO,
           (percentage of surgeries from priority list conducted in outpatient settings according to CCSS
           guidelines) were revised under the first Level-2 Restructuring of the Program. The ICR (p.7, footnote
           13) notes that, “The first restructuring was handled offline due to technical difficulties and was not
           recorded in the system. However, the documentation has been uploaded to the Image Bank."
           The original baseline was substantially increased by 23.6 percentage points, or more than doubled
           (from 18 percent to 41.6 percent) and the end-target was increased by only six percentage points
           (from 40 percent to 46 percent). This lowered the overall ambition of the target for this indicator,
           from an original target increase of 22 percentage points to a revised target increase of 4.4
           percentage points. According to the ICR (p.7), this change was “a result of both the identification of
           a conceptual error in the methodology for defining DLI1 during program preparation during the first
           supervision mission; as well as desire to increase consistency of the proposed new end-of-Program
           targets with both international good practices and standards and CCSS plans to expand ambulatory
           surgery at the same levels and by OECD standards. Further, the new goal also considered internal
           factors affecting performance, such as the availability of anesthesiologists and other medical
           specialists in the country.” The ICR addressed the issue of the less ambitious target by explaining
           that “While revised targets called for improvements more modest than the original ones, they
           reflected the fact that improvements with respect to a significantly larger baseline are harder to
           achieve.” IEG notes that while the baseline for the DLI was formally revised in the project’s results
           framework under this restructuring, it was not revised for the PDO indicator (PDOI 1), which tracked
           the exact same measure. In assessing achievement of this PDOI, IEG uses the revised baseline
           and target.
       ii. April 29, 2022 – The Restructuring postponed the program closing date from April 30, 2022, to
           December 31, 2023 due to COVID-19 related delays.
      iii. December 20, 2023 – The closing date was postponed for an additional month to January 31, 2024
           to secure achievement of the last DLI. Delays were attributed in the restructuring to the pandemic
           and a May 2022 cyberattack, which affected access to electronic medical records and financial
           systems.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




                                                                                                    Page 4 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




Rationale
The PforR reflected priorities outlined in the World Bank Group’s 2016-2020 Country Partnership
Framework (CPF) for Costa Rica, dated April 3, 2015, which was still in effect at closing. The operation
supported Objective 5 (Improve efficiency and quality of health insurance system to achieve results) of Pillar
2 (Bolstering fiscal, social & environmental sustainability) of the CPF. This Objective sought to address
“important cracks in the system” that reduced the effectiveness and efficiency of the country’s universal
healthcare system. According to the CPF, systemic flaws had led to increases in waiting times and in patient
frustration. In addition, the CPF noted that budget allocations did not take into account demographic and
demand changes, including increased out-of-pocket spending, leading to inefficiencies and inequities of
health care. The CPF also pointed to an outdated infrastructure and information management system,
decreasing transparency and efficiency of resource management (CPF p.28). The CPF identified two goals
to ensure quality and sustainability of universal health coverage: (i) the reorganization of health care services
within the framework of integrated health care networks of providers to improve timeliness and continuity of
care; and (ii) the strengthening of institutional financial and administrative capacity to foster suitable
incentives to reduce the burden of NCDs while boosting efficiency and using out-of-pocket expenditures with
transparency and clear lines of accountability. These goals were to be supported by reforming the health
sector’s financial model of budgeting and resource allocation and were reflected in the PforR’s objectives and
design.

The PforR was also in full alignment with Costa Rica’s latest National Development and Public
Investment Plan (Plan Nacional de Desarrollo e Inversión Pública - PNDIP). According to the ICR (p.9)
the PNDIP’s health aims included: (i) improving the health conditions of the population reflected in the
number of years lived without disease as a result of the timely and integrated provision of health care
services; and (ii) expanding the coverage of the public health insurance. The PforR was intended to support
these objectives by: (i) strengthening of the provision of health services and the development of integrated
healthcare networks in the CCSS; (ii) implementing the national strategy for the integral approach to chronic
NCDs and obesity; (iii) enhancing access and timeliness of health services, including cancer screening and
ambulatory surgeries; and (iv) developing interoperable technological infrastructure that facilitates decision
making. According to the ICR, the PDO was also consistent with the CCSS’s 2014 Strategic Development
Plan (i.e., CCSS 2041: Una Mirada al Futuro), which included (i) the comprehensive implementation of
primary health care services, including detecting NCDs early on through adequate screening programs at
primary care levels and following up those diagnosed at lower levels of care rather than in hospitals (PAD
p.7); and (ii) the financial and actuarial sustainability of the institution in the long term, considering the quality
and timeliness of health care services.

The choice of PforR was relevant given the high capacity of the government counterpart. According
to the PAD (p.9), at time of appraisal, the CCSS already had its own comprehensive program for improving
the health insurance model, the Strategic Agenda for Strengthening the Health Insurance (SASHI). Use of
the PforR model was also consonant with the CCSS aim to shift emphasis from the management of program
inputs to management of program results and risks. Finally, the Government sought to use its own country
systems in the implementation of the PforR in support of SASHI. This assessment was echoed in IEG's
interview with the Bank team. The Bank team emphasized the high degree of trust in the capacity of
government institutions, based on years of positive collaboration, and their consequent desire to ensure the
government was given the maximum possible ownership over the processes by which they would endeavor
to achieve their intended goals. Similarly, the Bank team reported that the government feedback to them



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 23
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



                       was that the PforR provided the right incentives for success, more so than had a more traditional IPF loan
                       been used.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                        New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Percentage of major surgeries from priority list conducted in outpatient settings according to CCSS institutional
                guidelines.

                Rationale
                The purpose of this DLI, which is also a PDO indicator (PDI1), was to free up hospitals’ operating capacity
                and reduce surgical waitlist times, while reducing costs by performing surgeries in less expensive settings. In
                addition, it was believed that quality of care would improve, as ambulatory surgeries shorten recovery and
                avoid invasive and risky interventions. The DLI was consistent with OECD recommendations that health care
                efficiency and quality in aging populations with a large burden of NCDs can be improved by providing
                effective lower cost services, such as ambulatory surgeries and home care (PAD p.11). This reform was also
                expected to increase equity and quality of care regardless of area of residence (PAD, p.22). The baseline
                and targets of the DLI were both upwardly revised during implementation. According to the ICR (p.8) "The
                changes were the result of both the identification of a conceptual error in the methodology for defining
                DLI1 during Program preparation during the first supervision mission; as well as desire to increase
                consistency of the proposed new end-of-Program targets with both international good practices and
                standards and CCSS plans to expand ambulatory surgery at the same levels and by OECD standards.
                Further, the new goal also considered internal factors affecting performance, such as the availability of
                anesthesiologists and other medical specialists in the country." IEG notes that neither international nor
                OECD standards for this indicator are specified in the ICR and the task team was not able to provide these to
                IEG.



                Rating
                Substantial

                DLI 2
                DLI
                Cumulative percentage of target population personally invited to undergo colon cancer screening in five priority
                counties.

                Rationale


                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



For this indicator, priority counties are defined as those with the highest incidence of colon cancer (PAD
p.38). The DLI was introduced based on a technical assessment, which found that between 1990 and 2010,
Costa Rica experienced an increase in the share of premature deaths caused by NCDs as well as a dramatic
increase in incidence of a number of specific NCDs, including colorectal cancer (PAD p.49). The overall
objective of this DLI was to implement a large-scale cancer screening program in the top five priority countries
with a view to increase early diagnosis of colon cancer to improve health outcomes and reduce cost of
treatment (PAD p.23). According to the PAD (p. 24) evidence showed that population health management
programs enable at-risk individuals to be screened earlier than they would be if they had not been contacted.
At the time of appraisal, Costa Rica did not have a robust program for targeting individuals for colon cancer
screening, but instead relied on patients to request screenings. However, the DLI, which is also a PDO
indicator (PDI2), does not track actual screening done but invitations to do colon cancer screening.
Consequently, the actual increase in colon cancer screening was not slated to be measured, thereby
giving no information on the extent to which achievement of this DLI actually led to real outcomes (improved
preventive care for patients). As detailed in Section 4, under Objective 1, PAHO ultimately went above and
beyond its verification role and identified supplemental data showing trends in colon cancer screening.



Rating
Modest

DLI 3
DLI
Percentage of individuals diagnosed with Diabetes Type II who are under optimal clinical control.

Rationale
This DLI tracked the efficacy of diabetes care by measuring the percentage of individuals diagnosed with
Type 2 diabetes who are managing to keep their hemoglobin A1C levels under control, presumably thanks to
following correct clinical protocol. This was supposed to be achieved by revision of clinical records of patients
diagnosed with diabetes Type II and comparison with national clinical guidelines (PAD p.43).



Rating
High

DLI 4
DLI
Pilot project on integrated health networks approved by the Costa Rican Social Security Administration (CCSS)
Board and implemented for a selected population and territory and evaluated with the results publicly
disseminated.

Rationale
This DLI referred to a pilot of new mechanisms for allocating primary and second-level services and
facilitating communication/coordination between the two, based on international best practices. The pilot
aimed to improve the navigation of the patient across all levels of care, with the help of strengthened teams at
the first level of care and new E-Health tools that would facilitate the exchanges between medical staff at the

                                                                                                    Page 7 of 23
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



first level of care and specialists. This was to reduce lengthy travel time and distances to reach services, and
ensure that complex conditions are treated in a timely fashion and in accordance with quality standards
introduced by the new clinical guidelines and pathways (PAD, p.10). The evaluation and public dissemination
of results were expected to contribute to learning and fine-tuning of the integrated health networks model, its
expansion to other populations and territories and to improved transparency between the health services and
the populations they serve.



Rating
High

DLI 5
DLI
Percentage of total number of primary health care units (Areas de Salud) with the Unique Digital Health Record
eHealth package (EDUS).

Rationale
At the time of appraisal, the CCSS lacked a unified, universally accessible digital platform for patient and user
records. Achievement of this DLI was intended to lead to improved monitoring of trends and more
expeditious decision-making for health care managers with better access to data for more efficient
management of the system. This DLI is also a PDO indicator (PDI3).



Rating
High

DLI 6
DLI
Redesign, implementation and use of data collected by the new annual survey to measure impact of new
interventions to improve patient satisfaction.

Rationale
The redesign of the surveys aim to enhance statistical significance and greater sensitivity of the instruments
to differences such as between populations living in urban vs. rural settings, geographical areas with high
concentration of indigenous peoples, or households living below the national poverty levels (PAD p.41).
Design of this PforR, among other things, was driven by high levels of patient dissatisfaction due primarily to
systemic inefficiencies leading to poor service and high wait times. This DLI both was to make it possible to
better gauge the effect of reforms on drivers of dissatisfaction and to provide a durable mechanism for
monitoring satisfaction to enable better priority setting and a patient centered focus. In addition, these surveys
were intended to inform culturally appropriate practices and thus avoid costly litigation (p.23).



Rating
High

                                                                                                    Page 8 of 23
                                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                  STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




                  DLI 7
                  DLI
                  Development and execution of a comprehensive medium- and long-term plan to ensure the financial
                  sustainability of the CCSS.

                  Rationale
                  As part of the results framework, the PAD (p.41) provides specific details with regard to needed elements in
                  the financial plan, such as prioritization of key infrastructure (civil works), medical equipment, and investments
                  in electronic digital information systems in order to ensure financial sustainability. This DLI corresponds with
                  the assessment at appraisal that financial management within the CCSS needed to be improved and
                  modernized in order to allocate resources more efficiently, including modernization of accounting and
                  budgeting practices (PAD p.8). Optimizing financial management of public health insurance is a key element
                  of SASHI. The DLI is also a PDO indicator (PDI4).



                  Rating
                  High


      OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




                  OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
                  Rationale
                  Overall relevance is high. The choice of a PforR instrument was appropriate for the country’s strategic
                  program aims and client capacities. Five out of seven of the DLIs were highly relevant with one rated
                  Substantial due to its original baseline being incorrectly assessed and the related OECD and international
                  standards not clearly defined, and one rated modest for measuring activities only loosely linked to results,
                  rather than results, themselves.



                  Rating
                  High



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




                       OBJECTIVE 1
                       Objective
                       Improving the timeliness and quality of health services.

                       Rationale


                                                                                                                      Page 9 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



In support of Objective 1 (timeliness and quality of services), the PforR supported the achievement of four
health system reforms, envisaged under SASHI Priority Area 1:

(1) a shift towards ambulatory care with a view to expanding selected surgeries in less expensive/outpatient
settings, which would free hospital resources, reduce waitlist times, and improve quality of
care. Achievements under DLI 1 (percentage of major surgeries from priority list conducted in outpatient
settings according to CCSS institutional guidelines) were to be triggered by disbursements and the
measurement of the cumulative percentage reduction in average waiting days for selected procedures
(tracers: hip and knee replacement) would provide further documentation of efficacy. DLI achievement would
depend on the undertaking of key activities/outputs, such as the optimization of existing capacity and the
development of new clinical guidelines.

(2) improved prevention, diagnosis and control of NCDs with a focus on prevention and early diagnosis of
colon cancer, and improved quality of care for those diagnosed with selected NCDs, including diabetes and
hypertension; In particular, the PforR focused on three results areas: (i) Implementation of a large-scale
colon cancer screening program in the top five priority counties (DLI2/PDO2) (ii) improvement of quality of
care of individuals diagnosed with diabetes (DLI3) and (iii) improving the percentage of individuals diagnosed
with hypertension that are under optimal clinical control (IRI2). According to the Bank team, while there was
no financial incentive associated with quality of care for hypertension, it was believed that merely including
this IRI in the results framework would be sufficient to incentivize the health system to focus on achievement
of this result, due to high levels of government motivation. DLI achievement was expected to involve a range
of activities, including, for DLI2/PDI2: assigning new staff roles and responsibilities, developing information
systems, purchasing new medical equipment, performing systematic analysis of health risks in the population
and for DLI 3 developing and deploying new clinical guidelines and e-health tools at primary and secondary
levels of care.

(3) greater integration of the health care network established at the national level, through the piloting of a
new, more holistic health care network management model, with a view to improving communication and
coordination across levels of care, continuity of care, strategic decision-making and resource allocation, and
the flow of patients. This was to be incentivized through DLI4, which rewarded the design, implementation
and evaluation of the pilot. Achievement of the DLI was expected to require the reorganization of
financing arrangements, and the reallocation of staff time and human resources to case management
responsibilities, investment in infrastructure and equipment, creation of new roles and authority
structures, and investment in E-health tools.

(4) the expansion of e-health tools to more PHC centers to improve national and local health managers’ ability
to monitor trends and make timely decisions, and to improve their overall access to data for more efficient
management. This was to be incentivized and measured by DLI5/PDI3, which tracked the number of health
care units with the Unique Digital Health Record e-health package as a share of all health care units. In
addition, two intermediate results indicators measured various aspects of implementation: Percentage of
households covered by the Family Socio-Economic & Health Risks Information File (IRI3); and Percentage of
households with Family Socio-Economic & Health Information File digital geo-referencing data available
online (IRI4). According to the PAD, the activities expected to contribute to these results included: investing
in software and hardware, training of new staff, reallocating staff time, and developing internal regulations for
privacy and data security.

The PforR improved the timeliness and quality of health services as follows:


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




  Disbursements against DLI 1 supported a decided shift toward ambulatory care, exceeding
   targets for ambulatory surgeries and reduced wait times for selected tracer surgeries both at
   the time of DLI verification and at project closing, despite setbacks due to COVID.
        o From a baseline of 41.6 percent (as revised in August 2018), the share of major surgeries from
          a priority list conducted in outpatient settings according to CCSS institutional guidelines rose to
          49.8 percent during 2018 (specifically between April and September 2018), exceeding the
          revised target of 46 percent. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the production of
          ambulatory surgeries dropped significantly, after the above-cited DLI target was achieved and
          rewarded. Nevertheless, progress against this DLI, which was also a PDO indicator, was
          significant after the initial effects of COVID-19. In 2023, just prior to project closing, this share
          rose to 50.4 percent, also exceeding the 46 percent target and slightly exceeding the level
          achieved at the time of DLI verification in 2018.
                 To underpin the effect of COVID-19 on surgeries, the ICR provides evidence (paras.
                   35-37) and data (p. 14, Figure 2) documenting the significant drops in scheduled
                   surgeries during 2020, particularly affecting surgeries performed in ambulatory settings,
                   and a healthy rebound of surgeries, especially ambulatory ones, around project
                   closing. Moreover, the share of all major surgeries that were ambulatory reached its
                   highest level of 22 percent in 2022 (the most recent measure) recovering from the low
                   of 13 percent in 2020 and exceeding the baseline of 19 percent. (Note: the
                   denominator of this measure is all major surgeries, whereas the denominator used for
                   DLI1/PDO Indicator 1 is a priority list of surgeries that can be done in ambulatory
                   settings, as itemized in ICR footnote 23, p. 11.)
        o From a 2015 baseline of 1032 days, the average waiting time for hip and knee replacement
          decreased to 422 days in 2018 at the time of DLI verification. This decrease of 59.1 percent
          exceeded the target of a 35 percent decrease. However, by 2023, the end-of-project wait time
          for these surgeries actually increased to 632 days. This setback was a reflection of the
          negative impact of the COVID-19 epidemic on the number of such surgeries conducted during
          the COVID era. Nevertheless, this end-of-project wait time represents a 39 percent decrease
          over the original baseline, thus exceeding the 35 percent target. IEG notes that the baseline
          data on waiting time is from 2015 and the project effectiveness date is end-2017. The
          presentation of annual data for 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018 would have provided more clarity
          on project attribution, especially for 2018, the time of DLI verification.
        o Supporting Intermediate Results and Outputs: The ICR (p.12) reports ambulatory surgical
          capacity was expanded through the optimization of existing capacity. A major Ambulatory
          Surgery Commission in July 2017 was established to oversee and support the implementation
          of the 2015 Institutional Strengthening Plan for Ambulatory Surgery. Specific outputs included
          the preparation of the Ambulatory Surgeries Operational Manual, submitted to the CCSS
          Medical Management in November 2018 and the monitoring of waiting lists for surgical
          procedures with the CCSS Waiting Lists Technical Unit.
  Disbursements against DLI 2 and DLI 3 contributed to improvements in prevention, detection,
   monitoring and control of selected NCDs, despite setbacks due to COVID.
        o From a baseline of 0, PAHO determined that by July 2022 (at the time of DLI2 verification), a
          total of 13,592 people aged 50 to 70 years living in five priority counties (with high prevalence
          of colon cancer) had been personally invited to undergo colon cancer screening, representing
          40 percent of the target population, thus fully achieving the target of 40 percent. The ICR
          (p.17) further cites data collected by PAHO indicating that 52 percent of those who received an
          invitation underwent testing, with 7 percent among them testing positive and subsequently

                                                                                                Page 11 of 23
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



           undergoing a colonoscopy. This indicator (inviting target population to undergo colon cancer
           screening) also served as a PDO indicator, but the ICR does not report end-of-project data on
           this indicator, although 2022 data is one year short of 2023, the last full year of
           implementation.
        o From a 2013 baseline of 39 percent, 45.7 percent of individuals diagnosed with Diabetes Type
           II were under optimal clinical control in 2019 (verified in 2022), exceeding the 43 percent DLI
           3.2 target. This level dropped drastically to 26 percent as a result of COVID-19, gradually
           recovering since then to reach 38 percent in 2022, the date of the last measurement
           available. While still below the baseline and the 43 percent end-program target, the ICR
           indicates that if the growth trend persists, the percentage of patients under optimal control is
           likely to have re-achieved the Program target in 2023. The ICR notes that the pandemic
           undermined optimal control of diabetes patients, but that the coverage of patents under
           primary care gradually increased over time. Factors undermining optimal clinical control,
           despite the expansion in coverage, included the limits of virtual and phone visits; reduced
           access to medications; and lifestyle changes during the pandemic. Modeled estimates show a
           promising trajectory towards re-achieving the program indicator target (ICR para. 43).
        o From a baseline of 62 percent, 65.7 percent of individuals diagnosed with hypertension were
           reported to be under optimal clinical control, i.e., maintaining a standard blood pressure of less
           than 140/90 mmHg, at the time of DLI verification (between 2013 and 2019) (IRI 2). This
           interim level of 65.7 percent exceeds the target of 64 percent. However, because of COVID,
           the share of patients with hypertension under optimal care dropped below the baseline to 50
           percent in 2020 and further regressed to 44 percent in 2021. An increase to 56 percent shows
           a significant recovery, although still below the baseline and target, and indicates the likelihood
           of achieving the program target of 64 by 2024. In response to an IEG question on whether the
           target for this IRI was overly modest, the project team answered as follows: “after extensive
           debates and discussions during preparation, it was recognized that even if it may look as a
           small change, this is a significant move and international evidence shows how challenging it is
           to achieve population-level increases. As a result, it was agreed to start with a realistic target,
           determined through inputs from experts and primary health care teams, to ensure feasibility."
        o Supporting Intermediate Results and Outputs: The ICR cites two: the development and
           dissemination of new clinical guidelines, including the 2020 Clinical Guidelines for Care of
           DM2” and the adoption of guidelines for standardizing the detection and care of people with
           obesity at the PHC level in 2019. Performance is now routinely tracked and reported in the
           CCSS Annual Health Performance Reports, including detection, recording, and referrals to a
           nutrition specialist.
  Disbursements against DLI 4 contributed to greater integration of the health care network and
   improved management of the healthcare system. DLI 4 provided the financial incentive for the
   design and implementation of a pilot program to test new mechanisms for integrating PHC with
   second-level services (i.e., hospitals) to improve the navigation of the patient across levels of care
   (ICR p.15). According to the ICR, the pilot project, implemented from 2019 to 2021, has allowed the
   gradual adaptation of health services to the needs of the population of the Huetar Atlántica region,
   while developing a governance, implementation and optimization strategy that serves as a basis for
   future expansion efforts. This pilot provided important insights into important aspects that need to be
   taken into consideration for the successful roll-out of the model to the rest of the country, including
   strengthening of governance mechanisms at the network level, the need to develop guidelines to
   further enhance patient and community engagement and foster self-care, and inclusion of instruments
   to measure the quality of services and patient satisfaction. Results and the implementation process


                                                                                               Page 12 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



         have been documented in two papers. While reported under Objective 1, these activities and results
         also contribute to PforR’s Objective 2.
        PforR disbursements against the achievement of DLI 5 (expansion of e-health tools to more
         PHC centers) triggered improvements in national and local health managers’ access to data,
         and their ability to monitor trends, make timely decisions, and manage more efficiently. From a
         baseline of 50 percent, the share of the total number of PHC units with an operational EDUS
         increased to 90 percent between 2013 and 2021, at the time of DLI verification, exceeding the target
         of 80 percent. By 2023, around the time of project closing, this share rose to 100 percent, further
         exceeding the 80 percent target and including PHC centers in remote areas without electricity or
         internet connectivity. The EDUS includes three different information sub-systems: (i) patient
         identification, scheduling, and appointment, (ii) the Integrated Family Record System, and (iii) the
         Integrated Medical Record System. The achievement of PDOI 3/DLI 5 facilitated information
         exchanges between PHC medical staff and specialists, thus contributing, as well, to the integration of
         primary and secondary levels of care. Two IRIs also tracked other aspects of digitization: i)
         percentage of households covered by the Family Socio-Economic & Health Risks Information File
         (Fully achieved: 100 percent at completion); and ii) Percentage of households with Family Socio-
         Economic & Health Risks Information File digital geo-referencing data available online (Surpassed:
         66.9 percent against a baseline of 0 and a target of 16). According to the ICR (p.21), EDUS has
         become a vital tool for the provision of health services, contributing to their timeliness and quality by
         facilitating the integration of health care services across primary, secondary, and tertiary levels of
         care. It also facilitates access by offering patients web and telephone appointment requests as well as
         electronic access to their personal records through the cell phone application, has more than 5.6
         million downloads, being the most popular application in the "Health and Wellness" category in the
         country. In 2019, EDUS was awarded the United Nations Public Service Award, recognized by the
         CCSS for its ability to digitally transform and better manage health. While reported under Objective 1,
         these activities and results also contribute to PforR's Objective 2.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
Improving the institutional efficiency of CCSS.

Rationale
In support of Objective 2 (improving the institutional efficiency of CCSS) and SASHI Priority Areas 2
(institutional management) and 3 (financial management), the PforR provided financial incentives to improve
the CCSS’ institutional efficiency, focusing on actions (i.e., Intermediate Results) aimed at providing the
CCSS with the necessary tools for ensuring its financial sustainability and enhancing its institutional
management capacity. In addition to financial incentives, the operation also contributed to the development
and implementation of several tools aimed at enhancing CCSS’ institutional management capacity through
collaborative efforts between the technical units responsible for their implementation and the Bank Team and
a focus on IRIs 3 through 7 in the results framework. Specifically:



                                                                                                   Page 13 of 23
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




      Financial sustainability - The operation provided financial incentives for the development and
       implementation of a comprehensive medium- and long-term plan to ensure the financial sustainability
       of the CCSS (DLI 7/PDOI 4). It also contributed to the implementation of new international accounting
       standards and streamlined, automated processes (IRI 7).
      Institutional management - The operation provided financial incentives for the redesign,
       implementation, and use of data collected by the new annual survey to measure patients’ satisfaction
       and, subsequently, the impact of interventions aimed at its improvement (DLI 6). The operation also
       provided support to the implementation of several management tools and institutional improvements,
       including increasing the percentage of households covered by the Family Socio-Economic & Health
       Risks Information File, ensuring that these households also had digital geo-referencing data available
       online and the publishing and dissemination of two annual reports measuring progress of SASHI,
       based on institutional strategic intelligence system data (IRIs 3-6).

Achievement of this objective involved a series of institutional and financial management reforms aimed at
increased efficiency. Some of these reforms are also important for achieving greater quality and timeliness of
health services, and so are reported in detail under Objective 1. They are also mentioned here as drivers of
efficiency, particularly: the integration of the health care network through the design and implementation of a
pilot, and the expansion of e-health tools to more PHC centers for better access to data and enhanced ability
to monitor, analyze and improve decision-making.

Amongst the primary institutional improvements financed at least partially by the PforR were expansion of e-
Health tools; digitization of health records to facilitate information exchanges between PHC medical staff and
specialists, thus contributing, as well, to the integration of primary and secondary levels of care; redesigned
survey tools; and the development of a new institutional strategic intelligence system by digitizing existing
heath data and linking to existing E-Health tools to allow for data triangulation that would enable directors and
managers to allocate resources more efficiently and equitably, monitor results, and improve patient
satisfaction.

Improved institutional management through enhanced data for decision making was accomplished through
DLI6 (Redesign, implementation and use of data collected by the new annual survey to measure impact of
new interventions to improve patient satisfaction). DLI6 was considered achieved with a redesigned survey
being approved and used to evaluate the PforR’s pilot project. Similarly, the IRI of “Use of institutional
strategic intelligence system data to publish and disseminate two annual reports measuring progress of
SASHI” was achieved. According to the ICR (p.22), the operation supported the digitization of Family Socio-
Economic and Health Risks Information File (Ficha Familiar) to be included under the SIFF. Now integrated
under EDUS, the Family Health Record dates back from the early 1990s and contains data collected by
Technical Primary Health Care Assistants (Asistentes Técnicos de Atención Primaria – ATAPs) on the socio-
economic factors affecting households’ health (e.g., housing characteristics, location, and basic services).
During the Program’s lifetime, the percentage of households included in the SIFF increased from 70 percent
to 100 percent (IRI 3). In addition, the operation also supported the georeferencing of housing units, with the
percentage of housing units with georeferenced information available online increasing from 0 percent to 66.9
percent (IRI 4). The georeferenced information of housing units, linked to the corresponding household socio-
economic data and health records, constituted the foundation to generate information on the concentration of
epidemiological profiles and risk maps at the community level and will facilitate the management of future
epidemics and natural disasters, as well as better target preventive interventions. In addition, the operation
provided financial incentives for the design and implementation of CCSS’s satisfaction surveys aimed at
giving greater visibility and impact to users’ perceptions, including those of indigenous populations. These
surveys have been successfully carried out for five consecutive years, including during the COVID-19

                                                                                                  Page 14 of 23
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



pandemic (DLI 6). Results of these surveys for individual health units are internally disseminated within the
CCSS, fostering accountability and transparency. Best performers are showcased through the media and
social networks, fostering healthy competition. Results from satisfaction surveys also serve as critical inputs
in the preparation of improvement plans by health units, thus including a direct feedback loop mechanism.

Financial sustainability was enhanced through achievement of DLI7/PDI4 (Development and execution of a
comprehensive medium- and long-term plan to ensure the financial sustainability of the CCSS). This goal
was fully achieved, with the annual budget execution using the tools developed through the plan in January
2024. Also achieved were the IRIs of “Financial statements produced using new international public
accounting standards, streamlined and digital automated processes” and “Shadow budget constructed based
on gender and age risk adjusted capitations.” According to the ICR, (p.22) the operation provided financial
incentives to reform the methodology used to allocate resources among PHC units and hospitals, moving
away from budgeting practices focusing on historical values to a system based on prospective elements that
introduces strategic purchasing mechanisms, aimed at enhancing expenditure efficiency, impact and quality
of care, in the long term. With additional technical support provided by the Bank, two models were developed
taking into consideration the literature on state-of-art resource allocation practices in the health sector and
country-specific conditions. First, a capitation model was found to be the most suitable for the allocation of
resources among PHC units based on: (i) a base rate (i.e., based on the number of people registered in each
health area) and (ii) a risk index (i.e., based on demographic factors, such as population under 18 and over
65, and the demand for health services). Second, a top-up budget model was developed for the allocation of
resources among hospitals to incentivize: (i) productivity and accessibility (i.e., bed occupancy rate, bed
turnover rate, and share of first time outpatient visits); (ii) quality of care (i.e., hospital-acquired infections);
and (iii) budget performance (compliance with annual budget policy, execution of additional resources
allocated for investment and maintenance activities). These two models were piloted for the preparation of the
2024 budget for eight of the 105 health areas and two of the 29 hospitals under CCSS.

In addition to all of the above, the PforR also contributed to the CCSS' efforts to have a greater focus on
results and accountability through incorporation of robust indicators into the CCSS institutional plans (i.e.,
2023-2027 Management Tactical Plan, and the 2021-2025 Institutional Budget Plan) (ICR p.30).



Rating
High




OVERALL EFFICACY
Rationale
Objective 1 (improving the timeliness and quality of health services) was highly achieved, with an increase in
the share of major surgeries from priority list conducted in outpatient settings from 41.6 percent to 50.4
percent, despite a severe drop in ambulatory surgeries because of the COVID epidemic. This triggered a
cumulative reduction in the average waiting time for (tracer) hip and knee procedures. The PforR's
incentivization of invitations to selected patients to be screened for colon cancer resulted in more screenings,
detections and earlier treatment of patients. At the time of DLI verification the share of patients diagnosed
with Diabetes Type II and the share of patients diagnosed with hypertension, who were under optimal clinical

                                                                                                     Page 15 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



 care rose, from a baseline of 39 percent, to 45.7 percent. While these levels subsequently dropped
 dramatically due to the impacts of COVID, improving trends and modeled estimates indicate that end of
 project targets are likely to be achieved. This is an indication of the resilience of the health system.

 Objective 2 (enhancing the institutional efficiency of the CCSS) was highly achieved. All end targets were
 fully achieved or exceeded, providing the CCSS with robust tools to enhance the CCSS's financial
 sustainability and its institutional management capacity, which have already and effectively been applied.

 Cumulatively improvements in efficiency introduced under both objectives are likely to contribute substantially
 to the PforR's higher level goal of enhancing the financial sustainability of Costa Rica’s public health
 insurance.



 Rating
 High


5. Outcome

Program outcome is high. The PforR and its DLIs were highly relevant for the country context and Bank CPF,
and the PDO was fully achieved.


    Outcome Rating
    Highly Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

There are no significant risks to development outcome. According to the ICR (p.30), several factors
contribute to the sustainability of outcomes, including strong ownership by the government and continuous
institutional support for the reforms under SASHI and the CCSS’s demonstrated implementation capacity. In
addition, the most significant reforms are supported by a legal framework and have been approved by the
CCSS and, when needed, also by the Republic General Comptroller.




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  PforR design was appropriately based on the Bank team’s strong belief in government capacity
  and commitment to supporting government ownership of the operation. SASHI was a “homegrown”
  initiative based on an evaluation conducted by the CCSS between 2014 and 2016 that identified priority
  health system challenges needing to be addressed. These objectives, as well as the SASHI Program as


                                                                                                  Page 16 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



  a whole, benefited from the full support and buy-in of the CCSS Board of Directors. In addition, according
  to the PAD, SASHI’s design drew on international best practice and lessons learned. Moreover, prior
  Bank work with the Costa Rican public health system had demonstrated that the country’s financial and
  management systems were robust and capable. The PforR was accordingly designed to work through
  existing government institutions and to be supportive of SASHI, helping further strengthen the CCSS’
  institutional capacity within the country and allowing a focus on results (ICR p.24).

  DLIs and results indicators were chosen to highlight key aspects of the government reform
  program, providing incentives for their achievement. Design of DLIs and results framework indicators
  differed from the norm in the sense that IRIs, rather than being selected to contribute to Project
  Development Indicators, tended to be stand-alone indicators that were at times at the same results level
  as PDIs. (For example, the only indicator directly measuring timeliness of service provision was the IRI
  on percentage reduction in average waiting days for selected procedures. This being said, the invitation
  of selected patients to undergo colon cancer screening addressed an element of timeliness in terms of
  early detection and treatment). Similarly, IRIs did not for the most part reflect achievement of, or steps
  toward achievement of DLIs. The Bank team explained to IEG the logic behind this design. Due to the
  strong ownership of the reform process by the government, and the government’s well-articulated
  strategy for achieving reforms, the Bank team deliberately limited the number of DLIs to enable easy
  disbursement of funds for the reforms without too many cumbersome monitoring provisions. The IRIs, for
  their part, were used to signal areas worthy of particular focus in the reform program. It was assumed
  that inclusion of targets in the results framework even without an accompanying financial incentive
  through the DLIs, was sufficient to galvanize action and support results. According to the Bank team, and
  given the full achievement of IRIs, this assumption proved correct.

  DLIs were scalable, to stimulate and reward gradual, continuous improvements and to sustain
  motivation and commitment toward full PDO achievement. This scalability was introduced in two
  ways: (i) disbursements in four DLIs were proportional to the corresponding quantitative results,
  rewarding partial achievements; and (ii) within each area of intervention supported by a DLI, expected
  results were grouped into two or three milestones, thus introducing more flexibility rather than an all-or-
  nothing approach (ICR p.24).



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 Due in part to close monitoring of the program, the Bank was able to respond proactively and
 appropriately to implementation challenges, such as those resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic,
 and to ensure program success. According to the ICR (p.29), supervision missions were carried out
 regularly, ensuring a fluid dialogue with the individual units responsible for implementing the various lines
 of intervention. Findings were recorded in detailed Aide Memoires and ISRs. The operation benefited from
 a strong and relatively stable Task Team, with smooth handovers from the original Task Team Leader
 to successors. According to the ICR (p.26), “the joint follow-up and active communication between the
 CCSS and the Bank’s Task Team and experts contributed greatly toward addressing implementation
 barriers to achieve the DLIs targets in a timely manner. As reported by some CCSS managers, these


                                                                                                     Page 17 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



 institutional breakthroughs would not have been possible without the added visibility and technical support
 resulting from this PforR operation.”

 Adequate technical support and training were provided by the Bank. Despite less focus on planning
 financing for technical support in advance, the Bank team was able to provide needed technical assistance
 on financial management, social and environmental safeguards, and on substantive areas, providing
 access to experts from the Bank and other countries to support the design and implementation of complex
 strategic reforms, such as the reform of budget allocation mechanisms. According to the Region, when this
 operation was designed in 2015, it was still early in the rollout of the PforR instrument (introduced in 2012)
 and, at that time, there was limited acceptance of integrating IPF-financed TA with a PforR. Furthermore,
 there were no flexible TA resources available within PforR operations. The ICR (p.26), explains that “some
 of the reforms planned under this Program were complex to design and implement. While not highly visible,
 a substantial amount of TA went hand-in-hand with the financial support provided under this PforR
 operation, in particular for the design of reforms linked to the implementation of prospective budgeting and
 alternative resource allocation models. This technical assistance was critical to overcome technical
 challenges encountered during implementation to ultimately ensure PDO achievement.” In addition, the
 Team disseminated lessons learned from the implementation experience of various lines of intervention
 through a series of articles published under the “Knowledge Brief” series in order to support Bank-wide
 learning.

 The Bank Team was very active in securing additional sources of finance amounting to US$160,000
 in Trust Funds (over and above the financing of staff time) to support various program-related
 activities, including technical support, which would otherwise not have been possible under the
 PforR instrument. The ad-hoc technical assistance provided by the Bank, in combination with the financial
 incentives provided by the PforR, was critical in helping overcome technical challenges encountered in the
 path of reforms to achieve the program's objectives (ICR, p.29).

 The Region was not able to inform IEG whether the project complied with safeguard and fiduciary
 (FM, procurement) requirements at the time of the project’s final evaluation and whether any of the
 audit reports were qualified. According to the Region, this was due to the two Task Team
 Leaders' departures from the World Bank.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Highly Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The DLIs and results framework indicators were well designed, but did not reflect a progressive
 theory of change. Indicators were clearly specified, measurable and aligned with the PDO. However,
 PDIs represented a selection of DLIs which were “elevated” to PDI level, although they were not

                                                                                                   Page 18 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



 necessarily more important than other DLIs for achievement of PDO, and did not represent greater
 progress along a defined results chain than DLIs not similarly elevated to PDIs. As noted in section 7a,
 IRIs did not represent a more intermediate result than PDIs (for example, an IRI provided the only direct
 measure of timeliness).

 Progress towards achievement of the Program's Objectives was appropriately to be measured by
 the country's robust existing monitoring and evaluation systems. In addition, an external entity was
 to be hired by the CCSS to independently verify the achievement of DLIs before a request for disbursement
 was submitted to the World Bank. The verification process was planned to rely on existing administrative
 data and not on household or other ad hoc surveys, to simplify the process and avoid unnecessary
 costs. According to the PAD (p.16), the quality of Costa Rica’s bio-statistical data was internationally
 acknowledged by other Governmental entities, universities, and the Pan American Health Organization
 (PAHO). In addition, according to the Program plan, the World Bank was to provide support for M&E
 based on a detailed Implementation Support Plan, including: (i) review of program implementation
 progress, verification of achievement of DLIs, and review of program progress reports, audit reports,
 and other relevant information; (ii) monitoring of CCSS performance, with particular emphasis on the
 program result areas and monitoring compliance with legal agreements, keeping records of risks;
 (iii) review of grievance redress mechanisms (PAD p.68).



b. M&E Implementation
  The CCSS set up a unit responsible for coordinating Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and
  reporting among the different implementing units and facilitate communication with the Bank.
  According to the ICR (p.26) this unit, which was constituted by highly capable and well respected CCSS
  professionals, proved invaluable in ensuring the seamless implementation and reporting of the various
  lines of action under this PforR. In addition, use of governmental M&E systems reinforce the likelihood
  that data collection on relevant metrics would be sustained after program close.

  Overall, M&E Implementation went smoothly, with few problems reported and no need to adjust
  indicators during the program. Baseline data was collected in a timely manner. However, as noted in
  Section 2e., one baseline needed adjustment after program launch due to “the identification of a
  conceptual error in the methodology during program preparation” (ICR p.7). Indicators under the results
  framework were closely monitored by the Program Implementing Unit with data provided by the individual
  units responsible for the implementation of the various lines of action as well as the CCSS’s information
  systems. One limitation was identified by the ICR: once an end-target indicator was reached, subsequent
  updates were not incorporated into the Implementation Status and Results Report (ISR). Therefore, the
  ISR did not capture the deterioration in those PDOs and IRIs that were negatively affected by the COVID-
  19 pandemic. However, the ICR notes that that the CCSS and Task Team diligently monitored all
  indicators throughout supervision missions, persisting in their oversight even after targets were met,
  including during the pandemic. In addition, according to the ICR (p.27), a 2022 computer systems
  shutdown due to cyberattack is likely to have resulted in the underestimation of some of the data reported
  for 2022 (DLI 3, IRI 4).

  The Pan-American Health Organization was hired by the CCSS to independently verify the
  achievement of DLIs. According to the ICR (p.27), DLI verification was done using rigorous
  methodologies consisting of the ex-post reviews of existing administrative data based on sound sampling
  methodologies. Verification reports gave detailed descriptions of the reviews’ methodological aspects and

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



  DLI achievement. They also included recommendations that helped improve current CCSS practices
  (e.g., suggestion for further data collection on colon cancer screening; recommendations for the
  Investment Portfolio 2021-2030).



c. M&E Utilization
  Data gathered during the course of the PforR was used to make adjustments as needed to
  implementation, including “softer” pushes where performance was lagging. According to the ICR
  (p.26), “having a system of continuous monitoring and reporting during implementation supervision
  missions, provided effective incentives for the various technical units to focus their efforts and actions to
  achieve results within the established timeframe.” In addition, regular monitoring of DLIs enabled timely
  reaction to COVID-19 and a cyber-security event in 2022. Regular monitoring facilitated the timely
  detection of these shortcomings and adjustments to implementation even for indicators not requiring a
  restructuring but “softer” pushes in implementation. (ICR p.27)



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Overall risk profile was rated low at appraisal and no major issues surfaced during implementation.
   The assessment carried out at appraisal concluded that the PforR did not include activities that could have
   significant or unprecedented adverse impacts on the environment and/or affected people (ICR p.28).
   Moreover, Costa Rica’s environmental, health and safety laws as well as the institutional capacity of its
   environmental regulatory authority was deemed to be adequate. The PforR also provided the opportunity to
   support more efficient and effective environmental, health, and safety management within the CCSS,
   including enhanced occupational safety procedures and the preparation of a technical proposal for the
   creation of an Environmental Directorate. During the COVID-19 pandemic, measures were adopted to
   ensure inclusion for Indigenous Peoples and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, and intersex
   (LGBTQI) persons. The inclusion of an Indigenous Peoples variable in data collection helped monitor
   pandemic-specific trends, which showed a higher contagion risk in Indigenous Peoples communities but
   also effective vaccination rates. Similarly, additional local Indigenous Health staff have been hired that play
   the dual role of medical support and community engagement. For LGBTQI-oriented actions, CCSS carried
   out training plans and capacity building sessions with staff to raise awareness and build knowledge on
   LGBTQI issues and challenges in health delivery. Finally, the Environmental and Social safeguards team
   participated in discussions about institutional changes throughout program implementation to support
   greater inclusivity in patient treatment (ICR p.20). The region was unable to tell the IEG whether the
   government was compliant with all safeguards, due to the departure from the World Bank of the members of
   the PforR's Task Team.

   The initial diagnostic study of the Costa Rican Social Security Administration's (CCSS) institutional
   capacity for implementing the Bank’s environmental guidelines set in motion a process of
   improving the CCSS’ environmental management capacity. According to the ICR (p.24) some of the

                                                                                                      Page 20 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



   most notable results include: (i) enhanced environmental management capacity, including the adoption of
   an institutional environmental policy, which has been embedded as a transversal axis in the CCSS’s
   Institutional Strategic Plan; (ii) development of the Environmental Sustainability Information System and
   training of CCSS staff; (iii) the inclusion of environmental investment projects within the CCSS’ investment
   portfolio; and (iv) a detailed environmental diagnosis of the CCSS’ institutional infrastructure.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   According to the ICR (p.26), the fiduciary and governance frameworks were considered to be adequate to
   support the implementation of the PforR, with the fiduciary risk rated as Moderate during both the appraisal
   and implementation stages. Financial management and procurement systems were considered to be
   adequate to facilitate budget planning and execution, procurement processes, transaction recording, and
   the generation of financial reports. Additionally, the CCSS is subject to oversight from Costa Rica’s
   Comptroller General's Office, the Legislative Assembly, and the internal control framework applicable to
   the public sector. For the purposes of the PforR, the services of the private firm Deloitte were
   engaged. However problems still arose concerning the timeliness and efficiency of audit deliverables. The
   audit for the year 2022 was submitted, on June 14, 2024, with almost one year's delay due to additional
   work requested by the CCSS Presidency. Furthermore, the pending report for the period January 1, 2023,
   to January 31, 2024, was submitted only in October 2024. Nevertheless, according to the ICR, these
   challenges did not impede the timely and reliable provision of information necessary for managing and
   monitoring Program implementation, including budget execution in accordance with approved budgets and
   financial statements.

   The region was unable to tell IEG whether, at the time of the PforR’s final evaluation, the government was
   compliant with all fiduciary and procurement guidelines or whether any of the audits were qualified, due to
   the departure from the World Bank of the members of the PforR's Task Team.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                   IEG
                                                                                Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Highly Satisfactory   Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                The PDOs did not adequately
Quality of M&E                  High                  Substantial
                                                                                represent a progressive theory

                                                                                                   Page 21 of 23
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)



                                                                                  of change, indicating how DLI
                                                                                  achievement affected health
                                                                                  system outcomes.
Quality of ICR                  ---                   High


11. Lessons

Drawn from ICR (p.30):

Making DLIs scalable helps stimulate and reward gradual progress toward PDO achievement,
and accommodate the potentially uneven pace of reforms. In this operation, scalability was
introduced in two ways: (i) in the case of DLIs supporting continuous quantitative results,
disbursements were made proportional to the achievements. In other words, where partial results
were achieved, partial financing would be provided; and (ii) in the case of sets of specific milestones
sequential grouping them into subgoals enhanced the monitoring and rewarding of progress.

Continuous monitoring of M&E indicators, even after the full achievement of DLI targets, can
track and identify backsliding where it is a risk. While annual achievements on DLI indicators
were not reported in the ISRs once targets were achieved, they continued to be discussed in the
progress reports and during the missions. This continuous monitoring enabled the raising of alerts
when annual performance lagged (in the case of this project primarily due to COVID) and allowed
the CCSS to take the necessary countermeasures. World Bank guidelines are clear on the need to
report outcomes at the time of evaluation, and not solely at the time of DLI achievement.

Identification of needed technical assistance during project design could potentially facilitate
the inclusion of an IPF component to support reform implementation. Even in the case of fairly
strong capacity countries, the inclusion of an IPF component to support TA might be given strong
consideration, especially when a PforR is supporting major, complex reforms in delivery systems
and institutional management. In the case of this PforR, the Task Team managed to raise the funds
needed to provide the TA. In retrospect, the ICR (p.26) pointed to the importance of assessing the
need for TA at the PforR design phase and identifying potential financing sources from the outset, as
even clients with high capacity, such as the CCSS in Costa Rica, highly value and request the high-
quality TA and the ability to share global experiences traditionally associated with Bank financing
engagements. The ICR further explains (p.30) explains why securing technical assistance during
program implementation is so challenging in PforRs:

     i. There is an expectation on the part of the Borrower that they can count on TA on the part of
       the Bank, with the Bank’s ability to provide solid TA being one of its competitive advantages;
    ii. When the need for TA arises in the context of PforR operations, the burden to obtain the
       necessary funding falls on the Bank Task Team; and
   iii. The process of obtaining such financial support is not only time consuming, but also
       uncertain in terms of its eventual success. If the Team had not been successful in obtaining
       the relatively small ad-hoc financial support required for this TA, the quality of the solutions
       being adopted could have been compromised.




                                                                                                     Page 22 of 23
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                         Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       STRENGTHENING UNIVERSAL HEALTH INSURANCE (P148435)




12. Assessment Recommended?

  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provides a complete and robust evidence base to support the achievements reported for what was
clearly a successful program. It adequately describes the genesis and content of the government SASHI reform
program providing the larger context of governmental healthcare reform efforts, within which the PforR goals
and achievements appropriately fit. The analysis is clear and in-depth and the lessons learned specifically
relate to challenges and experiences from program implementation. Moreover, the ICR took pains to report
end-of-project data on PDO indicators that were not routinely reported in ISRs after DLI achievements (on
these same indicators) were rewarded during the course of implementation, in order to give a full picture of
results.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       High




                                                                                               Page 23 of 23
