     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



                                                                                  Report Number: ICRR0024377

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P164536                                     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Madagascar                                  Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-63150,IDA-68170                         18-Dec-2023                                         90,201,926.34

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 18-Sep-2018                                 18-Dec-2023

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                             70,000,000.00                                              0.00

 Revised Commitment                            101,787,734.99                                               0.00

 Actual                                          90,201,926.34                                              0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Nestor Ntungwanayo          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   As per the 2018 Financing Agreement (FA) on page 4,"the project development objective (PDO) is to
   contribute to the sustainable growth of the tourism and agribusiness sectors by enhancing access to enabling
   infrastructure and services in the Target Regions of Madagascar". The PDO statement in the Project
   Appraisal Document (PAD) on page 12 is identical.

   There was a level 2 restructuring with an additional financing in December 2020 which was triggered by the
   COVID-19 pandemic and led to a change in the PDO. As per the 2020 FA, the revised PDO aimed “(i)

                                                                                                   Page 1 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



   to contribute to the sustainable growth of the tourism and agribusiness sectors by enhancing access to
   enabling infrastructure and services in Target Regions, and (ii) to provide immediate an effective response to
   an eligible crisis or emergency". The PDO statement in the 2020 Restructuring Paper on page12 was
   identical.

    Assessment methodology: The additional financing (US$33.0 million) was triggered by the need to cope
   with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemics and was used to expand existing activities and few emergency
   sector activities which did not differ significantly from those described in the PAD (see Project Paper, para
   34). There was no specific high-level objective added to the revised PDO, because new activities were
   incorporated in the original components. In line with the 2021 OPCS guidelines (para 60), this review will not
   conduct a split assessment but will assess the performance of the more ambitious revised outcomes and
   outcome targets.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Leveraging private investment in tourism and agribusiness (Original cost of US$11.5
   million equivalent, Revised cost of US$12.25 million equivalent at the 2020 restructuring; Actual
   Cost of US$5.6 million equivalent).

         This component intended to strengthen the government’s ability to attract and channel private
          investments into productive infrastructure and improved services delivery, and to provide direct
          support to new investment in productive sectors and support services through (i) the Madagascar
          Business and Investment Facility (MBIF), which was a competitive grant program supporting the
          creation of new enterprises and growth-oriented SMEs and the realization of investments in the
          project’s key sectors of tourism and agribusiness, and (ii) the support of investment promotion and
          transactions by funding technical assistance (TA), training and capacity building and equipment to
          reinforce investment promotion and facilitation through: (a) improving commercial justice (b)
          preparing feasibility studies for selected pilot projects, including PPPs; (c) support implementation
          for selected PPP projects in the Target Regions; and (d) strengthening Economic Development
          Board of Madagascar (EDBM) and public-private platforms to promote investments in the targeted
          value chains.

   Component 2: Removing key binding constraints for private investment in tourism (Original cost of
   US$32.5 million equivalent; Actual Cost of US$29.6 million equivalent).

         The objective of this component was to help the targeted destinations to grow into sustainable,
          standalone tourism destinations anchoring a growing portfolio of circuits for increasingly diverse
          markets.

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



      Supporting public management capacity related to tourism. This sub-component intended
       to support tourism institutions and to encourage more strategic tourism development approaches
       and market-oriented coordination for sector development. Key activities included (i) the funding
       of TA, capacity building, equipment and small civil works in support to the Ministry in charge of
       Tourism; (ii) the development of a Strategic Tourism Physical Master Plans to guide tourism
       development ; (iii) the support of the institution in charge of tourism promotion and the Tourism
       Confederation of Madagascar in the implementation of their strategic plans; and (iv) the support of
       the Ministry in charge of Transport, Civil Aviation and Madagascar Airports Authority to implement
       the Air Transport Policy Letter. At the regional level, this sub-component aimed to improve basic
       tourism-related infrastructure and implement site upgrades and management of key tourist
       attractions, increase supply and quality in the accommodation sector, and enhance local skills for
       the tourism industry.
      Upgrading urban connectivity and services for tourism development. This sub-component
       aimed to fund public works and equipment and to create a more favorable and safer urban
       environment for citizens and tourists and to enhance the attractiveness for investment in the
       hospitality industry. Activities were identified to fund (i) urban roads in Nosy Be, in Diego and
       neighboring Ramena, (ii) water infrastructure in Tulear, and (iii) airport infrastructure in Fort Dauphin
       and Tulear.
      Preparing Decentralized Territorial Local Authorities (DTLA) and Decentralized Technical
       Services (DTS) for private investment in tourism. This sub-component was to support
       decentralized territorial local authorities (DTLA) and decentralized technical services (DTS) to
       improve overall municipal service delivery and enhance local municipalities’ capacity to conduct the
       planning processes required in cases of private investment in the key sectors. Key activities included
       the financing of TA, capacity building, equipment and small civil works related to: (a) improving
       regional and commune-level development plans and sectoral investment strategies; (b) improving
       revenue mobilization and collection of tourism-related infrastructure; and (c) supporting the local
       budget planning process.

Component 3: Removing key binding constraints for private investment in agribusiness (Original
Cost of US$22 million equivalent, Revised cost of US$20.25 million at the 2020 restructuring; Actual
Cost of US$20.0 million).

      The objective of this component was to build on PIC (Pôles Intégrés de Croissance (Integrated
       Growth Poles) 2.1 results in key agribusiness value chains to support the establishment of efficient,
       diversified and sustainable agribusiness systems for high potential export crops in the Target
       Regions.

      Supporting public management capacity related to agribusiness: This sub-component aimed
       to provide TA, capacity building equipment and small civil works to the Ministry in charge of
       Agriculture and the Ministry in charge of Trade at the national level. Key activities intended to: (a)
       update and monitor the legal and regulatory framework covering key value chains ; (b) strengthen
       nascent and existing private-private and public-private platforms in supported value chains; (c)
       develop advocacy strategies to address sector-specific regulatory obstacles to competition; (d)
       support simplification of procedures for the licensing in the agribusiness sectors; and (e) strengthen
       export promotion agency and automation of export. At the regional level, key activities included the
       renewal of plantation and selected seeds; build capacity of farmers and primary processors; support



                                                                                                  Page 3 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



         farmers to regroup and link with primary processors and export markets; and accelerate
         mechanization and phytosanitary certification for higher-value products.

        Upgrading rural and urban connectivity for agribusiness development: This sub-component
         aimed to finance TA, equipment and civil works to rehabilitate urban and rural secondary and tertiary
         roads directly linked to key agricultural value chains in Diana, Atsimo-Andrefana, Anosy and Sainte
         Marie.

        Preparing DTLA and DTS for private investment in agribusiness: This sub-component aimed to
         finance TA, capacity building, equipment and small civil works to improve overall municipal service
         delivery, and provide small grants based on the Integrated Support for Municipalities (OCAI) model
         to DTLA that encourage delivery of communal and intercommunal sub-projects linked to
         agribusiness value chains.

  Component 4. Project Implementation (Original cost of US$4.0 million equivalent, Revised cost of
  US$5.0 million equivalent at the 2020 restructuring; Actual Cost of US$3.2 million equivalent).

        This component was to finance (i) the National Project Secretariat (Project implementation Unit -
         PIU) based in Antananarivo, as well as decentralized technical units in the three Target Regions and
         Sainte Marie; (ii) the MBIF Implementation Unit Coordinator at the national level; (iii) the project’s
         M&E system; and (iv) the preparation and implementation of all safeguards processes and
         documentation.

  Component 5: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM): (Original cost of US$0 million
  equivalent; Revised amount of US$33 million equivalent at the 2020 Restructuring; Actual cost of
  US$31.7 million equivalent).

        This component intended to provide immediate assistance in response to an eligible crisis or
         emergency that causes a major disaster. The IRM would enable the use of a portion of uncommitted
         funds from the overall IDA portfolio to respond to emergencies.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Cost: The total project commitment was estimated at US$103.0 million equivalent at appraisal. The actual
  disbursed amount totaled US$90,2 million equivalent, or 88 percent of the original project commitments.

  Project Financing: The project was financed entirely through an original International Development
  Association (IDA) credit of US$70.0 million, and an Additional IDA credit of US$33.0 million, totaling a
  commitment amount of US$103 million.

  Borrower Contribution: There was no planned contribution from the borrower at appraisal, and there was
  none during implementation.

  Dates: The project was approved on September18, 2018, made effective on May 08, 2019, and closed
  on December 18, 2023, the original closing date.



                                                                                                   Page 4 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



   Restructuring:

   A Level II Restructuring in November 2020 was triggered by the activation of the IRM component and
   provided additional financial assistance following the extraordinary COVID-19 event during implementation.
   Changes to the Project’s Component Activities and Results Framework included : i) baseline revisions to
   2018 to distinguish PIC 2.1 and PIC 2.2 progress; ii) revision of the PDO to add another objective for the
   COVID-19 emergency response; iii) updating the results framework to reconsider initial targets, deletion of
   an intermediate indicator and addition of two intermediate indicators in light of the COVID-19 crisis and
   response; iv) reallocation of funding across categories to integrate the undisbursed funds from PIC 2.1; and
   v) reallocation of funding across components intended to prioritize interventions to deliver results quickly in
   the COVID-19 crisis.

   A Level II restructuring was approved on December 18, 2023 to reflect a cancellation and reallocation of
   funds heavily impacted by a national budget procedure which was a prerequisite for call of funds and
   withdrawal applications clearance that drastically affected the ability of the PIU to make payments to
   contractors and services providers.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context: Through the National Development Plan (NDP) 2015-2019, Madagascar launched a
reform program aimed at promoting inclusiveness and resilience of economic growth and set out the
national goal of inclusive and sustainable growth, which included the spatial dimension. This program was
supported by (i) several World Bank-financed projects geared to helping the government scale up
investment in the provision of basic public goods and access to productive infrastructure, and (ii) a series of
budget support operations aimed at strengthening the fiscal framework to increase resources available for
priority spending and investment.

Tourism and agriculture were two sectors where unlocked investment would have significant multiplier
effects, with Madagascar offering tourists a diversity of activities and products, and agriculture sector
providing growth opportunities and possibility of poverty reduction. To build the technical capacity required
to attract additional investment, it was key to strengthen both the respective sectoral expertise and the
government institutional structures. Such capacity strengthening had already been accomplished
successfully through previous phases of this Series of Projects (SOP) which lay the necessary foundations
for growth in key agribusiness and tourism value chain.

This project was the phase two of the second project in a SOPs and constituted the continuation of an
established growth poles program. The PIC 2.2 project was designed to step up the strong base for growth
built by phase one of the second in the SOP (PIC 2.1) in agribusiness and tourism in the existing Target
Regions through acceleration of private investments and deeper interventions and limited strategic
geographical extensions.

Alignment with Government strategy: At closing, the PDO was still relevant to the third of the five
strategic axes of development of the Madagascar National Development Plan for 2015-2019 as follows:
"Inclusive growth and territorial anchoring of development”, which was focused on the implementation of

                                                                                                     Page 5 of 20
                                      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                       Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                      Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



               reforms, actions and measures to achieve four specific objectives: (i) to strengthen high value-addition and
               decent work intensive sectors, (ii) to strengthen structuring infrastructure, (iii) to optimize the organization
               and territorial structuring of the economy, and (iv) to develop the private sector and particularly small and
               medium enterprises (SME) with high capacity for job creation. The PDO is also relevant to the new
               government’s Emergence Plan for Madagascar 2019-2023 (PEM), specifically through the following
               “priorities”: (i) to ensure good institutional governance), (ii) to facilitate job creation and promote decent
               work), (iii) to provide the country with high quality infrastructure, including for transportation), (iv) to foster
               entrepreneurial spirit and innovation), (vi) to promote sustainable development of tourism), (vii) to
               modernize the country’s agriculture sector),(viii) to enhance access to energy and potable water.

               Alignment with Bank strategy. At project closing, the PDO is highly relevant to the FY2023–FY27 CPF for
               Madagascar. The agribusiness and tourism sectors were highlighted as holding growth potential in the 2021
               Madagascar Country Private Sector Diagnostic and were also discussed in the World Bank April 2022
               Systematic Country Diagnostic Update. Based on the 2023-2027 CPF (Report No. 179576-MG), the PDO
               is fully aligned to support the first CPF high-level outcome focused on improving job opportunities through
               transformative action particularly scaling up selected value chains and improving access to basic
               infrastructure services.

               The goal was to enhance Madagascar’s inclusive and sustainable growth, including the spatial dimension.
               The World Bank provided budget support and devised an investment program of SOPs, and this project
               was a continuation of an established growth poles program. Increase in jobs and private sector investments
               were the key outcomes which were expected to achieve the PDO.

               Overall, the PDO is highly relevant as it is in line with the priorities of the country throughout the period of
               project implementation and is still aligned with WBG partnership vehicle at project closure.


               Rating Relevance TBL




               Rating
               High


   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




                             OBJECTIVE 1
                             Objective
                             To contribute to the sustainable growth of the tourism and agribusiness sectors in the Target Regions of
                             Madagascar

                             Rationale
                             The theory of change (TOC) presented and discussed in the ICR on page 11 had some shortcomings. This
                             review has recreated a theory of change based on the material in the PAD and the 2020 restructuring paper
                             which is summarized below.



                                                                                                                             Page 6 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



TOC at appraisal. Toward contributing to the sustainable growth of the tourism, specific activities included
(i) removing key binding constraints for private investment in tourism, (ii) funding TA, capacity building, and
equipment in support to the Ministry in charge of Tourism; (iii) the development of a Strategic Tourism
Physical Master Plans to guide tourism development; (iv) the support of the institution in charge of tourism
promotion and the Tourism Confederation of Madagascar in the implementation of their strategic plans. At the
regional level, the project was to support the improvement of basic tourism-related infrastructure and
implement site upgrades and management of key tourist attractions, increase supply and quality in the
accommodation sector, and enhance local skills for the tourism industry.

Concrete activities included (i) the creation of the Madagascar Business and Investment Facility (MBIF),
which was a competitive grant program supporting the creation of new enterprises and growth-oriented SMEs
and the realization of investments in the project’s key sectors of tourism and agribusiness, and (ii) the
strengthening of the Economic Development Board of Madagascar (EDBM) and public-private platforms to
promote investments in the targeted value chains.

Selected expected outputs included the following: (i) the number of formal tourism businesses newly
registered hotel rooms available in the Target Regions (ii) urban roads rehabilitated (iii) increase in visitors in
tourism sites enabled by the project, and (iv) people trained in tourism or related sectors. The targeted
outcomes by the Project in the agribusiness sector included (i) an increase in the number of visitors in tourism
sites enabled by the project and (ii) an increase in the number of formal jobs created in the targeted poles.

Toward contributing to the sustainable growth of the agribusiness sectors, specific activities included the
following: (i) strengthen nascent and existing private-private and public-private platforms in supported value
chains; (ii) support simplification of procedures for the licensing in the agribusiness sectors; (iii) strengthen
export promotion agency and automation of export, (iv) rehabilitate urban and rural secondary and tertiary
roads directly linked to key agricultural value chains in key cities of the country, and (v) provide small
grants that encourage delivery of communal and intercommunal sub-projects linked to agribusiness value
chains. Concrete activities consisted in completing structural reforms in the agribusiness sector and building
technical capacity in the Government institutions and the private sector through training and the provision of
technical assistance.

Targeted outputs included the following: (i) the number of grant agreements signed under MBIF program, (ii)
the number of formal businesses newly registered in the Target Regions, (iii) the setup of business centers to
support startups and SMEs, (iv) the length of rural roads rehabilitated, (v) the number of people provided with
access to improved water sources, and (vi) an increase in annual sales revenue for MBIF BPC recipient
enterprises .

The targeted outcomes to be achieved by the Project included: (i) an increase in the value of exports of the
selected crops in the Target Regions (ii) an expansion of the revenues from target cash crop production for
smallholders in the Target Regions, (iii) an increase in revenues from target cash crop production for
smallholders in the target corridors in the target poles and (vi) an increase in the number of formal jobs
created in the targeted poles.

TOC at restructuring. New activities added in the context of the 2020 level 2 restructuring did not affect the
original TOC, because all new activities were incorporated under the existing components.

Overall assessment of the TOC: The theory of change was robust and showed how identified activities
would generate outputs and increase jobs and formal firms in targeted regions and revenues from target cash

                                                                                                     Page 7 of 20
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



crop production for smallholders. Overall, there was a logical chain between the identified activities, the
expected outputs and outcomes in targeted regions of Madagascar. However, there was no discussion in the
ICR analyzing the assumptions underpinning the TOC. The attribution of the achieved outcome was
discussed in some instances, for instance in the case of the number of newly created MSMEs.

The assessment of project performance draws from the ICR material presented on pages 12-17. However,
there was some inconsistency between the main text storyline on pages 12-17 and the Annex 1 of the
ICR. For instance, the number of jobs created reported in the Annex 1 is different from the one presented in
the main text. In this review, the numbers in the main ICR text were considered in cases of inconsistency
between sources.

Outputs:

      The target for the urban and peri-urban roads rehabilitated was exceeded, reaching 61.9 km, much
         more than the target of 38 km, from a baseline of zero in 2018. Urban roads rehabilitated included 20
         km in Diego (Ramena and Corniche), 24 km in Nosy Be, 1.3 km Route du Cratère, 9 km in Ambanja
         and 7.6 km in Tuléar.
        The project also provided 75,000 people with access to improved water services in line with the target
         of 75,000, which included piped household connections and community water points.
        The project contributed to an increase in hotels rooms in project-supported areas, from a 2018
         baseline of 6,487 to 7,632 rooms (exceeding the adjusted target of 2,737 rooms) despite the drastic
         consequences of the COVID-19 crisis on the tourism industry.
        The project also strengthened transversal institutions by building a local government revenue base
         and investment capacity at Commune and municipal levels. In addition to facilitating the increased
         collection of tax revenues by 154 percent over the project life (from 12.94 MGA billion to 19.98 MGA
         billion (as shown in table 2) against a target of 15.63 MGA and increasing tenfold the allocation of
         those revenues dedicated to investment in the Target poles from 2.6 percent (baseline) to 24.1
         percent, with no set target in the results framework.
        Beyond the outputs targeted in the results framework, the project co-financed the upgrading of Fort
         Dauphin, Tulear, and Sainte-Marie airports, airfield lighting work with ADEMA (Madagascar Airport),
         which strengthened the attractiveness of the destination and the entire tourism industry in Sainte-
         Marie, by enabling it to safely welcoming international flights.

Outcomes:

Tourism

      The target for the passenger's traffic by air settled at 300,790 passengers, well below the reduced
         target of 515,000 at project closure. This indicator was impacted by the lack of tourist traffic due to the
         travel restrictions of COVID-19.

Agribusiness

      The target for the revenues for the MBIF recipient enterprises (MGA million) was exceeded,
         reaching 8,323 MGA million, surpassing the 3,000 MGA million target. This indicator measures
         cumulative results of the total incremental sales revenue of project-supported businesses through the


                                                                                                      Page 8 of 20
  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
  Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



      MBIF BPC window, with baseline sales of zero for startups and previous year’s sales for existing
      firms.
     The increase in annual sales for women-owned businesses was 3,620 MGA million which exceeded
      the target of 900 MGA million, and a baseline of 0. Sex disaggregation of sales assumes 40% of
      beneficiaries are women-owned enterprises.

     The following additional achievements, not included in the RF and hence without target values, were
        reported by the ICR, and contributed to the project outcome:

             o The expected proportion of women-owned enterprises was down from 40 to 30 percent as
               women-led businesses grew mainly in revenue size rather than in number of businesses.
             o The MBIF program contributed to the creation of 1083 jobs and turnover of US$7,894,497
               million.
             o The project contributed to the development of seven main agricultural value chains including
               cacao, ylang ylang and vanilla in Diana, Sea Cucumber and Seaweed in Atsimo Andrefana
               and Pink pepper and Honey in Anosy. These contributed to 64.4 percent increase in the export
               values of these value chains from $US 27,5 million in 2018 to US$45.2 million in 2023.
             o 15,505 smallholders were also supported by the project and saw a 128 percent increase in the
               value of their local production from a baseline of 10,5 MGA billion to 23.9 MGA billion.
             o Increases in revenues were particularly pronounced in the vanilla (Diana), the sea cucumber
               (Atsimo-Andrefana) and the pink pepper (Anosy) value chains that respectively grew by 433
               percent, 279 percent, and 642 percent.
             o The Project contributed to an increase of 27 percent in smallholders’ revenues across all
               agricultural value chains. Increases in export value were particularly pronounced for the vanilla
               supply chain that grew by 3,124 percent to US$15,110,812.5.

Tourism and Agribusiness

     The target for the new registered businesses was exceeded, reaching 25,544 formal businesses
        newly registered across all sectors, in all three regions during the project lifetime against a target of
        13,591 formal businesses, and a baseline of zero in 2018.
       The value of private investment reached US$29.23 million which exceeded the end target of US$25
        million. These investments included: (i) private co-investments committed from MBIF recipients; (ii)
        supported PPPs: the private contribution that was verified through signed legal documents; (iii)
        Agribusiness and tourism enabled through investment promotion activities, tracked through regular
        reports.
       The training and co-financing programs established under the IRM helped to upgrade skillsets,
        enhance employability, and reduce attrition from the sector, and maintain 23,480 workers, more than
        twice the original target of 10,000, active in the tourism sector throughout the crisis.
       The number of formal jobs created in the Target Regions was 8,278 additional jobs (in both tourism
        and agribusiness sectors and in all three regions) which slightly exceeded a target of 8,201 additional
        jobs created during the project lifetime. At the sectoral level, 29 percent of all jobs created were in the
        tourism sector whereas 71 percent in the agribusiness sector across all three regions.
       The number of businesses benefiting from at least one COVID-19 response activity was 1,340 (across
        both sectors, in all three regions) which exceeded the target slightly of 1,000 by the end of the first



                                                                                                     Page 9 of 20
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



                                    quarter of 2022. As the tourism sector was most impacted, 86 percent of businesses that sought
                                    support came from the tourism sector.

                                  In summary, key outputs on target or beyond targets included the following: (i) rehabilitation of urban
                                    and suburban roads, (ii) people with access to water, and (iii) strengthened transversal institutions in
                                    the local government and improved investment capacity at Commune and municipal levels. There was
                                    also an upgrade of airports and airfields. The key outcome in the tourism sector consisted in an
                                    increase of passenger's traffic, which however fell below the target. Other project outcomes were
                                    either on target or beyond target and included: (i) the number of new registered businesses, (ii) the
                                    level of revenues for the MBIF recipient enterprises, (iii) annual sales for women-owned businesses,
                                    (iv) the value of private investment, (v) people with upgraded skillsets, (vi) the number of businesses
                                    benefiting from at least one COVID-19 response activity, and (vi) the overall number of formal jobs
                                    created in the Target Regions.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall, the project efficacy was substantially achieved. There was good results in the infrastructure and
                            services funded by the project in the tourism and agriculture sectors. Achieved outcome in the tourism sector
                            was positive, but was below target, while all outcomes in the agribusiness sector were either fully achieved or
                            exceeded. Key project development outcomes related to the new-created businesses, the jobs created and
                            the private sector investment were exceeded, and these achievements substantially contributed to the
                            sustainable growth of the tourism and agribusiness sectors.




                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



   5. Efficiency
   Economic and financial analysis

   The cost-benefit analysis methodology used at appraisal to assess economic and financial efficiency was
   repeated in the context of ICR preparation, although it had a larger coverage. The analysis used a discount rate
   of 10 percent over a 10-year period and found positive numbers at closure with a project’s economic rate of
   return (ERR) of 22 percent, and a net present value (NPV) of US$10.2 million, compared to an ERR of 24 and

                                                                                                                             Page 10 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



an NPV of US$17.5 million at approval. The economic analysis ex-post factored in the impacts generated by
increased tourist activities and increased producer revenues derived from the project’s agribusiness
interventions. For the tourism sector in particular, the financial analysis was based on the parameters and
conditions for a profitable high standard hotel in Madagascar with updated financial information based on current
market conditions. The analysis indicates an ex-post internal rate of return (IRR) of 16.9 percent over 10 years,
compared to 16.0 percent at appraisal.

Operational efficiency.

The project operational efficiency was impacted by the Presidential and parliamentary elections held in 2018,
and in 2019 respectively, because the project had to re-establish the buy in with new key central government
and municipal stakeholders. Operational efficiency and administrative costs were also impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic and global inflation, which particularly affected infrastructure costs. While the tourism sector
experienced a sharp decline due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the project support considerably lessened the
level of this decline, thereby ensuring the survival of many businesses within the sector and allowing them to
rebound after the pandemic. The project also helped improve investment planning and public management for
both the agribusiness and tourism sectors. Although the project did experience some delays due to the COVID-
19 pandemic, results across other years of the project exceeded the project targets. Because this project was
part of an SOP, its duration was not extended, and it closed at the original closing date set at effectiveness.

On balance, efficiency is rated substantial, based on positive economic benefits and a fairly effective operational
management of the project in a challenging environment.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      16.00
 Appraisal                                                 24.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      16.90
 ICR Estimate                                              22.00
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO was highly relevant as it was congruent with the country's priorities and still aligned with WBG
partnership vehicle at project closure. Efficacy performance was substantial as achievements related to the
value of private investment and formal jobs created in the Target Regions were exceeded, despite shortfalls in



                                                                                                     Page 11 of 20
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



the passengers' traffic by air. Efficiency was substantial, resulting in an overall Satisfactory rating of the project's
outcome.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Overall, the risk to development outcome following completion of this project is assessed as low, given (i) a
high level of Government ownership and commitment to the PDO and achieved results, and (ii) limited
financial and institutional risks.

Regarding the Government's ownership and commitment, there has been a sustained dialogue between the
WBG and the Borrower on the SOPs program, and the stability of the PIU team enabled the project to
progress effectively even in the context of the government change of 2019. Arrangements around the PIU
operating outside the line ministries was a recipe to keep the project outside negative influences during
periodic political swings occurring in the country. In line with the above, the key objectives of employment
and private investment of the Project have been maintained as part of the PIC-3 (Economic Transformation
for Inclusive Growth Project, P174684) which became effective after the Project closure.

Financial risks for achieved outcome are also limited because the project outcomes are underpinned by the
strengthening of the business environment aimed at creating the conditions of private sector development.
The goal is to create an environment favorable to the growth of private enterprises which will be prosperous
and partners to the banking and financial sector, and capable of creating jobs and paying taxes, without
relying on the Government subsidies or interventions.

Institutional risks are also limited because the approach adopted under PIC-2.1 and PIC-2.2 to prioritize a
direct approach to support the private sector development shifted slightly under PIC-3 as additional activities
pertain to public partners institutional capacity development such as the Madagascar Investment Promotion
Agency (EDBM), the Ministry of Tourism and the Central Bank to enable them to accompany more effectively
the private sector beneficiaries at the national and sub-national levels.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  This project design aimed to support an integrated approach to enhancing key infrastructure services
  projects that would support job creation and crowding in private investments and a decentralization
  strategy with expanded geographic reach and additional agricultural value chains. This project was
  designed in the context of the SOPs approach and built on achieved outcome from a first phase project
  (PIC 2.1).



                                                                                                         Page 12 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



  The project oversight was in the hands of a PIU not embedded in any particular Ministry but rather
  consisted in a strong technical team that was selected competitively on the international and national
  market. During the project appraisal process, the institutional arrangement aimed to: (i) enable a strong
  institutional memory; (ii) maintain project implementation capacities concentrated in the national PIU and
  the regional ones rather than distributing them across multiple line Ministry; and (iii) ensure project
  implementation autonomy to continue operating effectively when new officials turnover and political
  changes occur.

  The Series-of-Project approach allowed to take into consideration the previous Project results and
  building on them mostly in the same Target Poles and Corridors to add and capture more investment
  value and job creation in the selected Sectors namely Tourism and Agribusiness. The second
  phase considered additional agricultural value chains to deepen investments in the Target Poles and
  improve the crowding-in effect, investment sustainability and additional integrated developments
  including infrastructure projects that benefit the private sector and the local populations in each Target
  region. The focus on similar Target regions and sectors also helped manage project complexity given its
  multisectoral and multi-regional nature. The project components were designed with sufficient flexibility to
  adapt to changing conditions.

  Project preparation took into account investments underway/planned by other donors and either aimed to
  leverage them or avoided duplication of them in project design. For instance, the project managed and
  implemented US$15 million of funds from the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID) intended
  for urban and rural electrification. Doing so enabled the project to add urban and rural electrification
  results to its PDO-level outcome “access to enabling infrastructure services”.

  Overall, quality-at-entry was satisfactory as key features of the project at appraisal were fully
  researched. More specifically, the strategic relevance of project and safeguard, technical, financial and
  economic aspects were discussed throughout the project thoroughly in the PAD.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Project supervision team completed ten supervision missions with the support of technical World Bank
 staff across the project’s sectors – infrastructure, transport, land, agriculture, tourism, energy, water -
 who were consistently present during the missions and were accountable for project developments in their
 corresponding sectors. The TTL was based in Tananarive, and this allowed the team’s continuous
 dialogue in face of the huge implementation challenges including a governmental transition following the
 2018 Presidential election and the COVID-19 crisis response. Bank supervision findings of the project was
 reported in Aide Memoires after each mission and in ISRs prepared biannually.

 There was one TTL rotation which took place during the pandemic phase. Despite the challenges of
 establishing close working relationship with the client virtually, the new TTL previous experience with the
 PIC 2.1 project became valuable to manage the COVID-19 emergency response to support the
 beneficiaries and to accelerate the pace of progress toward the PDO objectives of the PIC 2.2 project.


                                                                                                   Page 13 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



 During the 2021 MTR mission, the progress revealed the need for a reallocation of resources from
 Components 1, 4 and 5 to Components 2 and 3. The reallocation responded to higher-than-expected
 demand for entrepreneurship-related activities and lower demand for other formally identified activities. The
 stability of the PIU team since PIC 1 enabled the project to progress effectively while duly managing
 expectations and concerns from implementing partners especially in the context of the government change
 of 2019. There were minor shortcomings in the oversight of the fiduciary and safeguards issues.




  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 Based on the discussion under the section, there was a consistency between the theory of change and the
 results framework, with a logical link between the activities, and outputs and outcomes generated by the
 project. The PDO was clearly stated, but could have been improved, and the results framework could have
 been simplified for an easier monitoring.

 The PDO-level and intermediate indicators were specific, measurable and achievable, effectively capturing
 the main results impacts expected from the operation in terms of formal job creation and value of private
 investment leveraged, and building on the previous experience with the PIC 1 and PIC 2.1, the M&E
 arrangements were adequate to keep track of the project performance across components given the
 integrated and decentralized approach of the PIC 2 series of projects. An independent PIU which had
 developed quality skillsets oversaw the regular collection of the RF data from participating institutions.

 While the majority of the PDO and intermediate indicators had baselines, the collection and interpretation of
 indicators was not accurate all the time, and would have called for the reduction of indicators, and instead
 of expanding the number of indicators, the choice should have been more selective.



b. M&E Implementation
  Most of the PDO and intermediate had baselines, making it possible to capture the changes brought in by
  the project activities. The key shortcoming in the M&E design was that the large number of intermediate
  indicators was not corrected during implementation, making the monitoring ineffective. That is why some
  of the results were either inaccurately or incompletely reported. As discussed earlier (see Efficacy
  section), there was some inconsistency between the Annex 1 of the ICR and the results on PDO and
  intermediate indicators presented in the main text.



                                                                                                  Page 14 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



  The M&E reporting was generally adequate as indicators were measured and reported in
  the Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs), including the mid-term review referenced in the
  ISR 6. Data collection methods relied on the PIU national and regional teams, especially the M&E and
  Sectoral and Technical Specialists. The WB team carried out regular implementation supervision
  missions including virtual ones during COVID-19 pandemic to monitor Project progress. The WB field and
  virtual missions helped triangulate and control quality of data collected by the PIU for an
  effective oversight of the Project implementation. However, during the COVID-19 crisis period, field
  missions stopped, and the WB team relied primarily on reports from the client and virtual mission
  findings.

  Some of the PDO-level indicators required revisions and redefinitions to: (i) adjust the parameters of
  disaggregation by recipient enterprises, of which women-owned” and/or (ii) improve or
  clarify measurement methodologies or “increase in the value of exports of the selected crops in the
  Target Regions”. Phase II of the Series-of-Project had to reconsider the baseline of PDO indicators and
  intermediate indicators to 2018, a year prior to the effectiveness to better track the individual performance
  of SOP 2.1 versus SOP 2.2. Consequently, as part of the restructuring of November 2020 all intermediate
  indicators except the one related to citizen engagement revised their baseline to 2018.

  The project implementation results were released on a regular basis with the issuance of each ISR and
  were assessed against pre-set targets. The exceptional circumstances of the COVID-19
  triggered additional revisions to account for the impact of the activities during the emergency response
  and recovery. Accordingly, a PDO-indicator and two intermediate indicators were added whereas one
  intermediate indicator was deleted.

  Overall, the M&E function performed satisfactorily despite moderate shortcomings. This project being part
  of an SOPs, the M&E system and function have been sustained, as a follow-on project is under
  implementation by an independent PIU which has developed adequate expertise for most project
  management functions.



c. M&E Utilization
  The PIU shared in a timely manner quarterly M&E reports with key stakeholders and the task team
  regularly updated indicators to measure progress against the baseline, and highlighted issues for WB
  management’s attention (page 25). Moreover, the M&E information influenced positive shifts in the
  implementation direction of the operation: for example, the 2020 change in the PDO and the results
  framework. As this project is part of a SOPs, the design of every subsequent project drew from the
  results provided by the M&E function and performance.

  Overall, the performance of M&E function was substantially achieved, with moderate shortcomings.
  While M&E implementation arrangements were good, the M&E design could have been simplified, by
  reducing the number of intermediate indicators to facilitate implementation monitoring. M&E
  implementation was generally effective, but did not correct the large number of intermediate indicators.
  M&E utilization was adequate as it was critical to adjustments to the ground challenges, while informing
  the design of follow-on project in the SOPs context.




                                                                                                    Page 15 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as a category B project, and five safeguard policies were triggered as follows: (i)
   Environment Assessment OB/BP 4.01; (ii) Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04; (iii) Pest Management OP 4.09; (iv)
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11; and (v) Involuntary Settlement OP/BP 4.12. However. The ICR
   did neither assess nor report on the implementation of all specific triggered policies.

   The Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) was functional since 2016, as part of the PIC 2.1. The project’s
   GRM received 68 complaints and 54 grievances. Project activities in Tulear generated the most complaints
   especially regarding the work on provision of access to water in Tulear. This included requests for additional
   infrastructure investments that fell outside the project activities and could not be addressed. Project
   activities in Diana generated part of the complaints and grievances on road projects including in
   Ambanja and in Nosy Be. No sanctions or cancellations of procurement processes were necessary because
   of complaints received through the GRM.

   The Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) were successfully prepared for urban road rehabilitation activities
   including in Ambanja and in Nosy Be. In total, 2,189 people affected (PAPs) by the project were
   compensated for economic disruption or displacement during the implementation of the works; 85 PAPs
   were compensated in the form of removal/replacement of impacted infrastructure located in public right-of-
   way areas. In addition, cash aid was provided from the State budget to support vulnerable households or
   those housing vulnerable households. Safeguards documentation for urban roads and rural road tracks
   activities in two of the target regions led to some temporary involuntary resettlement and land acquisition,
   and preparation and validation of the relevant safeguards' documentation was delayed but ultimately
   completed.

   The project’s environmental and social safeguards risk rating remained substantial throughout the project
   life due to the land acquisition and the involuntary resettlement that had to be managed for the above-
   mentioned road rehabilitation and water supply projects. All triggered safeguard policies were deemed
   Satisfactory at the time of the project closing.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   At closure, the Project Financial Management rating was Moderately Unsatisfactory, but during a brief
   period around the mid-term review in 2021, it reached a Satisfactory rating. The project disbursement rate
   was 89.5 percent (planned US$103 million equivalent, actual US$ 90.3 million equivalent). However, the
   conjunction of setbacks including the sudden passing of the Financial Management Specialist and the
   major impact of the “régularisation budgétaire” which drastically affected the ability of the PIU to make
   payments to contractors and services providers. Moreover, the concurrent management of PIC 2.2 and

                                                                                                   Page 16 of 20
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



  PIC 3 resulted in additional workload in a period where a newly hired Financial Management was not as
  technically experienced as the previous one and could not cope with all the challenges at hand so much so
  that this resource is being replaced. Overall, audit reports were presented on time, without auditors’
  observations. Lastly, the Government complied with all loan covenants, and at closure the undisbursed
  amount was canceled and reversed back to the country IDA allocation. The external final audit was
  completed in time and had an unqualified opinion of the project accounts.

  Upon request, the TTL indicated that WB supports to improve fiduciary capacity included: (i) on-boarding
  sessions for the newly hired national coordinator and financial management officer; (ii) regular trainings for
  PIU staff on WB fiduciary procedures, requirements, tools/platforms; (iii) regular meetings with PIU to
  oversee fiduciary management, documents, progress, issues and performance, beyond WB official
  supervision mission; and (iv) support to the resolution of the régularisation budgétaire issue, under the
  leadership of the CMU.

  Procurement

  The Project was affected by (i) weak procurement and institutional capacity in the face of a demand
  triggered by the COVID-19 emergency response, and the accelerated implementation post COVID-19
  pandemic, (ii) the start of the PIC 3 project 2 years prior to the PIC 2.2 closure, and (ii) delays related to
  the introduction of the STEP software aimed at streamlining procurement processes. While approval of the
  procurement plan was timely, procurement processes were slow, due to the sectoral-level and pole-level
  consultations in country and at the WB to prepare and approve procurement documents.

  Challenges were dealt with through collaboration between the WB and the PIU teams and between PIU
  national and regional teams. The central procurement team had to reorganize to ensure greater proximity
  and competency at the sub-national level in each pole. The last year of the Project saw an accelerated
  pace of procurement processing due to the activities shifting from the stage of pending to the stages of
  signed or pending implementation.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  The ICR did not identify any unintended impacts.



d. Other
  In complement to what was presented under the efficacy section, the ICR provided specific achievements in
  the areas of gender, institutional strengthening and mobilization of private sector financing as summarized
  below.

  Gender: The Project undertook gender-specific actions under Component 1 and 2, which sought to
  promote entrepreneurship in both the agribusiness and the tourism sectors in the Targeted Poles. At project
  closure, 48.2 percent of the US$2.9 million achieved among the 129 entrepreneurship beneficiaries was
  attributed to women-led businesses. Similarly, 38.8 percent of the beneficiary start-ups were women-led
  businesses (94 out of the 242 agreements signed over the two waves) and 32.4 percent of the jobs created
  were for women (263 out of the 769 jobs created).


                                                                                                   Page 17 of 20
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



   Institutional strengthening: The Project main achievements included the capacity building at several
   levels of private and public stakeholders in the agribusiness and tourism sectors. In the agribusiness sector,
   the project provided substantial support to the Ministry of Agriculture and its offices at the region and district
   levels. In the tourism sector, the project provided support to the Ministry of Tourism and the Regional
   Tourism Directorates, as well as to the National Tourism Office of Madagascar and the Regional Tourist
   Offices in target regions, to manage impacts of the COVID crisis, and drive recovery and continued growth
   of the tourism sector. In a more cross-cutting manner, the project continued its support to the Economic
   Development Board of Madagascar (EDBM) in two major areas: (i) Investment promotion and improvement
   of the regional business climate; and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacities of the EDBM.

   Mobilization of private sector financing: The project directly catalyzed US$4.3 million in private financing
   under the MBIF Agribusiness window. The MBIF Agribusiness window financed 10 business expansion
   projects for a total amount of US$2.8 million in six remote areas including Ambanja, Diego, Nosy Be, Tulear,
   Fort-Dauphin and Sainte Marie. These projects leveraged US$4.3 million in private financing from
   beneficiary enterprises.



11. Ratings
                                                                                    Reason for
Ratings                          ICR                      IEG
                                                                                    Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                          Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Bank Performance                 Satisfactory             Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                   Substantial              Substantial

Quality of ICR                   ---                      Modest


12. Lessons

The ICR identified several lessons on pages 28-29 of the ICR. Three of them are presented here
with some adjusted language:

      A Project's integrated and decentralization approach can set the stage for
       infrastructure and growth interventions and provide the required flexibility to
       support specific poles and corridor development. This project contributed to derisking
       important infrastructure requirements that were necessary for private sector investments and
       ensured the infrastructure projects to have a direct impact on boosting private investments
       and improving productivity for firms and individuals in the selected poles and corridor. The
       decentralization strategy aimed at expanding geographic areas of interventions and local
       supervision to become an advantage in this project despite the country’s political fragility,
       low-capacity environment and the emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
       The Project demonstrated that multi-faceted and spatially concentrated interventions focused
       on improving the overall competitiveness of regions and corridor can meet the objectives of
       inclusive growth in priority sectors at both the national and sub-national level.


                                                                                                      Page 18 of 20
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)



        The Series-of-Project approach might be a recipe to cope with a reduced IDA envelope
         arising from internal constraints, including the political volatility at the time. The
         design of this Project from a stand-alone operation to a series-of-projects allowed to cope
         with a drastic reduction of IDA that resulted from a long period of political instability,
         including an OP 7.30 between 2011 and 2013 before normalization of relations between the
         World Bank and the Government of Madagascar in 2014. During each phase of the SOP,
         demonstration of pilot project results and detailed planning laid the foundation to expand
         investments between each phase of the PIC Project. Moreover, it provided visibility and
         continuity to the PIU team to gain experience and to build upon activities and initial results
         achieved from one phase to the next.

        An autonomous and experienced PIU can become a solution in implementing a project
         in the context of political volatility and limited institutional and technical capacity.
         There was a deliberate decision to have an independent PIU that would not be embedded in
         a line Ministry. In addition, the initial PIU team members had been competitively selected by
         headhunters in the international job market including the coordinator that had come in from
         Coca Cola in France. During the PIC 1 Project, the team was able to ramp up and to acquire
         experience including on Bank systems and procedures. During the PIC 2.1, the team was
         expanded to not only ensure a consistent presence in the Poles, but also to cover the
         specific requirements of sectors (Tourism, Agriculture, Public Sector) and activity types
         across regional and multiple Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs).



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR is candid in presenting the context of project design and implementation, and the achieved results.
The document is results-based and provides substantive material related to the components, the outputs and
the outcomes generated by the project. However, the quality of analysis has some weaknesses. The ICR has
several shortcomings including the following: (i) the ICR did not abide with some of the OPCS guidelines in
terms of style and length, the document is lengthy and repetitive, making the main text more than double the
required length, (ii) the theory of change presented in the Annex 7 of the ICR is inconsistent with the one
delineated in the main text on page 4, particularly the logical link between the activities, the outputs and
outcomes was not discussed, (iii) the key annexes 1 and 3 of the ICR were were inconsistent with the main
text. Overall, the quality of the ICR is rated Modest.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Modest




                                                                                                    Page 19 of 20
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                   Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
Integrated Growth Poles and Corridor 2.2 (P164536)




                                                                                  Page 20 of 20
