     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



                                                                                Report Number: ICRR0024385

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                Project Name
 P152359                                   Ebola Emergency Response Project

 Country                                   Practice Area(Lead)
 Western and Central Africa                Health, Nutrition & Population


 L/C/TF Number(s)                          Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D0070,IDA-D0080,IDA-D0090,IDA- 30-Sep-2015                                               372,292,666.40
 H9900,IDA-H9910,IDA-H9920

 Bank Approval Date                        Closing Date (Actual)
 16-Sep-2014                               31-Dec-2023

                                           IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                         105,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                          389,343,850.22                                               0.00

 Actual                                      372,292,666.40                                               0.00




 Prepared by                  Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Judith Hahn Gaubatz          Salim J. Habayeb           Susan Ann Caceres              IEGHC (Unit 2)




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (page 4) and the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, page 10), the
   original project objectives were as follows:




                                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



         To contribute in the short-term to the control of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak and
          the availability of selected essential health services, and mitigate the socio-economic impact of
          EVD in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

   At the time of project restructuring in December 2016 (Project Paper, page 8), the project objectives were
   revised as follows:

         To contribute to the control of the EVD outbreaks and the recovery of selected essential health
          services in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

   Given the circumstances for the project restructuring - that the acute phase of the EVD outbreak had passed -
   the project focus shifted from emergency short-term response to recovery. At this time, the associated
   emergency activities such as food distribution, had been completed with the PDO indicator target achieved;
   therefore, third element of the original PDO was dropped. As these changes, in addition to the November
   2014 Additional Financing, reflected an expansion, rather than a reduction, in project scope, including with
   increased targets for four PDO and intermediate indicators to align with the expanded scope of the project
   and the strengthening of health systems (ICR, p. 25), a split rating methodology is not applied.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  08-Dec-2016

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support to the EVD Outbreak Response Plans and Strengthening Essential Health Services
   (Appraisal: US$ 48.0 million; AF: US$ 127.0 million; Actual: US$ 224. million): This component aimed to
   finance critical gaps in emergency response efforts by the governments of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra
   Leone, specifically according to the Ebola Response Roadmap developed by WHO, and also to strengthen
   provision of essential health services. Activities in the Roadmap included: case management, burials, case
   diagnosis, surveillance, information, communications and education (ICE), and social mobilization. Activities
   in other health services included: provision of personal protective equipment (PPE) and infection prevention
   and control (IPC) materials, training on the use of PPE and IPC, and essential drugs and equipment for
   health facilities.

   Component 2: Human Resources Scale up for Outbreak Response and Essential Health Services
   (Appraisal: US$ 35.0 million; AF: US$ 124.0 million; Actual: US$ 109.0 million): This component aimed to
   motivate and reward health workers in the three affected countries to work on the EVD emergency
   response and provide other essential health services. Activities included: hazard/indemnity pay to health
   personnel who work in Ebola treatment centers and referral centers, including volunteers; funding for in-

                                                                                                   Page 2 of 14
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



  country medical care for exposed health workers; death benefits payments to families of exposed health
  workers; and recruitment and deployment of expatriate health workers.

  Component 3: Provision of Food and Basic Supplies to Quarantined Populations and EVD Affected
  Households (Appraisal: US$ 22.0 million; AF: US$ 6.0 million; Actual: US$ 29.0 million): This component
  aimed to improve access to food and other basic supplies for EVD-affected households in the quarantined
  areas and other "hot zones". Activities included: delivery of food (enhanced general food ration) to affected
  households, cooked meals at hospitals and referral centers through local partners, and general food
  distribution.

  At the time of Additional Financing in November 2014, the following components were added:

  Component 4: Provision of Essential Public Services (AF: US$ 25.0 million; Actual: US$ 25.0 million): This
  component aimed to provide flexible funding (sub-grants) which could be used to provide public and other
  support services to EVD-affected communities. Each government would choose from the following social
  priorities: provision of safety nets, orphanage care, support to female-headed households, reopening of
  schools, and seed and fertilizer supply to affected farmers.

  Component 5: Pre-Investment Assessment of New Ebola Therapies, Diagnostics and Vaccines (AF: US$
  3.0 million; Actual: US$ 3.0 million): This component aimed to support rapid assessment and planning on
  EVD preparedness. Activities included: 6–10-week rapid assessment and planning on new EVD therapies,
  diagnostics, and vaccines, and establishment of a Regional Network of Institutes of Public Health. The
  component was also designed to finance emerging options to address health system gaps; and to facilitate
  public-private partnerships, market-guarantees, and indemnities.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project cost

        The estimated project cost at appraisal was US$ 190.0 million.
        Additional Financing was approved in November 2014, in the amount of US$ 285.0 million.
        The revised project cost was US$ 387.2 million, of which US$ 372.3 million disbursed.

  Financing

        The project was financed by multiple IDA Grants: Guinea: US$ 97.0 million; Liberia: US$ 167.0
         million; and Sierra Leone: US$ 126.0 million.
        The project supported retroactive financing, according to BP/OP 10.0 (Projects in Situations of
         Urgent Need of Assistance), to allow retroactive financing up to 40 percent of the grant amount.

  Borrower contribution

        There was no planned Borrower contribution.

  Dates

        September 16, 2014: Project approval.
                                                                                                   Page 3 of 14
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



                          September 19, 2014: Project effectiveness.
                          November 2014: Additional Financing in the amount of US$ 285.0 million was approved to scale up
                             the emergency response.
                            March 23, 2015: Mid-term review.
                            December 8, 2016: Project restructuring. The PDO was revised to reflect the shift from emergency
                             to recovery response. New activities were added to strengthen national and regional capacity to
                             prevent and mitigate future outbreaks. The results framework was revised such that several PDO
                             indicators were moved to intermediate indicators and one other was deleted. The closing date was
                             extended from December 2016 to December 2019 (Guinea), December 2020 (Sierra Leone), and
                             March 2021 (Liberia).
                            April 2019: Project restructuring. The results framework was revised to refine definitions and targets.
                            December 31, 2023: Project closing.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
West Africa faced its first outbreak of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in 2014, the largest and most
persistent outbreak since the virus was first identified in 1976. Given the high mortality rate and the risk
of rapid spreading to neighboring countries, an immediate emergency response was warranted, led by the
World Health Organization. In particular, the countries of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone were highly
vulnerable to the outbreak given high poverty and weak health service delivery systems, as well as under-
resourced and weak capacity of the public sector to respond. There was also high exposure within
communities due to household care and customary burial procedures, exacerbated by mistrust and
miscommunication among the population. Health care workers were also being infected due to inadequate
infection control measures. Lastly, the above were contributing to food insecurity in the affected areas due
to restricted movement of goods and people.

Other basic health sector indicators were also weak due to limited sector capacity and resources. Life
expectancy, maternal mortality, and under-five mortality rates were among the lowest in the world for all
three project countries. The number of doctors per capita was below the average for low-income countries.

The project objectives were strongly aligned with the WHO-led Ebola Response Roadmap and each
countries' National Response Plans, in coordination with other international agencies. As articulated in the
PAD (page 10), in addition to Ebola-focused interventions, the project aimed to initiate a series of
coordinated investments to boost the essential public health systems and service delivery capacity. The
project objectives were also consistent with the Bank country strategies for all three countries, within the
overall pillars of strengthening human capital, although the specific challenge of the EVD outbreak is not
explicitly mentioned or included in indicators.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To contribute in the short-term to the control of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreak in Guinea, Liberia,
               and Sierra Leone.

               Rationale
               The theory of change was sound. At the onset of the EVD outbreak, person-to-person transmission of the
               virus was high, with patients and staff being equally infected. This was in large part due to the very low
               availability of personal protective equipment to protect healthcare workers and patients as they were being
               treated; low contact-tracing; limited community knowledge on the best ways to effectively control the
               virus; stigmatization of the sick and their families; and burial traditions that required mourners to have direct
               contact with the deceased. The project provided resources to implement several activities to address these
               challenges, such as provision of needed supplies and training. Project funds supported implementation of the
               "Ebola Response Roadmap" developed by WHO. As noted in the PAD (page 36), given the emerging nature
               of the outbreak, the project design took a more programmatic approach, with thematic areas and cost items
               identified but not explicitly earmarked. Implementation was largely contracted out to UN agencies.

               Outputs

                     Provision of infection prevention control (IPC) and personal protective equipment (PPE) materials
                        such as disinfectants, masks, gloves, tents, and body bags.
                       Training of 44,887 health workers on IPC and Ebola response (target: 30,000). The original indicator
                        was "Percentage of trained health workers with knowledge of Ebola and IPC" but this was revised as
                        the methodology or process for measuring that indicator was never determined.
                       Supervised burials with dedicated expert burial teams.
                       Case diagnosis by WHO-recognized laboratory.
                       Training on and implementation of contact tracing and monitoring.
                       Information and education campaigns among general public with accurate information on the Ebola
                        outbreak and measures to reduce the risk of exposure, promote full community engagement in contact
                        tracing and risk mitigation. 55,136 community health and social mobilization workers were deployed
                        for door-to-door communication and case identification in target areas (target: 7,800).
                       Hazard payments to 42,762 health workers (target: 18,000).
                       Deployment of 740 expatriate health workers (target: 725).

               Outcomes

               (Note: these indicators were monitored until 2016, at which point the outbreak was declared over.)

                     100% of Ebola treatment centers and referral centers had at least two weeks' needs of PPEs and
                        other required IPC supplies available, at any given time. This surpassed the target of 80%.


                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




        100% of registered contacts were followed up (during the mandated period) to detect new EVD cases.
         This achieved the target of 100%.

By the end of 2016, the EVD outbreak was contained in all three project countries. As reported in the ICR
(page 13), there was a 64 percent, 70 percent, and 47 percent drop in the number of new cases in Liberia,
Guinea, and Sierra Leone, respectively, between October and November 2014 when the initial funds
(US$105 million) were fully disbursed, and implementation of activities was at its peak.

Achievement is rated High due to strong evidence of impact, through control of the EVD outbreak, including
surpassing of targets.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To contribute in the short-term to the availability of selected essential health services in Guinea, Liberia, and
Sierra Leone.

Rationale
The theory of change was overall sound. The loss of health workers to EVD and other disruptions in the
health systems in the three countries led to an increase in the deaths and disabilities due to the EVD and
non-EVD diseases and conditions (i.e. reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health, and
nutrition services). In addition, patients had stopped going to health facilities due to fear of contracting EVD
and mistrust of healthcare workers. The planned activities to provide essential health supplies, increase the
number of health workers, and rehabilitate health centers were likely to lead to the intended outcome.

Outputs

In addition to the outputs reported above:

        Rehabilitation of 200 health centers to enhance implementation of IPC (target: 125).
        Construction of Redemption Hospital (Liberia) Phase 1, which was started in August 2018 with
         physical construction reaching 65% completion by project closing. According to the ICR (page 14), this
         represented the full scope of works that was planned under this operation, as the remaining
         construction, equipping, and operationalization of the hospital was to be financed from another Bank
         project (Institutional Foundations to Improve Services for Health (IFISH) project (P169641)).
        Provision of essential drugs to 1,900 health facilities (target: 804).
        Long term training in clinical medicine, nursing and midwifery, as well as a residency program (Liberia)
         for doctors.

Outcomes




                                                                                                     Page 6 of 14
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




        Over 6.9 million people received essential health, nutrition and population services (target: 2.5 million).
         This included 3.9 million children immunized (target: 1.5 million), and 2.4 million deliveries attended by
         skilled health personnel (target: 24,000).

The ICR (page 13) stated that by project closing, the provision of essential health services had been restored
to pre-EVD levels and sustained in the three countries. Also, (ICR, page 14) the number of doctors, nurses,
and midwives per 1,000 people in the three countries increased.

Achievement is rated High due to strong evidence of impact through delivery of essential health services,
including surpassing of targets.



Rating
High


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To mitigate the socio-economic impact of EVD in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

Rationale
The theory of change was overall sound. The EVD outbreak had disrupted trade (closing of borders and
transportation access points) and potentially [SH1] agricultural activities, which constitute the main source of
livelihood in these countries. Government containment measures had also included cordoning off of large
geographic areas, roadblocks, and other movement restrictions (e.g., banning of large gatherings such as
markets). The planned project activities to deliver food and other basic supplies to quarantined or hard to
access areas were likely to lead to the intended outcome.

Outputs

        Delivery of 18,988 metric tons of food (enhanced general food rations) (target: 22,900). The food was
         either directly provided by WFP to local health partners or through General Food Distribution blanket
         approach providing take-home dry rations.
        Provision of cash transfers to 100% of beneficiary households.

Outcomes

        766,170 individuals received food and other basic supplies (target: 544,000). This achieved the target
         of 140,000 in Liberia; 135,000 in Guinea; and 120,000 in Sierra Leone.

Achievement is rated Substantial due to effective implementation of mitigation activities.



Rating
Substantial


                                                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy is rated High due to High achievement of the first two objectives and Substantial achievement
                            of the third objective.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            High



    5. Efficiency
   At appraisal (PAD, Annex 10), the economic analysis was primarily a justification of the Bank's intervention,
   namely the significant economic impact of the EVD outbreak on the countries' economies and daily lives of the
   impacted individuals (human capital loss, food insecurity, economic livelihoods). Longer-term impacts due to the
   disruption to economic activity was also noted. No quantitative analysis was provided.

   At completion (ICR, Annex 4), a cost-benefit analysis was conducted based on actual project costs for
   interventions. The analysis identified the primary benefit as the reduction in number of EVD-related cases and
   deaths. Disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) were used to measure the burden of disease that was decreased
   due to project interventions. The project was estimated to have averted 4,329,099 DALYs across the three
   countries. Using the human capital method, total project benefits were then calculated by multiplying each DALY
   averted by US$2,114 (averaging 3 X GDP per capita (2015 US$) across the three countries). The net present
   value (NPV) of the project investment was US$7.8 billion and the benefit to cost ratio was estimated at 22:1.
   From a cost-effectiveness approach, the estimated cost of US$96 per DALY averted is significantly lower than
   the recommended cost-effectiveness thresholds for low-income countries and below the average GDP per
   capita (constant 2015 US$) over the period 2014-2022 for each of the three countries. In Guinea, the cost per
   DALY averted was US$98 (11 percent of the average GDP per capita); in Liberia it was US$75 (11 percent of
   the average GDP per capita); and in Sierra Leone it was US$154 (24 percent of the average GDP per capita).

   Due to the emergency nature of the operation, the project was prepared, approved, and became effective in a
   very short period. Project preparation was 28 days, followed three days later by project effectiveness. The first
   disbursement was made nine days after project approval and the original financing amount of US$105 million
   was fully disbursed in two months. On November 18, 2014, additional financing of US$285 million was rapidly
   approved.

   Regarding implementation efficiency, the majority of the project funds were channeled through UN agencies
   (and some local and international NGOs) who were able to facilitate rapid implementation due to existing
   capacity and experience. The retroactive financing arrangements also facilitate immediate provision of the first
   substantial consignment of protective gears, essential medicines, and food items in the three countries. This
   emergency phase of the project lasted approximately one year of the total nine-year project period. The
   recovery phase was initially expected to take three to five years due to severe capacity constraints and further
   deterioration of the health system due to EVD. However, this phase was further extended due to additional time

                                                                                                                             Page 8 of 14
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



needed to complete activities, mostly notably the construction of the hospital in Liberia. There were delays in the
construction of the hospital NRH due to disagreements on the scope of work between the contractor and the
supervision firm and COVID-19 (2020-2021) containment measures such as workforce streamlining and
restriction of movements and limited availability of construction materials. The contract for the supervision firm
was not renewed when it expired in January 2021 and therefore construction was suspended for two years
under a new supervising firm and contractor.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                                Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                      0
 Appraisal                                                  0
                                                                                       Not Applicable
                                                                                      0
 ICR Estimate                                               0
                                                                                       Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

Relevance of objectives is rated High due to strong alignment with country conditions and the global health
response to the Ebola outbreak. Efficacy is rated High due to high achievement of the aggregated objectives.
Efficiency is rated Substantial due to high cost-effectiveness with moderate shortcomings in implementation
efficiency . The above findings are consistent with a Highly Satisfactory outcome rating.


a. Outcome Rating
   Highly Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The project contributed to institutional capacity development to respond to epidemic outbreaks. This included
establishing institutional arrangements in Guinea, such as the National Agency for Health Security which
oversees and coordinates epidemic preparedness and response activities in the country. Health centers and
staff have been strengthened for both disease surveillance and essential health service provision. This
included EVD screening which was incorporated into health screening programs. It is understood that the
threat of wildlife transmission of EVD persists, but the capacities that were enhanced under the project



                                                                                                      Page 9 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



augmented the likelihood of prompt and effective responses to potential new outbreaks, and would contribute
to diminishing the risk to development outcome.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank facilitated a necessary and timely response to the EVD outbreak by accessing funds through
  the Crisis Response Window. The project was prepared and became effective very rapidly due to the
  emergency nature of the project. Disbursement was also rapid to ensure immediate and effective
  response to the outbreak. Overall implementation risk for the project was assessed as High due to the
  low capacity of health systems, the regional nature of the outbreak, the accompanying food and nutrition
  crisis, and lack of experience in managing EVD in the region. To mitigate the high implementation risk,
  the task team designed the project to maximize partnerships with UN agencies (FAO, UNDP, UNFPA,
  UNICEF, UNOPS, WFP and WHO) and draw upon their technical expertise. Additional local and
  international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) were contracted to implement activities including
  the Clinton Health Access Initiative, John Snow Incorporated, Boston Children's Health International, and
  an academic institution (Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai).

  Given the rapidly evolving nature of the outbreak, project preparation documents also noted the likely
  need for additional funds and therefore proposals for additional support would be developed. In this
  way, the Bank team ensured flexibility and adaptability in the project design. Monitoring and evaluation
  arrangements were appropriate and measurable. Fiduciary arrangements were also appropriate, taken
  into account the weak capacity of the recipient countries.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Highly Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The project’s supervision team provided regular implementation support. Supervision missions were
 carried out every six months. Fiduciary and other subject matter technical specialists were part of the
 supervision missions to ensure that all the technical and operational aspects of the project were adequately
 implemented. The Additional Financing, project restructurings, and Mid-term Review were well utilized to
 make project adjustments and ensure continued impact even after the crisis had passed. This included
 numerous revisions to the results framework and indicators to enhance measurability, including as the
 project shifted from emergency to recovery phase.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory


                                                                                                  Page 10 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The results framework was appropriate given the emergency nature of the operation. The key project
 indicators and intermediate outcome indicators were measurable and relevant, with data collection
 arrangements also identified. Some of the baselines were not available and data were to be collected as
 project implementation progressed (ICR, p. 25).



b. M&E Implementation
  The project regularly collected data from the three participating countries and the UN technical
  agencies. The results framework was revised on numerous occasions to enhance measurability, to
  ensure consistency with data sources, and to align with adjustments to the project scope. For example,
  one PDO indicator was added while targets were increased for existing indicators.



c. M&E Utilization
  As noted in the ICR (page 26), data from the M&E system were used to inform project management and
  decision making, particularly during the early stages of the project when EVD outbreak data was in high
  demand from stakeholders. Stakeholders at national and sub-national levels routinely sought and used
  the data from the M&E system for surveillance and contact tracing as well as to make key decisions
  such as identifying areas for increased project support for food and pharmaceuticals supplies, and
  training and distribution of health workers.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   The project was classified as an Environmental Category "B" project. The safeguard policy on
   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) pertaining to health care waste management was triggered. The
   project developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and environmental
   screenings were carried out to meet safeguards requirements. The Overall Safeguards Rating was
   Moderately Satisfactory in the last ISR, as recorded in the operations portal.

   The safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) was triggered during the December 2016
   restructuring due to the construction of the hospital NRH in Liberia. This was due to the need to acquire

                                                                                                Page 11 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



   land from settlers for the construction, affecting the livelihoods of 88 people. An Abbreviated Resettlement
   Action Plan was developed, and this was cleared by the World Bank in November 2016. The anticipated
   negative impacts of resettlement arising from the project were loss of unoccupied, unfinished, and
   completed structures of project-affected persons. The ICR (page 26) reported that all 88 project-affected
   persons were fully compensated with no outstanding obligations to any party before the construction of the
   hospital commenced. Out of the total of 19 ISRs, two ISRs (ISR 15 and 16) rated overall safeguard
   compliance Moderately Unsatisfactory with the rest rating it above the line (Satisfactory or Moderately
   Satisfactory).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial management: At appraisal, a financial management assessment was carried out in all three
   countries, including for the UN agencies, which determined that financial management arrangements were
   adequate. Sierra Leone utilized a fiduciary agent for the initial project period, while Guinea hired additional
   experienced staff. According to the ICR (page 27), interim financial reports and audits were submitted in a
   timely and satisfactory manner, with no qualifications reported. Out of the total of 19 ISRs, one ISR (ISR
   12) rated financial management Moderately Unsatisfactory with the rest rating it above the line
   (Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory).

   Procurement: There were no problems reported in procurement performance, with the following
   exceptions: The contract for the initial contractor for the hospital in Liberia was terminated while the
   contract for the initial supervision firm expired and was not renewed. A new contractor and supervision firm
   were hired after a two-year delay to complete the construction works. In Sierra Leone, there were several
   delays in the procurement of goods and services for the project due to, among others, inadequate capacity
   to write quality product specifications, and slow pace in forming bid evaluation teams and their
   functionality. All 19 ISRs rated procurement above the line (Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory).




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   ---

11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Highly Satisfactory    Highly Satisfactory
                                                                                  Note: While the rating summary
                                                                                  in the ICR on p. iv did rate
Bank Performance                Satisfactory           Satisfactory
                                                                                  overall Bank Performance as
                                                                                  Satisfactory, The ICR on ( p. 28)

                                                                                                     Page 12 of 14
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



                                                                                   rated overall Bank Performance
                                                                                   as Highly Satisfactory, based on
                                                                                   a Highly Satisfactory Quality-at-
                                                                                   Entry and a Satisfactory Quality
                                                                                   of Supervision. This ICRR had
                                                                                   the same sub-ratings, but since
                                                                                   these are in the same range, the
                                                                                   lower of the two sub-ratings
                                                                                   determines the overall Bank
                                                                                   Performance rating as per the
                                                                                   IEG/OPCS harmonized
                                                                                   guidelines.
Quality of M&E                    Substantial           Substantial

Quality of ICR                    ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

Lessons drawn from the ICR (pages 28-29), adapted by IEG:

        Strong cooperation with governments and development agencies can facilitate
         implementation to lead to immediate impact. In the case of this project, aspects of the project
         design (retroactive financing, partner agency implementation, procurement arrangements)
         led to rapid disbursement and implementation of critical infection prevention and control
         measures.
        In health crises that affect neighboring countries, it can be operationally more efficient to
         prepare and implement a regional project rather than multiple individual country projects. In
         the case of this project, the EVD outbreak affected countries with shared borders and
         interrelated communities. With similar project interventions and the need to ensure cross-
         border cooperation, project preparation and project supervision were more efficiently carried
         out as a single operation.
        The dual approach of responding to the immediate crisis and also post-epidemic recovery
         efforts can capitalize on the opportunity to bolster health systems. In the case of this project,
         the efforts to restore health services following the end of the EVD outbreak helped to prevent
         re-emergence of the disease, better prepare health systems in case of future disease
         outbreaks (i.e. COVID-19), and strengthen health systems to be able to provide essential
         health services.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR


                                                                                                      Page 13 of 14
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




The ICR quality was overall substantial. It was consistent with guidelines and concise. The quality of evidence
was strong to verify results achieved. Lessons were informative for regional disease outbreak scenarios,
particularly the critical importance of rapid response. There were some inconsistencies in data figures reported
in Annex 1 and Section B on Efficacy. For example: Annex 1 for Number of health workers trained on IPC and
Ebola reported two different figures in the table: 44,887 and 32,579; Annex 1 for Number of children immunized
reported 2,458,381 and Section B reported 3,933,994; Annex 1 on Number of deliveries attended by skilled
health personnel reported the PDO indicator as 2,553,547, but also an intermediate indicator as 2,458,381. The
ICR was also inconsistent with its different ratings of overall Bank Performance between the Ratings Summary
(ICR, p. iv) and the Justification of Overall Rating of Bank Performance (ICR, p. 28).



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
      Substantial




                                                                                                  Page 14 of 14
