     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



                                                                                 Report Number : ICRR0024403

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Program Name
 P117876                                    UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                     Urban, Resilience and Land


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)              Total Program Cost (USD)
                                                                                             484,036,513.16

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 28-Mar-2013

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                   Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                                     0.00                                  1,434,500.00

 Revised Commitment                                      0.00                                  1,236,579.04

 Actual                                                  0.00                                  1,236,579.04




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Cynthia Nunez-Ollero        Fernando Manibog           Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)




2. Program Context and Development Objectives

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   According to the Financing Agreement (FA, p. 4) and the Program Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 35)
   the Development Objective of this Program for Results (PforR) Support to Municipal Infrastructure
   Development was to enhance the institutional performance of Program local governments (LGs) to improve
   urban service delivery.

   This review will assess the program performance against two sub-objectives:


                                                                                                Page 1 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



         To enhance the institutional performance of program local governments
         To improve urban service delivery by program local governments

   The program originally targeted the following 14 local governments or municipalities Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti,
   Moroto, Mbale, Jinja, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal, Hoima, and Tororo. Additional
   Financing (AF, see below) increased the target to add another eight for a total of 22 local governments.
   Another World Bank-financed program separately focused on the capital Kampala.



b. Were the program objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during
   implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  Yes

  Date of Board Approval
  15-May-2018

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   The following Results Areas (RA) correspond to the program components:

         RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery – (US$126 million at appraisal, US$106.1 million actual)
          This component was to finance the engineering design, preparation of bidding documents, and
          supervision of infrastructure investments. This component was also to finance municipal
          development grants to finance eligible priority investments included in the target local governments’
          Infrastructure Action Plans. Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) 1, 2, and 3 were to provide
          evidence of achieving this RA (see Section 3 on the Relevance of DLIs below).
         RA 2 – Enhanced capacity of local governments and the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and
          Urban Development (MOLHUD) in urban development and management (US$16 million at
          appraisal, AF increased this to US$18 million, US$14.8 million actual) This component was to
          finance training, technical assistance, and equipment to strengthen the institutional capacities of the
          central agency, MOLHUD and participating local governments. This component was to finance
          municipal capacity building grants (MCBGs) to target local governments according to prioritized
          activities included in the local governments’ Capacity Building Plans (CBPs). DLIs 4 and 6 were to
          provide evidence of achieving this RA (see Section 3 on the Relevance of DLIs below).
         RA 3 – Central government strengthened municipal capacity – (US$18 million at appraisal, AF
          increased this to US$37 million, US$17.4 million actual) This component was to finance annual
          MOLHUD capacity building activities for target municipalities to strengthen their technical and
          management capacities to implement, coordinate, and manage their respective program-financed
          activities. DLIs 5 and 7 were to provide evidence of achieving this RA (see Section 3 on the
          Relevance of DLIs below). AF (see below) replaced this DLI 7 with a new DLI 7 to support RA 4
          below.

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



        RA 4 – Sub-window for refugees and host communities (US$0 million at appraisal, AF increased
         this to US$60 million, the ICR did not report actual disbursements but the Operations Portal reported
         US$50.2 million actual) This component was to finance MOLHUD support to refugees and host
         communities in the planning and implementation of land tenure activities This component was also
         to finance small-scale infrastructure investments such as auxiliary infrastructures to roads, solid
         waste management, drainage improvements, and other local urban infrastructure. The AF added
         eight Refugee Hosing Districts (RHDs), to bring the total target local governments to 33. Three more
         districts were carved out of these eight, bringing the total of refugee hosting districts (RHDs) to 11
         and the total number of local governments to 33. The RHDs were added due to the influx of
         refugees to these communities with urban characteristics. The new DLI 7 and DLI 8 were to provide
         evidence of achieving this RA (see Section on the Relevance of DLIs below).



e. Comments on Program Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Program Cost: The original total program cost was US$150 million. Additional Financing (AF) of US$360
  million (US$335 million in credit and US$25 million in grant) resulted in a revised total program cost of
  US$560 million. This consisted of US$510 million from the World Bank ($485 million in a credit and US$25
  million in grants) and US$50 million from the government. The credit disbursed US$459 million while the
  grant disbursed US$24 million for a total of US$483 million. The balance was cancelled.

  Financing: The International Development Association (IDA) financed a credit, and the IDA-18 Host
  Community and Refugee Sub-Window administered by the World Bank provided an additional grant.

  Borrower Contribution: The government originally committed to contribute US$10 million. At AF, the
  government increased this with another US$40 million for a total of US$50 million. The government
  disbursed US$52.1 million. The government increased its contribution by US$2.1 million to meet the
  increased scope of the AF (see Dates below).

  Dates: The Board approved this Program for Results (P4R) on March 27, 2013. The program was made
  effective on September 4, 2013. The Mid Term Review (MTR) was conducted on May 18, 2016. The
  program was to originally close on December 31, 2018. Additional Financing (AF) and two level 2
  restructurings extended the closing date to June 30, 2024, or 66 more months.

        In May 2018, the World Bank approved Additional Financing (AF) of US$360 million, consisting of
         US$335 million in credit and US$25 million in grant. The IDA-18 Regional Sub-Window for Refugees
         and Host Communities provided a separate grant of US$60 million. The AF extended the Program
         by five years or 60 months to December 31, 2023. The PDO remained unchanged. The AF added a
         new Results Area (4) to support to refugees and host communities. The government adopted a new
         national Annual Performance Assessment (APA) system to assess local government performance
         against program minimum conditions: Thus, DLIs 1-5 were revised to refer to the use of the APA
         system.
               o From the original DLI 2: Local governments achieved institutional performance as scored in
                 the APA to: “Program local governments strengthened their institutional performance in
                 seven thematic areas as scored in the APA;”
               o From the original DLI 3: Municipal local governments delivered local infrastructure using
                 program funds per their annual action plans; to “Program local governments implemented


                                                                                                  Page 3 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



                   their Infrastructure Action Plans, value for money, and maintenance of key infrastructure as
                   scored by the APA;”
                o From the original DLI 4: Municipal local governments built local capacity using program
                   funds; to “Program local governments implemented their Institutional Strengthening Plans
                   (ISPs), using program financing as scored by APA;”
                o From the original DLI 5: Executed annual Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Urban
                   Development (MOLHUD) capacity building activities for the PforR municipalities to
                   “MOLHUD executed Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs) for program local governments,
                   including physical planning and valuation services;”
                o Dropped the original DLI 7: Municipalities with functional Integrated Financial Management
                   System (IFMS) system in place because all local governments were now required to use
                   IFMIS.
         Introduced two new DLIs related to financing RA 4 – Sub-window for refugees and host
          communities:
                o A new DLI 7, where MOLHUD implemented physical planning, and land tenure security in
                   program local governments hosting refugees.
                o A new DLI 8, where local governments implemented the following urban infrastructure
                   investments in target local governments hosting refugees to strengthen peaceful coexistence
                   between host communities and refugees: (i) all season district and community access roads,
                   and (ii) playgrounds, resource centers, markets, and leisure parks.
         In December 2023 to extend the closing date by six months, from December 31, 2023, to June 30,
          2024. Delays in reaching AF effectiveness and COVID-19 delayed the implementation of contracted
          activities.
         In June 2024 to modify the FA to withdraw funds allocated under DLIs 1–4 and DLI 8 because the
          fifth APA did not allow these expenditures; reallocate US$6.97 million (or SDR 5.3 million) from DLIs
          2–4 to DLI 1: and reallocate US$2.5 million (or SDR 1.9 million) from DLI 7 to DLI 8 because
          activities that triggered the achievement of DLI 7 underperformed.

   A split rating of the outcome will not be undertaken. The AF raised the program’s ambition. The target
   program local governments increased from 14 to 22. DLIs were refined and two new ones added to capture
   the achievements of the expanded scope. Targets of output and outcome indicators increased.




3. Relevance   TBL




a. Relevance of Objectives   New




  Rationale
  Context: This program originally targeted 14 local governments, excluding the capital Kampala because they
  were mature, had the potential of being cities, were rapidly growing, and needed LGMSD financing for their
  infrastructure investment needs. In addition, these cities achieved regional balance (PAD, Annex 1). The
  World Bank and other development partners financed a separate operation for Kampala. The central
  government transferred earmarked and non-earmarked funds to local governments to meet their burgeoning
  development needs. Earmarked intergovernmental fiscal transfers were to finance specifically mandated
  services delivered by the local government such as health, safety, and housing. Non-earmarked fiscal

                                                                                                  Page 4 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



transfers fell under the purview of the Local Government Development Grants (LGDG) under the existing
Local Government Management and Service Delivery (LGMSD) Program. PforR resources were added to
LGDG to finance two additional grants: first, the Municipal Development Grant (MDG) for investments and
second, the Municipal Capacity Building Grant (MCBG).

Country Plans: The PDO was consistent with the government’s Third National Development Plan (NDP III,
and the Uganda Vision 2040, where the government aimed to grow the economy 10-fold in the next 15
years. The plan’s theme of “Sustainable Industrialization for Inclusive Growth, Employment, and Wealth
Creation” would support the government’s goal to achieve higher household incomes, full monetization of the
economy, and employment for sustainable socio-economic transformation. The PDO contributed to two of
the plan’s five strategic objectives: (i) build and maintain strategic sustainable infrastructure in transport,
housing, energy, water, industry and information, communication, and technology (ICT); and (ii) strengthen
good governance and security. The government developed its Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Program
(IFTRP) to address issues in the adequacy, equity and management of infrastructure and services delivered
at the local level as part of its inclusive growth strategy.

Alignment with the World Bank Country Strategy: The PDO was aligned with the World Bank’s Country
Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period FY16-FY21, the country strategy that remained in effect at
closing. Preparations for a new CPF to support Uganda’s vision to transform from a peasant economy to a
modern and prosperous country by 2040 is underway. The World Bank’s 2021 Systematic Country
Diagnostics (SCD) showed declining funding levels and increasing disparities in financing local government
services across the country. This PforR financing instrument, used for the first time in Uganda, was to
address these development problems by strengthening the intergovernmental transfer architecture and using
it to enhance the capacity of the target municipalities to deliver services to its constituents and at the same
time enhance the central government’s capacity to use these transfers to meet local infrastructure investment
needs of local governments. The PDO was consistent with Objective 6 – Improved Access to Urban Services
under Strategic Focus Area C: Boosting inclusive growth in urban areas. The CPF’s Annex 1 Results Matrix
cited this program as contributing to achieving the Strategic Objective 2 – Enhance public Infrastructure by
improving the stock and quality of economic infrastructure noting its contributions under 2.1: Increased
access to electricity; 2.3: Increased access to quality water and sanitation services; and 2.4: Improved
management and delivery of urban services.

World Bank Previous Sector and Country Experience: The World Bank assisted Uganda in the Kampala
Institutional and Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP), an APL that closed on December 31, 2013. A
second phase of this APL (KIIDP II) was anticipated following a new governance structure for the capital city
(the Kampala Capital City Authority or KCCA). This was the first PforR in the country. As of October 2024, 17
national projects worth US$4.2 billion comprise the World Bank’s portfolio of IDA-financed credits and grants
in Uganda. Assistance in the urban sector was 13 percent of this portfolio. This portfolio also includes
US$666 million (92% in grants) from the Window for Host Communities and Refugees focused on supporting
the implementation of Uganda’s integrative refugee policies. This is development support for host
communities and refugees (from the World Bank website on Uganda).

Country Implementation Capacity and Choice of PforR Instrument: The PforR was an appropriate
instrument to address the challenges faced by a nascent intergovernmental fiscal transfer system that had (i)
limited autonomy for local expenditures; (ii) insufficient funding; (iii) insufficient local government capacity;
and (iv) weak assessment and allocation system. The PforR designed incentives that would strengthen the
system by building the capacity at both central and local levels to deliver urban services. The significant
advantage of the PforR instrument was its use of established institutions and processes. In this case, PforR

                                                                                                    Page 5 of 27
                              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                        Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                              UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



                       resources was part of the LGMSD and disbursed accordingly to assist target municipalities in enhancing their
                       capacities in delivering services such as conducting competitive procurement and injecting value for money
                       practices in infrastructure investments. The PforR instrument fosters sustainability because it improves an
                       existing system. The instrument reinforces partnerships among stakeholders. The findings of the technical,
                       fiduciary, social and environmental assessments targeted local governments that had some capacity to plan
                       investments, raise own source revenues and conduct annual audits. The government had features that
                       reflected capacity to implement the program. These included an existing intergovernmental fiscal transfer
                       system, Municipal Urban Forums in some cities that promote transparency, accountability and participation
                       and an agency – the MOLHUD – to manage the country’s urban development delivered by local
                       governments and would be the main interlocutor for the program, The program intended to build upon and
                       enhance these capacities. The PDO was pitched at an appropriate level since the CPF acknowledged the
                       nascent system of intergovernmental transfers and the newly adopted Annual Performance Assessment
                       (APA) to guide local governments transfers.

                       Overall, the relevance of the PDO is rated High. The PDO was aligned to both the country plans and the
                       objectives of the World Bank Group partnership with the country. The choice of instrument was appropriate in
                       terms of (i) enhancing the capacity of the target municipalities to deliver its mandated services using the
                       intergovernmental transfer architecture and (ii) pursuing the PDO’s intermediate outcome level of addressing
                       local urban development challenges.


       Rating Relevance TBL




                       Rating
                       High


b. Relevance of DLIs                           New




DLI RELEVANCE TBL




                DLI 1
                DLI
                Municipal LGs have met Program minimum conditions in the annual assessment.

                Rationale
                Relevance of DLIs. The following Disbursement Linked indicators (DLIs 1, 2, and 3) targeted local
                government capacity improvements to deliver infrastructure services and achieve the objective of enhancing
                the institutional performance of program local governments. The incentives under this DLI, together with DLIs
                2,3, and 4 would credibly improve local institutional performance, achieving targets under RA 1 – improve
                urban service delivery and contribute to achieving the PDO. The minimum conditions such as having staff,
                town clerks as accountants, procurement systems in place, and conducting the planning and prioritization of
                investments using participatory processes, signal improvements in capacity. This DLI was specific,
                measurable, achievable, and timebound although unclear how many of the minimum conditions were to be
                met. The DLI verification protocol was adequate, sufficiently sound, but questioned sustainability, because the
                assessment applied only to the participant, not all, local governments. Restructuring clarified these
                shortcomings (see DLI 1 Revision below).




                                                                                                                      Page 6 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



The relevance of this DLI 1 is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings. The DLI is credible and
sufficiently measures that RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery would be achieved and contribute to the
higher level PDO.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 1 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Program local governments met all program minimum conditions (PMCs) as assessed by the Annual
Performance Assessment (APA).

Revised Rationale
Revised DLI 1 - This revision clarified two things to address the shortcomings raised above. – first, that the
government has adopted the APA to determine fiscal transfers across all local governments Second, that all
the minimum performance conditions were to be met.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial. This DLI is credible and accurate. DLI directly measures the
evidence to support results under RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery that would indicate achievement of
the PDO.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 2
DLI
Municipal LGs achieved institutional performance as scored in the annual performance assessment.

Rationale
This DLI also contributed to the overall performance and results of RA 1 and contributed to achieving the
PDO. An independent assessment scored local government performance. This DLI was relevant, achievable,
and timebound. The scores measured the progression in improvements. The targets were strategic and
sufficient to drive the reform process forward. However, the score did not specify which capacity was to be
improved and may lead to misattribution. This shortcoming was corrected at AF (see below). This DLI,
combined with DLIs 1 above and 3 and 4 below formed the coherent framework of the local government
action in improving capacity under RA 1 to achieve the PDO. The same verification protocol noted above
applied to this DLI, which was improved in the revised DLI below.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. This DLI is credible and accurate
while directly measuring the evidence to support the results under RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery
that would indicate achievement of the PDO.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




Rating
Substantial

DLI 2 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Program local governments strengthened their institutional performance in seven thematic areas as scored in
the APA.

Revised Rationale
This DLI was revised to improve two things – first, the use of the APA as the institutional instrument to
determine relevant transfers to all local governments. Second the seven specific thematic areas to be
scored– (i) links between municipal physical plan, five-year development plan, annual budget; (ii) OSR
generation; (iii) procurement; (iv) financial management; (v) program execution and implementation (budget
execution); (vi) monitoring, enhanced accountability, transparency, and communication; and (vii)
environmental and social safeguards compliance.

The relevance of this revised DLI is rated Substantial. The DLI is credible, was made more accurate, and
was a better measure of the results to be achieved under RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery that in turn
would signal PDO achievement.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 3
DLI
Municipal local governments used program funds to deliver local infrastructure following their annual action
plans.

Rationale
This DLI identified the implementation of investments as a critical incentive for reform to achieve the results
under this RA and contribute to the PDO. The targets and the amount allocated (US$38 million) signaled
adequate resources to meet investment needs. However, which performance reform would lead to the
investment made was not clear. The AF corrected this shortcoming. This DLI was measurable, achievable,
and timebound. The sequence of this DLI, together with DLIs 1,2, and 4, moved implementation forward. This
group of DLIs, 1,2,3, and 4, formed a coherent framework of the local government action to achieve the
results under RA 1 and achieve the PDO.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The DLI is credible and
adequately measures results under RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery –thus indicating achievement of
the PDO.



Rating

                                                                                                  Page 8 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



Substantial

DLI 3 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Program local governments implemented their Infrastructure Action Plans, value for money, and maintenance
of key infrastructure as scored by the APA.

Revised Rationale
This DLI was revised to address the shortcomings noted above and improve two factors – first, to specify the
reform actions that led to implementing investments that was to provide the critical evidence for achieving the
RA and contribute to achieving the PDO. Second, two other factors were identified in the APA to signal a
clear, technically sound, and credible verification protocol where the investments made were supported by
decisions around value for money and having O&M budgets for the investments to be made. The investments
provided the evidence for achieving the PDO.

The relevance of this revised DLI is rated Substantial. The improved DLI is more credible, more accurate,
and better able to measure the results under RA 1 – Improve Urban Service Delivery – that indicate PDO
achievement.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 4
DLI
Municipal local governments built local capacity using program funds.

Rationale
This DLI measured critical actions necessary to achieve the results under RA 1. The DLI signaled that the
reform process was underway. The achievement of DLI milestones indicated improvements in the local
governments’ institutional performance. However, the targets were less than specific since there was no
indicator to associate how capacity improved. This DLI was not specific, measurable, or timebound; and
hence, its relevance could not be assessed. The AF addressed this shortcoming (see below). The DLI was
broadly aligned with achieving the PDO.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The DLI is credible, accurate,
and measures the results under RA 2 – Enhanced capacity of local governments and the Ministry of Lands,
Housing, and Urban Development (MOLHUD) in urban development and management. These measures
were to contribute to achieving the PDO.



Rating
Substantial

DLI 4 REVISION 1

                                                                                                  Page 9 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




Revised DLI
Program local governments used program funds to implement their Institutional Strengthening Plans (ISPs) as
scored by APA.

Revised Rationale
The DLI was revised to address the shortcomings noted above to specify how the capacity was strengthened
using aspects in the plans that signify such improvement. The revised DLI also improved the verification
protocol using the APA. This DLI, together with DLI 6 below was to support the achievement of the results
implemented by the local governments under RA 2. Indicators and targets that were to be achieved by the
central government, together with DLI 6 were to provide the results under RA 2 – Enhanced capacity of local
governments and the Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Urban Development (MOLHUD) in urban development
and management. This DLI supported the achievement of RA 2 and formed a coherent framework consisting
of actions undertaken by the central government on one side and the local governments in the other to
achieve the PDO.

The relevance of this revised DLI is rated Substantial. The DLI is made more credible, more accurate, and
provided the measure to support the results under RA 2 – Enhanced capacity of local governments and the
Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Urban Development (MOLHUD) in urban development and management.
These measures, in turn, were adequate to demonstrate the achievement of the PDO.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 5
DLI
The Ministry of Lands, Housing, and Urban Development (MOLHUD) executed annual capacity building
activities for the program municipalities.

Rationale
DLIs 5, 6, and 7 were to reflect results under RA 3 to be achieved by the central government’s MOLHUD in
strengthening urban management capacity of program local governments.

This DLI was critical to the reform process. This DLI measured the action of the central government to
achieve RA 3 and contribute to achieving the PDO. This DLI provided the central government with targets to
implement its capacity building plan for participating local governments to deliver urban services. This DLI in
combination with the DLI providing direct local government assistance were strategic and supported the
improvements in the intergovernmental fiscal transfer process. However, the DLI did not specify
which capacity was being targeted, or if the entire annual capacity building plan was expected to be
implemented. The AF addressed this shortcoming.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial. Despite moderate shortcomings, the DLI credibly measures
results under RA 3 – Central government strengthened municipal capacity -- and indicate their contribution to
achieving the PDO.




                                                                                                   Page 10 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




Rating
Substantial

DLI 5 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
MOLHUD executed Performance Improvement Plans (PIPs) for program local governments, including physical
planning and valuation services.

Revised Rationale
This revised DLI specified which services – physical planning and valuation services –would satisfy how the
agency implemented their capacity building plan for the local governments. Valuation services are
assessments of the worth of businesses, assets, and properties to inform investment decisions, mergers,
financial reporting, and strategic planning by assessing market trends, competition, historical sales data,
industry benchmarks, and other financial performance metrics. The use of the APA indicated a technically
sound and credible verification protocol. The revised DLI is an improved measure of achieving RA 3 and the
PDO.

The relevance of this revised DLI is rated Substantial. The DLI remains credible, made more accurate, and
specifically measured the results under RA 3 – Central government strengthened municipal capacity and thus
it is a better signal of PDO achievement.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 6
DLI
Local governments with town clerks in place.

Rationale
DLIs 5, 6, and 7 - were to reflect results under RA 3 to be achieved by the central government’s MOLHUD in
strengthening urban management capacity of program local governments.

This DLI measured an action that was initially unclear how critical to achieve the results under RA 3. The PAD
mentioned that Town Clerks, appointed by the central government, served as local government accountants.
This DLI did not specify that hiring a Town Clerk would address this capacity shortcoming. The causal link
between having a town clerk and its contribution to achieving the PDO was assumed because the
counterfactual would be that the local government would not have the capacity to comply with its accounting
obligations. In this case, while no verification protocol was mentioned, it can be considered as a
direct contribution to achieving RA 3 as implemented by the central government.

The relevance of this DLI is rated Substantial. The DLI is a credible and accurate measure of how RA 3 –
Central government strengthened municipal capacity – would be achieved and would contribute to PDO
achievement.



                                                                                                Page 11 of 27
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




Rating
Substantial

DLI 6 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
Unchanged

Revised Rationale
Unchanged.



Revised Rating
Substantial

DLI 7
DLI
Municipalities with functional Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) in place.

Rationale
DLIs 5,6, and 7 were to reflect results achieved under RA 3 by the central government’s MOLHUD in
strengthening urban management capacity of program local governments.

This DLI was to measure and monitor the critical action related to the adoption of the IFMS. This use was to
achieve the results under RA 3 and contribute to achieving the PDO. During implementation, the government
adopted the IFMS for all local governments to use. This DLI was dropped.

The relevance of this DLI in achieving the PDO is not rated.



Rating
Not Rated/Not Applicable

DLI 7 REVISION 1
Revised DLI
MOLHUD implemented the results on physical planning, land tenure security.

Revised Rationale
AF added a new RA 4 – Sub-window for refugees and host communities. DLIs 7 and 8 were added to monitor
the results under RA 4. Both DLIs referred to assistance directed at Refugee Hosting Districts (RHDs).

This DLI measured the strategic action by the central government to initiate reform in how host communities
addressed the needs of an increasing refugee population. However, the DLI did not provide a clear definition
of “implementation.” It was unclear how the DLI targets contributed to achieving the PDO. This DLI did not
mention a verification protocol. It is assumed that the same verification protocol used by the other DLIs is

                                                                                               Page 12 of 27
                            Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                            UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



            used. While the causal link was not explicitly defined, the DLI supported PDO achievement since the results
            would promote peaceful co-existence between refugees and host communities.

            The relevance of this new DLI to achieve results is rated Modest because of a missing link between the
            achievement of the results regarding physical plans and its contribution to peaceful coexistence
            between hosts and refugees.



            Revised Rating
            Modest

            DLI 8
            DLI
            Target local governments implemented the results on planning and infrastructure investments in local
            governments hosting refugees.

            Rationale
            This DLI measured the action to achieve RA 4 and the PDO. Achieving the milestones under both DLI 7 and
            8 helped push the reform regarding the peaceful coexistence between hosts and refugees. However, as in
            DLI 7 above, it was unclear how implementation of the investments was measured to achieve the results of
            RA 4 and contribute to the overall PDO. Implementation provided output targets to satisfy this shortcoming.

            The relevance of this added DLI is rated Substantial. While noting its weakness in terms of accuracy, the DLI
            credibly measures the results under RA 4 – Sub-window for refugees and host communities -- and the
            contribution of these results to achieving the PDO.



            Rating
            Substantial


OVERALL RELEVANCE DLI TBL




            OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING
            Rationale
            There were seven original DLIs to support the achievement of three results areas to support the PDO. The
            overall rating of the relevance of the DLIs is Substantial with moderate shortcomings, with one not rated
            because this was dropped. Most DLIs sufficiently offered incentives to drive the reform process. The DLIs
            strategically complemented the requirements of the overall local government management framework to drive
            institutional reform to achieve the PDO. The achievement of DLIs improved institutional performance. Most
            DLIs were relevant, and achievable within the program period.

            The relevance of the objective is rated High.

            The overall relevance of the DLIs is rated Substantial.


                                                                                                           Page 13 of 27
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




               Rating
               Substantial

               OVERALL RELEVANCE RATING REVISION 1
               Revised Rationale
               One (DLI 7) was replaced after the AF and another one added to support the results under a new RA 4. AF
               added resources to address the rising needs of refugees in host districts and include this level of local
               government in the reform of the intergovernmental fiscal transfers and local capacity improvements to
               achieve the PDO. Restructuring improved the specificity and measures of the DLIs and how these
               contributed to achieving the PDO.

               The overall relevance of the objective remains High.

               The overall relevance of the revised DLIs in bolstering reform and achieving the PDO is rated Substantial.



               Revised Rating
               Substantial



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)
EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To enhance the institutional performance of program local governments. The program originally targeted 14
               of the 22 local governments.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (TOC): At preparation, a Theory of Change (TOC) was not required. A TOC was created
               for the ICR to outline the causal link between inputs, outputs, and expected outcomes. The resources
               (training and technical assistance) were the inputs that would lead to improved capacities of both local and
               central governments in urban service delivery to finance infrastructure investments. These outputs would be
               expected to achieve the intended outcomes of improved urban service delivery in the target local
               governments. However, this outcome of improved local government performance is at an intermediary rather
               than the outcome level of effective delivery of infrastructure services captured in the second PDO below. The
               central government assisted the local governments to address the increasing need for infrastructure services
               through earmarked and unearmarked intergovernmental fiscal transfers. Local governments were to use
               earmarked funds for mandated sector expenditures such as health, education, and salary payments for local
               employees. Local governments were to use non-earmarked, or discretionary funds for investment and
               capacity-building resources. The PforR formed part of the non-earmarked funds. These funds were to be


                                                                                                              Page 14 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



used to achieve the PDO by strengthening the capacity of both the central and local levels in delivering local
infrastructure investments and financing roads, drainage, waste management and streetlighting.

INPUTS: were to be the training and technical assistance to build the capacity of both central and local
governments in urban service delivery and grants to finance infrastructure investments. OUTPUTS: were to
be training programs, action plans, hiring of municipal core staff; increasing own source revenue (OSR); audit
reports; operations and maintenance (O&M) budgets. and an Integrated Financial Management System
(IFMS). Outputs also included municipal roads, economic structures (bus parks, markets, parking lots, etc.),
and garbage collection and disposal systems. OUTCOMES: were to be improved local government
management measured by the average annual performance scores and the rate that local governments
implemented their infrastructure targets based on their annual work plans. The annual performance scores
rated the performance of participating local governments in the following seven thematic areas: (i) links
between municipal physical plan, five-year development plan, and annual budget; (ii) OSR generation; (iii)
procurement; (iv) financial management; (v) program execution and implementation (budget execution); (vi)
monitoring, enhanced accountability, transparency, and communication; and (vii) environmental and
social safeguards sustainability. The following critical assumptions, if realized, were to increase the
probability of achieving the PDO: (i) local governments have the political will to engage in reform; (ii)
infrastructure projects have sufficient time and budget allocations; and (iii) local governments have adequate
capacity for maintaining infrastructure.

Overall, the causal link between the inputs and the outputs was sound. A reasonable link to the expected
outcomes was also established although the outcome indicator itself was at an intermediate rather than
outcome level.

OUTPUTS: The following original targets were exceeded or achieved:

      22 municipalities had qualified core staff (original target 14 municipalities,).
      22 municipalities had clean audit reports for previous year (baseline 8, original target 14).
      17 municipalities spent more than 75 percent of their operations and maintenance (O&M) budget
       (baseline 6, original target 14).
      MOLHUD implemented 91 percent of their Program Action Plan (original target 90 percent).

The following original targets were not achieved:

      12 municipalities had at least 10 percent increase in own source revenues (OSR), baseline 6, original
       target 14).
      The Chief Valuation Officer strengthened 88 percent of its valuation services (original target 100
       percent).
      14 Municipalities had functional IFMS system in place (original target 14 municipalities, achieved).
       During the AF, this indicator was dropped because all municipalities were required to use IFMS.

OUTCOME:

      3.4 million people directly benefited from the program. 1.8 million people (51.8 percent) were female
       (baseline was 1.4 million beneficiaries, 0.7 million (48.9 percent) were female, original target was 3.5
       million beneficiaries, of which 1.8 million (51 percent) were female, targets were substantially
       achieved)

                                                                                                  Page 15 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




      An independent assessment rated the annual performance of participating local governments across
       the seven thematic areas noted under the revised DLI 2 above. They scored an average of 70.72
       percent (baseline 60 percent, original target 90 percent, target not achieved).A high score would
       mean improved practices in the seven thematic areas – e.g.., better link between plans and
       investments, higher OSR mobilized, higher budget execution, improved financial management, and
       higher participation rate among constituents.

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve its objective using original target indicators is rated
Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The TOC showed valid and credible links among the inputs,
outputs, and expected outcomes. One of two outcome indicators was not achieved leading to the moderate
shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The PDO was unchanged.

Revised Rationale
Revised TOC: The TOC was unchanged.

Revised Inputs: expanded the training and infrastructure investments to cover eight additional municipalities
and 11 other refugee hosting districts (RHDs). The government adopted a new Annual Performance
Assessment (APA) for use across all local governments, informed by the lessons from this PforR operation.
Revised Outputs: were to be investments in physical plans and land tenure security, district and community
access roads, and small infrastructure such as playgrounds, resource centers, markets, and leisure parks in
the added RHDs. Revised outputs also increased targets for the original output indicators. Revised
Outcome: increased the target number of beneficiaries. Outcome indicators were not added to reflect the
improved services that benefitted refugees in the RHDs, such as the rate of land titles distributed to refugees,
or participation rate in civic programs where rights and privileges accorded refugees were discussed. These
were asked in the beneficiary survey. However, without targets, the level of achievement could not be
assessed. Subsequent restructurings did not address this shortcoming. A critical assumption was added to
increase the likelihood of achieving the PDO. RHD infrastructure investments were to lead to peaceful
coexistence among host communities and refugees. This would have served as an objective rather than a
critical assumption.

Overall, the revised inputs expanded the ambition of the program. The targets were increased to match the
increased resources. Original outcomes included increased targets.

REVISED OUTPUTS: The following revised targets were achieved:

      22 municipalities had qualified core staff (revised target 22).
      22 municipalities had clean audit reports for previous year (revised target 22).

                                                                                                  Page 16 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



In addition to the outputs that were not achieved under the original Objective 2, the following revised targets
were also not achieved.

      12 municipalities had at least a 10 percent increase in own source revenues (OSR) (revised target
       22).
      17 municipalities spent more than 75 percent of the (O&M) budget (revised target 22).

REVISED OUTCOMES: This was unchanged. No additional outcome indicators that benefited refugees were
identified, monitored, or reported although a Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey (BSS) reported that 60 percent of
respondents participated in meetings and trainings sponsored by the program.

The efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings in the
lack of outcome indicators for interventions directed at the added RHDs.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve urban service delivery by the target local governments.

Rationale
The TOC created for the ICR provided a logical link between the inputs, outputs and expected outcomes.
Local governments would conduct Municipal or City Development Forums to prioritize investments according
to needs expressed by constituents and other stakeholders. These forums addressed transparency, fostered
trust in the government, and promoted accountability. Grants were released to finance core municipal
services such as roads, street lighting, drainage, and solid waste systems.

Inputs: were grants to finance the infrastructure investments contained in local development plans. Outputs:
were completed priority infrastructure investments and core municipal services, such as municipal roads,
urban transport (bus, taxi, and lorry parks and associated market stalls for vendors), urban solid and liquid
waste management, drainage, water, and sewerage extension to peri-urban areas. Outcome: was to be the
implementation rate of the investments against annual work plans. This outcome was at an intermediate level.

Critical Assumptions: The critical assumptions under the first objective remained valid for this objective.

Overall, the TOC established a reasonable causal link between inputs and outputs and expected outcomes.

OUTPUTS: The following original targets were exceeded.

      Rehabilitated or built 208 km of municipal roads (baseline was 78 km, original target was 190 km).
      781,791 tons of garbage were collected from all 22 local governments and disposed (baseline was
       520,000 tons, original target was 696,938 tons).



                                                                                                  Page 17 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




      Built or rehabilitated 10 small infrastructures (bus parks, markets, parking lots, etc.) (baseline 3,
       original target 9).

OUTCOME: Local governments delivered 93.2 percent of targeted local infrastructure investments. Baseline
was 60 percent, original target was 85 percent, target was exceeded.

Overall, the efficacy of the program to achieve this objective is rated Substantial, although the outcome was
set at an intermediate level.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
The objective was unchanged.

Revised Rationale
Revised TOC: This was unchanged.

Revised Inputs: AF increased resources made available to benefit eight additional local governments and 11
RHDs. for a total of 33. Revised Outputs: were to include MOLHUD assistance to RHDs to address their
physical planning needs, land tenure security such as land titles prepared by the Systematic Land
Adjudication and Certification (SLAAC), and completed investments in beautification such as public parks,
playgrounds, urban landscaping, and urban greening. AF also increased targets of original outputs. Revised
outcomes: these were to be the increased number of beneficiaries because of the added local governments.
However, host beneficiaries were not distinguished from refugees. There were no outcome indicators to
reflect how harmonized existence was achieved between the host community and refugees. Beneficiary
surveys did mention favorable outcomes in these areas, but without any targets, the level of achievement
could not be assessed. Revised Critical Assumptions: A fourth was added to the original assumptions - that
RHD infrastructure would foster peaceful coexistence among host communities/refugees. This does not apply
as a critical assumption since if this assumption were realized, it would contribute directly to achieving the
PDO. This assumption is part of the PDO itself.

Overall, the TOC remained valid in linking the revised inputs to the revised outputs and expected outcomes to
achieve the PDO.

Revised OUTPUTS: The following revised targets were exceeded:

      6,565 land titles were prepared through the Systematic Land Adjudication and Certification (SLAAC)
       (target was 5,000). There was no distinction if any of these certificates benefited refugees.
      Constructed 372.70 km year-round district and community access roads (baseline 0, target 285 km).

The following revised targets were achieved or almost achieved:

      11 RHDs prepared physical development plans (baseline 0, target 11)
                                                                                                    Page 18 of 27
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




      Built 42 local infrastructure (such as playgrounds, resource centers, markets, leisure parks) to
       strengthen the interaction and peaceful co-existence between refugees and host communities
       (baseline 0, target 47 structures).

The following revised output target was partially achieved because of delays in completing the roads in
Adjumani District.

      8.8 km of roads were upgraded from gravel to asphalt or sealed surfacing (baseline 0, target 12 km).

Revised OUTCOMES: The following revised targets were exceeded.

      3.1 million people directly benefited from the improved infrastructure (baseline 0, target 2.5 million
       beneficiaries), although it was unclear how many were refugees.
      At least 92 percent of the beneficiaries interviewed indicated satisfaction with the program
       interventions while 99 percent were satisfied with the positive social and economic impact of the
       program.
      According to the Beneficiary Satisfaction Survey (BSS) report for RHDs,
            o 84.4 percent were satisfied that the implementation of the physical development plans was
               aligned with their needs.
            o 98 percent felt the objective of peaceful coexistence and harmonious access to social services
               was achieved.
                     The resource centers empowered the refugees and host communities.
                     Most markets overflow on market days, with stalls owned by both the host communities
                       and refugees. This was not reported as an outcome indicator, hence it had no targets,
                       and was not monitored or reported.
                     Playing fields fostered a harmonious meeting ground.
            o Overall, 9 out of 10 beneficiaries said the program had a visible effect on their communities,
                     positive socioeconomic impacts,
                     new business/income opportunities,
                     reduced transportation costs,
                     improved working conditions in markets, and resource centers.

      No targets or measured achievements were reported against the following reported outcomes.
            o Land titling contributed to reduced land disputes, provided opportunities for women to own
                land, enhanced land tenure security, and strengthened community engagement.
              o Built roads provided previously isolated refugee communities with access to markets and
                enabled the delivery of humanitarian assistance to refugee settlements.

Overall, the efficacy of the project to achieve this objective using revised targets is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings because of the lack of indicators for the outputs that benefited refugees in RHDs.



Revised Rating
Substantial



                                                                                                   Page 19 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)




 OVERALL EFFICACY
 Rationale
 The efficacy of the program to achieve the first objective using the original targets is rated Substantial with
 moderate shortcomings because one of two outcome indicators for institutional capacity improvement was not
 achieved. The efficacy of the program to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial even as
 investment delivery experienced some delays.



 Rating
 Substantial

 OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
 Revised Rationale
 The efficacy of the program to achieve the first objective using the revised outputs and increased target
 outcomes is rated Substantial. The efficacy of the program to achieve the second objective using the added
 outputs and increased outcome target indicators is rated Substantial, with moderate shortcomings due to
 Investment delivery delays and incomplete projects under the AF. There was also a lack of outcome
 indicators for the outputs directed at RHDs beyond beneficiary survey results that, in some cases, were
 reported but without targets to assess the level of achievement. However, evidence points to significant
 enhancement of the institutional capacity of the target local governments and RHDs to deliver the services
 (infrastructure, staffing, and plans).



 Revised Rating
 Substantial


5. Outcome

The overall outcome is rated Satisfactory. The relevance of objectives is rated High. The relevance of the
Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because lack of
specificity in measures. The AF addressed the shortcomings by institutionalizing the APA as an assessment
instrument to rate all local governments and expanded the program’s ambition by increasing the number of
target local governments and the scope to address growing needs of refugees in host communities.
The relevance of these revised DLIs is rated Substantial. The overall efficacy of the program to achieve the first
objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings because of one of two unmet outcome targets. The
efficacy of the program to achieve the second objective is rated Substantial. The revised efficacy of the
program to achieve both objectives using revised targets is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings due
to investment delivery delays and incomplete projects. However, capacity improvements in the target local
governments and RHDs justify an expectation that services would be delivered. The overall outcome is rated
Satisfactory.


    Outcome Rating
                                                                                                   Page 20 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



    Satisfactory


6. Risk to Development Outcome

The following pose risks to the development outcomes:

      Technical and financial risks. There is a substantial risk that the LGs would be inconsistent in O&M
       levels and underinvest, as shown by disrepair of the completed infrastructure due to lack of
       maintenance budgets. Solar lights were vandalized but not repaired, for example. Thus, program
       investments may deteriorate and require costlier replacements.
      Risk of low government commitment. There is a substantial risk that some investments would not
       be completed, e.g., Kabale road’s right of way and compensation issues, increased scope of Mbarara
       and Kitgum projects, and rehabilitation of quarry sites. The government committed to a Post Closure
       Plan (ICR, Annex 4).




7. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
  The Bank team designed this program in response to the urban priorities of the government. The Bank
  team conducted technical assessments of the country’s fiduciary, financial management, governance,
  and urban sector systems to design a results framework that focused on capacity building indicators after
  incorporating LGMSD experience since 2000. The DLIs and targets were appropriate. The team
  designed an M&E framework to support critical disbursements. The choice of a PforR instrument was
  justified by using the existing intergovernmental fiscal architecture, focusing disbursements on
  performance and the strengthening of local government service delivery.

  However, there were shortcomings in M&E aspects. The Bank team acknowledged that targets could
  have been more ambitious (ICR, paragraph 62). There were also shortcomings in the specificity and
  measures of the effectiveness of DLIs as incentives to achieve the PDO. Some of these shortcomings
  were addressed at supervision (see below).

  Overall, the quality of Bank performance at entry is rated Satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The Bank team conducted 23 implementation support missions, including virtual ones during COVID-19.
 Technical experts joined the missions to deliver training and technical assistance and address

                                                                                                 Page 21 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



 implementation challenges such as delayed procurement, weak supervision of investment delivery,
 fiduciary risk management, and compliance with environmental and social safeguards. The Bank team
 conducted two midterm reviews. The team also conducted technical assessments during the AF to expand
 the program’s ambition by adding more local governments and Refugee Hosting Districts (RHDs) although
 these were smaller, with less capacity, were newly constituted, and were less ready to implement than the
 earlier batch of target local governments (ICR, paragraph 38). Implementation delays were caused by
 unexpected Rights of Way issues, COVID 19 induced design modifications, poor performing contractors,
 limited E&S compliance capacity, and government action creating new local governments. The ICR notes
 significant weaknesses in monitoring, documentation, and reporting on safeguards and OHS management.
 The Bank team responded with corrective measures, such as increasing capacity-building training to
 strengthen monitoring and supervision. The Bank team, however, did not address the lack of indicators that
 would have strengthened the outcomes directed at the added RHDs (see Section 4 Efficacy above and
 Section M&E below).

 Overall, the quality of World Bank supervision performance is rated Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


8. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The TOC was sound and was based on the results framework prepared at appraisal. The PDO was clear
 and had two sub-objectives. The main feature of this PforR PDO was the focus on enhanced capacity in
 aid of delivering urban services to constituents under the existing intergovernmental fiscal transfer
 architecture. Most original DLIs were sound, aligned with the PDO, and provided reasonable impetus to
 spur institutional change, with efforts coming from both the central and local governments. There were
 shortcomings in specificity and measures that were corrected at implementation (see below). A technically
 sound, credible protocol to monitor and verify the DLIs was in place. This was improved at implementation
 when the government adopted its own APA incorporating improvements upon the shortcomings of the
 originally planned assessments. Intermediate results indicators of activities adequately captured their
 contribution to achieving the PDO. Target output indicators were specific, measurable, achievable,
 relevant, and timebound. Baselines and targets were available for all indicators since these were part of
 designing the DLIs. The M&E design was embedded institutionally within the existing intergovernmental
 fiscal transfer architecture. A Program M&E specialist was to manage this M&E system with periodic
 updates.




                                                                                                Page 22 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



b. M&E Implementation
  The M&E system was implemented as designed. A MOLHUD Program M&E specialist, assisted by the
  Project Steering Committee and Program Technical Committee (PTC) implemented the system. The PTC
  with technical staff from relevant central government ministries, departments, and agencies, regularly
  conducted quality assurance of the program’s technical aspects as planned. Non-PTC members like local
  leaders and technical teams attended PTC deliberations to foster cross-learning. External, independent
  verification agencies conducted the Annual Performance Assessments (APAs) of the local governments.
  The APA provided information on institutional performance and core process and system areas, such as
  planning, PFM, and implementation. The APA used factors to determine that cities, towns, and
  municipalities complied with various legislations The APA also determined compliance with the program’s
  Environment and Social Management and Resettlement Framework. An independent verification protocol
  measured and reported on the DLIs. The program conducted annual beneficiary satisfaction assessment
  surveys. The Office of the Auditor General conducted annual Value for Money (VfM) audits on
  institutional and structural improvements. The program established a grievance redress mechanism
  (GRM) and Municipal Development Forums (MDFs). Beneficiaries formed part of planning
  and implementation with their participation in the MDFs and the beneficiary surveys. Weaknesses in M&E
  design, such as in the measurability and specificity of DLIs, were corrected during implementation.

  The AF results framework added indicators to reflect the expansion of the program, the description of
  existing indicators was improved, and targets for some indicators were increased. M&E implementation
  was designed to be part of the institutional framework of the overall LGSMD to continue its use after
  program close.



c. M&E Utilization
  M&E findings were communicated to the beneficiaries during the MDFs and the periodic surveys. The
  central government shared data from local governments progress reports and PTC deliberations.
  Districts, cities, and various stakeholders used M&E data to inform design, compliance requirements,
  action plans, and tender documents. M&E data informed the AF, improvements in indicators,
  increased targets, and restructuring to extend the program closing date. M&E data was used to confirm
  whether output and outcome targets and minimum conditions were met.

  The overall rating of the quality of M&E is Substantial. The M&E system was implemented as
  designed. It informed the achievement of the objectives and evaluated the links in the results chain. The
  indicators in the results framework and verification protocols led to disbursements and exclusions in
  cases of poor or non-performance. Some weaknesses were acknowledged in the specificity or
  measurability of indicators and a lack of recourse to assist local governments in addressing the deficient
  performance by contractors or supervision consultants.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

9. Other Issues



                                                                                                   Page 23 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



a. Safeguards
  The program complied with the environmental and social safeguards policies outlined under OP/BP 9.00.
  The project’s implementation history shows evidence of limited compliance capacity with the program’s E&S
  policies, such as those experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic. (ICR, paragraph 54). Over time E&S,
  compliance and management improved. However, ineffective enforcement was evident in the lack of
  outreach regarding available grievance redress mechanism or GRM, inconsistent procedures for
  establishing Rights of Way (ROWs), and acquiring land that did not have titles. (ICR, paragraph
  56). MOLHUD adopted a post-closure action plan to address these shortcomings.




b. Fiduciary Compliance
  Financial management. The program's financial management complied with World Bank policies. All
  allocated grants were fully disbursed. The World Bank found adequate implementation of internal controls
  by the internal auditors of the Program Implementation Unit (PIU), and the local governments noting
  challenges at the local level. Audits were mostly received on time. The external audit report for FY2023/24
  was expected by December 31, 2024, and a final audit expected in 2025.

  The government adopted a Treasury Single Account (TSA) system during the implementation of the AF.
  This led to cash flow challenges where required disbursements could not be released to match the
  assessment targets achieved by local governments. This TSA limitation challenged implementation. The
  World Bank team suggested corrective measures to ensure annual budget allocations followed program
  requirements; performance-based allocations were adjusted to match absorptive capacities; and swept
  funds (a cash management tool where excess cash is automatically moved into an investment account to
  earn interest) were budgeted in the following fiscal year and made available within six months of that fiscal
  year.

  Procurement: This program supported the improvement of the procurement function at the local level.
  Improved procurement was scored as part of the annual assessment. Procurement capacity building
  formed part of the technical assistance delivered to participating local governments.
  Procurement effectiveness was limited by the local government’s capacity to cluster or batch construction
  works across municipalities to package these into larger contracts to attract experienced firms. Challenges
  in local government procurement were reflected in contract variations, delays in design reviews, delayed
  payment of contractors, less-than-timely resolution of safeguards issues, slow implementation of works in
  municipalities, and varying standards of quality for completed infrastructure. A few projects had weak
  investment delivery supervision, such as the absence of tangible actions against poor-performing
  contractors. The MOLHUD adopted corrective measures by assisting the local governments with (i)
  procurement planning, (ii) conducting procurement, (iii) sharing lessons from municipalities that performed
  well, and (d) rewarding well-performing municipalities. IEG concurs on further institutional strengthening to
  improve local government capacity to manage future contracts.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
  ---


                                                                                                  Page 24 of 27
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



d. Other
   ---

10. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory
                                                                                  Shortcomings in the quality of
Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Moderately Satisfactory
                                                                                  supervision
Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


11. Lessons

The PforR operation identified the following lessons:

      Introducing City and Municipal Development Forums (MDFs) may foster accountability
       and improve the delivery urban services. Target municipalities established local
       development forums where diverse, non-partisan stakeholders from the community and the
       private sector, with varying backgrounds and experiences participated to plan and implement
       investments. These forums fostered transparency and accountability. This approach
       improved relationships between local governments and their constituents. It facilitated
       delivery of investment projects. Allegations of fraud and corruption were raised and dealt
       with. Grievances were resolved. These actions promoted value for money (VfM). MDFs
       facilitated training on OSR so members could mobilize and sensitize the public on municipal
       taxes to improve resource mobilization. These forums secured citizens’ trust and confidence
       in their local leaders, fostered capacity in budget planning, enhancing OSR, infrastructure
       design and supervision capacity and VfM guided investment decisions. In a
       beneficiary survey, respondents highlighted diversity and inclusivity in the MDFs, noting that
       in one instance, 60 percent of MDF committee members represented women and disabled
       people.
      If the government introduces a new mechanism to manage its payment system, such
       as a Treasury Single Account (TSA), PforR operations would benefit from adopting
       mitigating measures. The government adopted a TSA payment system while implementing
       the AF. This affected cash flow needs of target local governments where capacities
       improved, scores improved, absorptive capacity to use resources improved, and needs
       increased. The TSA payment posed limits on funds that could be disbursed. Future PforRs
       may consider the following measures this program adopted: (i) calibrate program design to
       match DLI funding needs against the absorptive capacities of agencies whose implementing
       capacity has improved; (ii) carefully monitor budget allocations against anticipated
       expenditures; (iii) the Financing Agreement may provide conditions when funds may not be
       disbursed when DLIs are met if disbursements systematically exceed expenditure ceilings;
       (iv) break annual DLI disbursements into two tranches with approval of the second tranche


                                                                                                    Page 25 of 27
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                           Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



      conditional on full expenditure to ensure that disbursements are in line with government
      budget allocations.
     Future PforR operations may use the following strategies to meet O&M needs for long-
      term sustainability of local investments. A risk to outcome was raised coming from local
      governments underinvesting in O&M for its investments. Examples of measures to consider
      include: (i) combine technical assistance with capacity-building support to improve OSR
      mobilization that may identify a long-term source for O&M. (ii) Asset management guidelines
      and toolkits for diverse types of infrastructure investments may be developed. (iii) O&M
      manuals and frameworks based on international best practices, standard procedures for
      maintaining infrastructure assets, accompanied by periodic training may be designed and
      implemented. (iv) require local governments to provide for O&M as part of minimum access
      conditions to participate in government programs although this needs to be balanced by not
      putting low performing municipalities at a disadvantage miss further funding to enhance
      capacities. (v) Future P4R operations may link provisions for O&M to job creation where
      community residents participate in providing O&M. (vi) Costs of the latest technology may be
      used to justify VfM in achieving operational efficiency. Advanced technologies may
      strengthen O&M, as in advanced batteries for solar street lighting with their increased
      lifespan and improved efficiency.
     Sequencing investment planning, physical preparations of sites, and contract
      management may help avoid implementation delays. Site-specific issues, such as the
      unexpected need to acquire rights-of way (ROW), engineering designs that required
      modifications post contract award, and poor local contract management practices led to
      implementation delays. Before allocating budgets for investment projects, participating local
      governments may need to provide evidence of completed site planning, approved detailed
      engineering designs, and acquired ROWs based on the approved detailed design. Program
      affected persons (PAPs) may sign standardized consent forms, or government entities
      whose services may be affected or need relocation may sign memoranda of agreement as
      evidence of acquired ROWs. These approved ROWs from PAPs and relevant utility agencies
      form part of a package when turning sites over to contractors. Procurement may need to
      include building contract management capacity as access conditions for local governments
      with corrective measures to address non-performing service providers, such as damages
      and contract termination for contractors and supervision consultants.
     A hybrid P4R may provide sufficient resources for capacity-building and program
      management support. MOLHUD underachieved because of delays in physical plans, land
      parcel surveying, and land titling. MOLHUD also did not support local governments with O&M
      policies, leading to inconsistent local government strategies. A hybrid PforR may support
      institutional and capacity development activities and technical assistance implemented by the
      national agency with an IPF component, rather than linked to a DLI, to provide predictable
      budget support for key national government capacity building actions to support a successful
      PforR. The Kenya Urban Support Program (KUSP) is one such example.




12. Assessment Recommended?



                                                                                               Page 26 of 27
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Support to Municipal Infra Dev (P117876)



  No

13. Comments on Quality of ICR

The ICR provided a detailed overview of the operation, highlighting the results achieved. These results were
internally consistent and mutually reinforcing. The report followed the guidelines and is focused on results. The
quality of the evidence was from the annual assessments that formed part of DLIs, and the various annual
beneficiary surveys conducted as designed in the M&E. The results of these assessments and additional
information from the annexes presented a complete picture of the operation and the achievements reported.
were linked to the evidence of the findings. Data was appropriately referenced and credible. The Program’s
theory of change guided the reader on how the ratings were reached. The ICR’s lessons were clear, useful, and
based on evidence, although there were moderate shortcomings related to the specificity and measurability of
indicators. It is candid, acknowledging the lack of ambition for the original targets of the indicators in the results
framework and the targets for DLIs. There were also some shortcomings in the lack of indicators that would
have reflected the impact of the outputs on refugees and the communities hosting them. The ICR also
highlighted the challenges faced at implementation of both the original program and the AF. The quality of the
ICR is rated Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                       Page 27 of 27
