     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



                                                                                 Report Number: ICRR0024513

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                 Project Name
 P157782                                    Guinea Urban Water Project

 Country                                    Practice Area(Lead)
 Guinea                                     Water


 L/C/TF Number(s)                           Closing Date (Original)               Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-D2140                                  30-Jun-2022                                         28,709,379.62

 Bank Approval Date                         Closing Date (Actual)
 27-Jun-2017                                29-Mar-2024

                                            IBRD/IDA (USD)                                     Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                           30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                            30,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                        28,724,856.77                                               0.00




 Prepared by                Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator         Group
 Hassan Maher Amin          Ebru Karamete                 Avjeet Singh                   IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Waly




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) of Guinea’s Urban Water Project (UWP) as articulated in the Grant
   Agreement (GA, page 4) was identical to the one on the Project Appraisal Document (PAD, paragraph 25)
   and aimed to:

   “Increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area and improve the operational
   efficiency of the urban water utility.”


                                                                                                  Page 1 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



   Parsing the PDO. The PDO will be parsed based on the following two objectives:

         1. To increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area.
         2. To improve the operational efficiency of the urban water utility.



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  Yes

  Did the Board approve the revised objectives/key associated outcome targets?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   Yes

d. Components
   The PDO was supported by four components as follows:

   1. Urban water (appraisal cost: US$26.20 million; actual cost: US$21.97 million). The supported
   activities included: (i) construction of a booster pump station at Grandes Chutes Dam for transferring an
   additional 86,000 m3/day of raw water to the Yessoulou treatment plant via two existing trunk lines; (ii)
   construction of a treated water tank of 6,000 m3 capacity; (iii) rehabilitation of the distribution network, by
   replacing old and obsolete pipelines (asbestos cement and gray cast iron; (iv) restructuring/extending
   networks in targeted areas (including district metering and replacement of informal ‘spaghetti’ connections)
   to reduce non-revenue water (NRW) and reach poor peri-urban areas; (v) updating of the urban water
   supply master plan, baseline, and hydraulic modeling for Greater Conakry (2030 horizon); (vi) improving the
   water utility -Guinea Water Company’s (SEG) customer service through a new service data center
   increased SEG responsiveness to user complaints and digital platform setup of a best-practice grievance
   redress system; (vii) training of SEG staff in the use of new management and operational tools; and (viii)
   contributing to energy savings and greenhouse gas reduction and climate change mitigation through NRW
   reduction in SEG’s network in Conakry, thus saving water and improving revenues.

   2. Urban sanitation. (appraisal cost: US$1.00 million, actual cost: US$1.00 million). This component
   financed: (i) support to the Government to develop a citywide inclusive sanitation baseline survey on the
   current condition of urban sanitation for Greater Conakry; (ii) development of a sanitation strategy; (iii)
   development of an urban sanitation master plan to guide interventions in the sector (i.e. on-site sanitation,
   fecal sludge management, and sewerage system); (iv) undertaking a benchmark study tour to the Benin
   agency in charge of urban sanitation.

   3. Institutional strengthening and Project management. (appraisal cost: US$2.80 million, actual cost:
   US$5.80 million). This component financed: (i) support to the National Hydraulics Directorate (DNH) for the
   modeling of the groundwater of the Conakry peninsula and the development of a database of water
   resources users and levels of abstraction; (ii) support the Ministry of Energy, Hydraulics and Hydrocarbon
   (MEHH) to lay the foundation for urban water reforms including: (a) the development of a financial model for
   SEG; (b) conducting a tariff study for the urban water sector, which includes affordability and efficiency in
   the analysis, and (c) updating the legal framework and the sectoral policy letter in the urban water sector;
   (iii) mitigate institutional capacity risks at the MEHH and SEG by establishing a strong and well-staffed PIU

                                                                                                     Page 2 of 25
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



  in key positions to deliver project outcomes; (iv) technical assistance for SEG with the view of a new
  management contract with conditionalities.

  4. Contingent Emergency Response (appraisal cost:US$0.0 million; actual cost: US$0.0 million). This
  component was to improve the Government’s response capacity in the event of an emergency, following the
  procedures governed by OP/BP 10.00 paragraph 13 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies). The
  project did not activate this component because one of the key criteria, requiring a change to the project
  development objective (PDO) through level 1 restructuring, was not met. The PDO remained unchanged
  through the three level 2 restructurings as explained below.

  Revised Components. Component 1 was revised during the first and second restructurings to reflect
  cancellation of water production activities, and the project reallocated those resources to capacity building
  and the Utility Operational Efficiency Improvement program (PACT) activities initiated and supported by the
  French Development Agency (AFD) in three out of the nine SEG branches in Conakry. PACT activities were
  integrated as a sub-component under component 1, by increasing its budget from US$4.99 million to
  US$9.8 million for: (a) the procurement of mapping (US$0.7 million; (b) a customer management software
  (US$2.5 million); and (c) the installation of 12,500 meters (US$1.7 million). Furthermore, PACT extended
  the distribution network by over 1,630 linear meters.

  The cancellation of: (i) the booster pumping station located at Grandes Chutes Dam (with a capacity of
  86,000 m3/day), (ii) the rehabilitation of Kakoulima water production site (with a capacity of 5,000m3/day),
  and (iii) the water standposts and associated boreholes under the first and second restructurings,
  respectively, decreased ambition of the project (i.e. around 50% of SEG's total production
  capacity) because there was no increase in the volume of water produced as initially hoped.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project Cost. The total project cost was estimated at US$30.00 million. The actual cost according to the
  ICR Data Sheet (page ii) was US$28.72 million or about 96% of the appraisal estimate.

  Financing. The financing instrument was an Investment Project Financing (IPF), consisting of an IDA Grant
  equivalent to US$30.00 million, over five years. The selection of the IPF instrument is based on its flexibility
  and suitability to finance a range of activities, including works, equipment, and capacity building. The project
  was financed 100% from the IDA Grant. The actual amount disbursed according to the ICR Data Sheet
  (page ii) was US$28.72 million.

  Borrower Contribution. The project was fully financed through the IDA Grant and no borrower contribution
  was expected.

  Dates. The project was approved on June 27, 2017, and became effective about five months later on
  January 11, 2018. The Mid-term Review (MTR) was conducted on June 13, 2022, about 4.5 years after
  effectiveness. While the PAD did not specify an exact date for the MTR, this Review finds that conducting
  the MTR 4.5 years after effectiveness for a five-year operation is significantly late. The project closed on
  March 29, 2024, which was one year and nine months beyond the original closing date on June 30, 2022.

  The project was restructured three times, all of which were Level-2 restructuring as follows:



                                                                                                     Page 3 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



       1. On May 4, 2020, when the amount disbursed was US$4.50 million, in order to cancel activities
          including: the construction of a pumping station at Grandes Chutes Dam and the construction of a
          water treatment plant at Yessoulou, revise the results framework (RF), revise the implementation
          schedule, revise the integrated safeguards data sheet, update the economic and financial analysis,
          reallocate funds between disbursement categories including about $1 million reallocated from the
          original NRW budget to support water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) activities as part of the
          COVID-19 response, and extend the Grant closing date from June 30, 2022, to December 31, 2023
          “to allow time for the completion of some activities that were behind schedule (ICR, paragraph 25).”
       2. On March 27, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$12.90 million, in order to cancel activities
          including: the Kakoulima production site, the water standposts and associated boreholes, and the
          construction of a network of piezometers in Greater Conakry revise the results framework, update
          the safeguards as one safeguard was dropped (Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37), and revise the
          projects Legal covenants.
       3. On December 29, 2023, when the amount disbursed was US$23.35, in order to extend the Grant
          closing date from December 31, 2023, to March 29, 2024, “to allow residual payments to Project-
          Affected Persons (PAPs) in accordance with the Safeguards instruments and to finish works that
          were behind schedule (ICR, paragraph 25).”

   This Review and in agreement with the ICR and will assess the project outcome based on a split rating
   methodology. This was justified because the project ambition on water production was reduced as there
   was no increase in the volume of water produced as initially envisioned. As a result, the target for the
   indicator “Number of people in urban areas already connected and provided with access to enhanced water
   supply services under the project” significantly decreased from 730,000 to 17,000 people.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Context at Appraisal. In 2013, water supply demand in Conakry-Guinea was assessed as 308,000
m³/day, while production was only 167,000 m³/day, resulting in a 141,000 m³/day deficit. Conakry's water
supply system suffered from irregular service and inadequate pressure management. Non-revenue water
(NRW) increased from 33% in 2011 to 45% in 2016, with three-quarters due to physical losses and one-
quarter to commercial losses. Furthermore, the metering ratio was only 56%, with non-metered customers
in Conakry paying a flat monthly fee. In addition, SEG performed poorly on key performance indicators: the
billing ratio was only 57% of total water produced, and operational cost recovery was barely above 1.0 in
2015, covering only operational expenses without funds for maintenance, renewal or expansion. This
project aimed to increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area and improve the
operational efficiency of the urban water utility. Finally, this project represented a re-engagement of the
Bank in Guinea’s water sector after a prolonged absence. The Bank’s previous water project (Third Water
Supply and Sanitation Project - P001075) closed unsatisfactorily in 2006 leaving a gap for structural reform
in the sector.

Previous Bank Experience. The World Bank had previous IDA operations in Guinea and in Africa in
developing access to water and sanitation services. Specifically, in Guinea the World Bank financed the
Second Water Supply Project (P001044), which was the first World Bank project to support private sector


                                                                                                   Page 4 of 25
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)          Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



participation in the delivery of urban services and the Third Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P001075).
These operations informed the project design. In addition, the Bank has had a rich experience in designing
and overseeing the implementation of projects in post-conflict countries. While the Bank had enough
accumulated experience to design and oversee the implementation of this project, the conditions on the
ground were more challenging than anticipated.

Consistency with the Bank Strategies. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with the World Bank’s twin-goals
of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Through increasing the availability of clean
water, the project expected to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity by lowering health-related costs.
The PDO was also in line with the World Bank’s Country Partnership Strategy for Guinea (CPS, FY2013–
FY2017). Specifically, the CPF’s pillar on Human Development, which sought to achieve improved
outcomes in basic services delivery, including education, social protection and health. The CPS also
emphasized a stronger focus on integrated basic social services in support to the Post-Ebola Priority Action
Plan through restoring the national healthcare delivery services and putting in place a solid framework
prioritizing other social services such as education, water, environmental sanitation, and hygiene.
Therefore, the project was expected to contribute to realizing the World Bank’s pledge to support an
effective and sustainable recovery from the Ebola epidemic (World Bank, 2015) by supporting the
expansion to access to sustainable water and sanitation services.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in line with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework
for Guinea (FY2018-FY2023), national and municipal level development plans. Specifically, under pillar 3 of
the CPF: better access to energy and water through improved management of utilities. The ICR (paragraph
17) noted that the project successfully adapted to changing country priorities including additional
investments to support SEG needs in: (i) establishing basic conditions accounting for NRW reduction under
the PACT program; and (ii) COVID-19 response activities to help the GoG manage critical actions during
the challenging pandemic.

Consistency with Government Strategies/Priorities. At appraisal, the PDO was in line with Guinea’s
socioeconomic development plan (2016–2020). The Plan called for a major increase in the share of
households, institutions, and communities that had access to improved water, sanitation, and hygiene
facilities from 61% to 75.6% for water supply and from 30% to 38% for sanitation.

At completion, the PDO continued to be in-line with national Urban Water Supply Master Plan (December
2023) which was developed under the project.

Summary of Relevance of Objectives Assessment. At completion, the PDO was in line with the Bank’s
CPS and the Government’s national Urban Water Supply Master Plan. Therefore, the Relevance of
Objectives is rated High.




Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High


4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

                                                                                                  Page 5 of 25
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)




EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project aimed to increase urban water supply
               to greater Conakry area through constructing a booster station at Grandes Chutes Dam to transfer additional
               water flow (86,000 m3 per day), constructing a water tank of 6,000 m3 capacity to support demand during
               peak time, rehabilitate the distribution network to decrease water losses, train SEG staff in use of new
               management and operational tools, and extend networks in the targeted areas to reduce NRW. To support
               urban sanitation, the project aimed to support a baseline sanitation study that was expected to inform a
               sanitation strategy and support the preparation of a sanitation strategy and a sanitation master plan for
               Greater Conakry.

               The expected outputs of the supported activities included: number of water facilities constructed, additional
               water storage increased, length of pipe laid in km, additional meters installed, number of SEG staff trained,
               baseline sanitation study completed, sanitation strategy adopted, and sanitation master plan approved. The
               intermediate outcomes were increase in additional volume of water available under the project, and a
               decrease in non-revenue water ratio as a result of the project activities. All this would contribute to achieving
               the PDO of increasing access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area. Anticipated long-term
               impacts included: a decline in water-borne illnesses in the greater area of Conakry, and women and girls
               have more free time to invest in education and revenue-generating activities.



               The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions:

               (i) The project’s Midterm review (MTR) will help to set the baseline and expected outcome for NRW, (ii)
               people currently affected by water shortages will benefit from enhanced services through the increased water
               production, (iii) SEG utility will benefit support to gradually improve its management capacity, provide services
               to the city inhabitants, and generate additional revenues, (iv) additional water production will increase water
               sales by 31 million m3 per year by year 4, and (v) GoG will adopt better policies, implement reforms,
               strengthen institutions, and build capacity in urban sanitation.

               The ToC reflected clear connections between the stated activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and the
               PDO in plausible causal chains. However, the ToC lacked clear indicators to define and measure enhanced
               water services for people already connected.

               Outputs/Intermediate Results

                     Additional water production capacity constructed under the project was none, compared to a target of
                      86,000 cubic meters because the project dropped the original production sub-component (Grandes
                      Chutes booster pump) at the first restructuring (target not achieved).



                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)




      1, 532 new piped household water connections that were resulting from project interventions which
         exceeded the original target of 1,000 connections (target exceeded).
         4, 622 piped household water connections were rehabilitated under the project exceeding the original
         target of 4,000 (target exceeded).
         Increasing water storage capacity constructed under the project was not achieved, compared to a
         target of 6,000 cubic meters (target not achieved).
        23.91 km of feeder pipes were constructed under the project exceeding the original target of 20 km
         (target exceeded).
        Reduction in non-revenue water ratio was not reported (target: 30%).
        94.80% of project beneficiaries felt that the project investments reflected their needs exceeding the
         original target of 80% (target exceeded).
        100% of the registered grievances related to the project activities were appropriately responded within
         two weeks exceeding the original target of 80% (target exceeded).
        Baseline sanitation study was completed and informed the new sanitation strategy (target achieved).
        Sanitation strategy adopted and Sanitation Master Plan for Greater Conakry was approved. The ICR
         used the term adopted which left the achievement of this IRI vague.

Outcomes

      By project completion, the number of people in urban areas provided with access to improved water
       sources’ under the project reached 30,640 exceeding the original target of 20,000 (PDO outcome
       indicator #1). It was not clear from the statement of this indicator measured the new piped water
       connections. Also, only 32,440 people in urban areas, who were already connected, were provided
       with access to enhanced water supply services under the project; this was significantly below the
       original target of 730, 000 people (PDO outcome indicator #2). As mentioned earlier description of
       enhanced water supply services was not clear here; whether increased piped water volume, increased
       duration of water availability, and/or safe or affordable water. Finally, 51.30% of females in urban
       areas were provided with access to ‘improved water sources’ under the Project substantially achieved
       the end target of 51.70% (PDO outcome indicator #3).
      The project also did not achieve its envisioned targets for increasing water supply production capacity
       and water storage capacity as noted above.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed at increasing access to improved water services in
the Greater Conakry area through constructing a booster station at Grandes Chutes Dam to transfer
additional water flow (86,000 m3 per day), constructing a water tank of 6,000 m3 capacity to support demand
during peak time, rehabilitate the distribution network to decrease water losses, and extend networks in the
targeted areas to reduce NRW. The project exceeded its original target for number of people with access to
improved water services but fell significantly short of achieving the target of enhanced water supply services
for people who were already connected. This was due to not being able to construct the planned production
and water storage capacity. Also, enhanced water supply services was not described via specific indicators.
Furthermore, the ICR did report on the percentage of reduction in NRW because activities related to
establishing a baseline were not implemented. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved
is rated Modest.




                                                                                                   Page 7 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)




Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area.



Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). While the PDO statement was not revised, key activities were dropped as part of
the 2020 restructuring. These included the cancellation of the construction of a pumping station at Grandes
Chutes Dam and the construction of a water treatment plant at Yessoulou. These changes under the first
restructuring decreased ambition of the project because there was no increase in the volume of water
produced as initially envisioned. On the other hand, the distribution sub-component was originally estimated
at US$5.4 million but was increased to US$11.2 million as the scope increased to include the construction of
18 km of pipeline and renewal of 8 km of obsolete asbestos and cast-iron pipes; and increase the number of
household connections rehabilitation from 4,000 to 5,000 and installing 20 new stand water posts. The
stronger emphasis on distribution under the restructuring was expected to allow SEG to enhance the
efficiency of its network first, before future investments in new production bring additional volumes of water
through a dilapidated system, leading to water losses. Other activities, outputs under the original objective 1
still applied.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

      1, 532 new piped household water connections that were resulting from project interventions which
         exceeded the original target of 1,000 connections (target exceeded).
        4, 622 piped household water connections were rehabilitated under the project substantially achieving
         the revised target of 5,000 (target substantially achieved).
        23.91 km of feeder pipes were constructed under the project substantially achieving the revised target
         of 26 km (target substantially achieved).
        94.80% of project beneficiaries felt that the project investments reflected their needs exceeding the
         original target of 80% (target exceeded).
        100% of the registered grievances related to the project activities were appropriately responded within
         two weeks exceeding the original target of 80% (target exceeded).
        Baseline sanitation study was completed and informed the new sanitation strategy (target achieved).
        Sanitation strategy adopted and Sanitation Master Plan for Greater Conakry was approved. The ICR
         used the term adopted which left the achievement of this IRI vague.
        12,192 household meters were installed under the project substantially achieving the target of 12,500
         (target substantially achieved).
        500 handwashing facilities were constructed by the project fully achieving the target of 500. These
         facilities aimed to provide better hygiene practices to support efforts to control COVID-19.
        2,000 cubic meters of additional water resources from Kakoulima water complex supplied to SEG
         customers (not achieved).



                                                                                                   Page 8 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                    Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



Outcomes

      By project completion, the number of new piped household connections under the project reached
       30,640 exceeding the revised target of 26,000 (PDO outcome indicator #1). Also, 32,440 people in
       urban areas were already connected and provided with access to enhanced water supply services
       under the project which exceeded the revised target of 17, 000 (PDO outcome indicator #2). Finally,
       51.30% of females in urban areas were provided with access to ‘improved water sources’ under the
       Project almost fully meeting the end target of 51.7% (PDO outcome indicator #3). However, the
       project did not implement the envisioned 20 water stand points and the baseline on non revenue water
       was not established, and the additional water resources (2,000 cubic meters) from Kakoulima water
       complex did not materialize as the activity was not implemented.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to increasing access to improved water services in
the Greater Conakry area through rehabilitating the distribution network to decrease water losses and
extending networks in the targeted areas to reduce NRW. The project exceeded its revised targets for PDO1
outcome indictor #1 and #2 and met its target for PDO outcome indicators #3. Also, most IRIs were either
fully achieved or substantially achieved. The project also contributed to efforts to control COVID -19 through
supporting the construction of hand washing facilities. However, the project did not implement the envisioned
20 water stand points and the baseline on non revenue water was not established, and the additional water
resources (2,000 cubic meters) from Kakoulima water complex did not materialize as the activity was not
implemented. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Substantial with
moderate shortcomings.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 1 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To increase access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). While the PDO statement was not revised, key activities were dropped as part of
the 2023 restructuring. This included: the cancellation of the Kakoulima production site, and the cancellation
of the water standposts and associated boreholes. The cancellation of the afore-mentioned activities reduced
the scope of the project.

Other activities, outputs under the revised objective 1 still applied.

Outcomes

      By project completion, the number of new piped household connections under the project reached
       30,640 exceeding the revised target of 24,000 (PDO outcome indicator #1). Also, 32,440 people in
       urban areas were already connected and provided with access to enhanced water supply services
       under the project which exceeded the revised target of 17, 000 (PDO outcome indicator #2). Finally,


                                                                                                       Page 9 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



       51.30% of females in urban areas were provided with access to ‘improved water sources’ under the
       Project substantially meeting the end target (PDO outcome indicator #3).



Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project exceeded its revised targets for PDO1 outcome indictor #1
and #2 and met its target for PDO outcome indicators #3. Also, most IRIs were either fully achieved or
substantially achieved. The project also contributed to efforts to control COVID -19 through supporting the
construction of hand washing facilities. Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated
Substantial.



Revised Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To improve the operational efficiency of the urban water utility.

Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). To achieve the stated objective, the project supported: improving SEG customer
service responsiveness to customer complaints and requests, conducting a baseline, and hydraulic modeling
for Greater Conakry targeting for the horizon of 2030, adopting technologies for energy savings, greenhouse
gas reduction and climate change mitigation in NRW activities, updating of the urban water supply master
plan, drilling piezometers to monitor the water table and conduct qualitative test of the groundwater, conduct a
groundwater modeling and water table monitoring of the Conakry peninsula, develop of a database of water
resources users and levels of abstraction, develop a financial model for SEG, and conduct a tariff study for
the urban water sector.

The expected outputs included: the implementation and tracking of a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM),
establishing a hydraulic baseline and adoption of a hydraulic model, reduction in carbon dioxide emissions
(tons), updating urban water supply master plan, monitoring of ground water achieved and groundwater
model adopted, database for water resources users established and operationalized, SEG financial model
validated, and tariff study for urban water sector completed.

The expected intermediate outcome was the production of support tools for urban water reform. All this would
contribute to achieving the PDO of improving operational efficiency of the urban water utility. Anticipated long-
term impacts included a technically and commercially viable SEG capable of supplying drinking water to the
required standards.

The achievement of the PDO was underpinned by the following critical assumptions:

(i) The project’s Midterm review (MTR) will help to set the baseline and expected outcome for NRW, (ii) SEG
utility will benefit support to gradually improve its management capacity, provide services to the city



                                                                                                  Page 10 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



inhabitants, and generate additional revenues, and (iii) the government of Guinea will adopt better policies,
implement reforms, strengthen institutions, and build capacity in urban sanitation.

The ToC reflected clear connections between the stated activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and the
PDO in plausible causal chains.

Outputs/Intermediate Outcomes

      The tariff study for urban water was completed.
      The adoption of a new policy letter for the water sector was not achieved.
      188 SEG staff received training on technical and commercial aspects of water supply (no target
         provided).
        99 water sector officials received capacity building on ground water resources exceeding the target of
         25.
         A new cartographic system was installed for SEG capable of georeferencing customers was installed.
         23.91 km of new feeder pipes (target: 26) and 12,192 water meters were installed (target fully
         achieved).
         Non-revenue water (NRW) baseline was not established and the targeted decrease of NRW from
         42% to 30% was also not achieved.

Outcomes

      By project completion 7 SEG districts have completed a non-revenue water reduction program
       exceeding the target of 4 (PDO outcome indicator # 4). Specifically, those 7 SEG districts completed
       the program to install meters, lay pipes to eliminate long connections, repaired physical and
       commercial leaks, and reconnected households with required standards.
      The original PDO indicator “Working ratio of water utility (ratio between O&M cost and revenue) was
       not measured. This could have provided more clarity on the contribution of the project to improvement
       in operational efficiency.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The project aimed to improve operational efficiency of the urban water
utility through supporting capacity building to improve customer service and adopt modern technologies that
are more efficient and climate friendly. The project also supported improving urban water planning through
establishing hydraulic modeling for Greater Conakry, updating of the urban water supply master plan,
conducting a groundwater modeling and water table monitoring of the Conakry peninsula, developing a water
resources users database and levels of abstraction. Finally, the project supported developing a financial
model for SEG and conducting a tariff study for the urban water sector. While the project met most of targets
for IRIs, some activities were not implemented including the hydraulic study and levels of abstraction. The
project significantly exceeded its PDO outcome target as noted above. However, non-revenue water was not
measured and the working ratio of the water utility was not measured. Based on the available information, it
not possible to determine whether and how much the operational efficiency of urban utility improved.
Therefore, the efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest



Rating


                                                                                                 Page 11 of 25
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 1
Revised Objective
To improve the operational efficiency of the urban water utility.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). While the PDO was not changed, additional funding was allocated to support the
line Ministry on the urban water sector reform activities, and to enhance the PIU’s operations to adjust to the
new scope of activities and to reflect the project extension in relation to distribution. Also, the alloaction to the
distribution sub-component increased to US$11.2 million from US$5.4 million which reflected an increase in
scope to construct 18 km of pipeline and renewal of 8 km of obsolete asbestos and cast-iron pipes; increase
the number of household connections rehabilitation from 4,000 to 5,000 and installing 20 new stand posts.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. As explained earlier under the original objective, the project did not
present sufficient evidence to determine if and how much the operational efficiency improved. Therefore, the
efficacy with which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.



Revised Rating
Modest


OBJECTIVE 2 REVISION 2
Revised Objective
To improve the operational efficiency of the urban water utility.

Revised Rationale
Theory of Change (ToC). The PDO remained the same as above. However, with the 2023 restructuring
there were two main changes including: dropping the construction of a network of piezometers in Greater
Conakry to inform the proposed ground water study, and the PDO outcome indicator related to the
operational efficiency of SEG (working ratio) was dropped and replaced by the more pertinent one related to
the number of SEG sectors that benefitted from the non-revenue water program financed by the project.

Outcomes

      By project completion 7 SEG sectors have completed a non-revenue water reduction program
       exceeding the target of 4 (PDO outcome indicator # 4). Specifically, those 7 SEG districts completed
       the program to install meters, lay pipes to eliminate long connections, repaired physical and
       commercial leaks, and reconnected households with required standards.

Summary of Efficacy Assessment. The second restructuring supported the rehabilitation and
strengthening of water distribution systems, reduction of water leaks, the development of a new customer
software system, and installation of both social water connections and renewed water connections.
Installment of water meters improved billing and collection rates (in half of the six districts billing rate
improved above 50%-no target provided). After the dropping of the PDO indicator on operational efficiency,

                                                                                                      Page 12 of 25
                                 Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                 Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



                              the project significantly exceeded its PDO outcome target as noted above However, the ICR noted that: "the
                              shift from a quantitative cost recovery indicator to implementing an NRW program without specific reduction
                              targets hindered SEG's operational efficiency” (paragraph 48) and “the project could have assisted SEG in
                              conducting an organizational capacity assessment of the NRW department, and establishing baseline data on
                              total customers, metered customers, production and sales volumes, fixed-rate customers, illegal connections,
                              billing, sales, and network efficiency ratios for comparison at project closure (paragraph 49). The ICR
                              reported that while “the Utility Operational Efficiency Improvement program (PACT) was fully implemented, its
                              impact on utility operational efficiency remained ambiguous, as the number of supported districts did not
                              provide information on the water utility's operational efficiency(paragraph 53).” Therefore, the efficacy with
                              which this objective was achieved is rated Modest.



                              Revised Rating
                              Modest


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy against the original Objectives is rated Modest. The project aimed at increasing access to
                            improved water services in the Greater Conakry area (objective 1). The project exceeded its original target for
                            PDO1 outcome indictor #1 but fell significantly short of achieving its target for PDO outcome indicator #2
                            because the envisioned increase in urban water supply from booster pumping station located at Grandes
                            Chutes Dam (with a capacity of 86,000 m3/day) did not materialize. The project also aimed to improve
                            operational efficiency of the urban water utility (Objective 2). While the project met most of targets for IRIs,
                            some activities were not implemented including the hydraulic study and assessing the levels of abstraction. In
                            addition, the PDO target indicator pertaining this objective “Working ratio of water utility (ratio between O&M
                            cost and revenue)” was not measured.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating                                   Primary Reason
                            Modest                                                    Low achievement
                  OBJR1_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 1
                            Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rationale
                            Overall Efficacy against the revised targets is rated Modest. The project aimed to increasing access to
                            improved water services in the Greater Conakry area (Objective #1). The project exceeded its revised targets
                            for PDO1 outcome indictor #1 and #2 and almost met its target for PDO outcome indicators #3. Also, most
                            IRIs were either fully achieved or substantially achieved. The project also contributed to efforts to control
                            COVID -19 through supporting the construction of hand washing facilities. However, the envisioned increase
                            in water supply through the rehabilitation of Kakoulima water production system was not achieved. Regarding
                            the second objective, to improve operational efficiency of the urban water non-revenue water baseline was



                                                                                                                              Page 13 of 25
              Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
              Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



         not implemented the working ratio of the water utility was not measured; thus, it was not possible to determine
         that operational efficiency improved due to the absence of direct evidence that this happened.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 1 Rating                        Primary Reason
         Modest                                                    Low achievement
 OBJR2_TBL




         OVERALL EFFICACY REVISION 2
         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rationale
         Overall Efficacy against the revised targets is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings. The project
         aimed to increasing access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area (Objective #1). The
         project exceeded its revised targets for PDO1 outcome indictor #1 and #2 and substantially met its target for
         PDO outcome indicators #3. Also, most IRIs were either fully achieved or substantially achieved. The project
         also contributed to efforts to control COVID -19 through supporting the construction of hand washing facilities.
         The project also aimed to improve operational efficiency of the urban water utility (objective #2). While the
         project met most of targets for IRIs, some activities were not implemented including the hydraulic levels of
         abstraction, and non-revenue baseline. The project significantly exceeded its PDO outcome target as noted
         above. Despite the reported achievements, it was not possible to determine that operational efficiency
         improved due to the absence of direct evidence that this happened.



         Overall Efficacy Revision 2 Rating
         Substantial



5. Efficiency
Ex-ante

              The economic and financial analyses at appraisal assessed the economic and financial benefits and
               related costs arising from investments implemented under Component 1. The results of the EFA showed
               that the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) was estimated at 30% and the financial internal rate of
               return (FIRR) was estimated at 51%, which indicated that the project was economically and financially
               viable. The analysis was done using two discount rate assumptions: 6% and 10%.
              Cost-benefit analysis. The economic/financial feasibility analysis of the project compared the estimated
               economic/financial benefits of the project with its economic/financial costs. Costs included the investment
               costs of schemes under Component 1, which would be incurred during the project life; maintenance and
               rehabilitation cost, calculated as a percentage of the investment cost (3%); and operational costs for the
               water supply facilities financed under Component 1. The net benefit was the difference between the
               incremental benefits and the incremental costs of two scenarios: ‘without’ and ‘with’ the project.
              Benefits. The project was expected to increase water supply capacity in Conakry, enhance the
               distribution network, and reduce water losses. The total number of beneficiaries at full capacity of the
               infrastructure implemented under the project was about 730,000.



                                                                                                            Page 14 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



      Overall, the PAD reflected a detailed EFA that adequately justified the project investments.

Ex-post

      An ex-post EFA of the project was carried out based on a methodology similar to that used in the PAD to
       ensure consistency and comparability. Also, an EFA was repeated as part of the June 2020 and March
       2023 restructuring.
      The ex-post EFA showed that the project at completion had an internal rate of return (IRR) of 13.2% and
       an NPV of US$9.6 million which below the ERR of 30% and NPV at US$105 million.
      The table below reflects the comparison between appraisal estimates and the project at completion and
       at the 2020 and 2023 restructuring:

                             Ex-     Restructuring                    Ex-
                                                      Restructuring
                             ante                                     post
Discount Rate                6%      6%               6%              6%
Net Present Value (millions
                            105      9.4              6.2             9.6
US$)
ERR/IRR                     30%      10.70%           9.17%           13.20%

      The ex-post IRR was comparable to that estimated at the 2023 restructuring but significantly lower than
       the ex-ante one. This reflected the decrease in the project ambition through completely cancelling the
       water production activities.
      In terms of financial rate of return, the calculated financial rate of return was only 0.3 percent, as the
       benefits achieved from improved billing and collection ratios were insufficient to cover the financial cost
       of the project.

Implementation Efficiency. The project experienced a 21-month time of implementation overrun, which was
related to different challenges faced. Those included: delays in recruiting the PIU staff and putting in place the
prerequisites necessary for the project's effectiveness, a delay of an independent dam safety assessment;
procurement management and processing delays, challenges to deal correctly with compensation of PAPs
during the lifetime of the project, and delays related to the outbreak of COVID-19 and the associated restrictions.
Also, the project faced difficulties in disbursing funds between 2017 up to the second restructuring, where the
disbursement rate was only 38%. Most of the funding was disbursed over the final two years of implementation.

Summary of Efficiency Assessment. The ex-post IRR was significantly lower that the ex-ante one (13.2%
compared to 30%), and financial rate of return was 0.3%. The project also faced implementation delays, slow
disbursement, and challenges in implementing activities. Therefore, Efficiency is rated Modest.


Efficiency Rating
Modest


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:

                                                                                                      Page 15 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)




                               Rate Available?             Point value (%)           *Coverage/Scope (%)
                                                                                     87.00
Appraisal                                                  30.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable
                                                                                     76.00
ICR Estimate                                               13.00
                                                                                      Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

      Pre-restructuring: Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Modest. The
       project aimed to increasing access to improved water services in the Greater Conakry area (Objective
       1). The project exceeded its original target for number of people with access to improved water services
       but fell significantly short of achieving the target of enhanced water supply services for people who were
       already connected. This was due to not being able to construct the planned production and water
       storage capacity. The project also aimed to improve operational efficiency of the urban water utility
       (Objective 2). While the project met most of targets for IRIs, some activities were not implemented
       including the hydraulic study and assessing the levels of abstraction. In addition, the PDO target
       indicator pertaining this objective “Working ratio of water utility (ratio between O&M cost and revenue)”
       was not measured. Efficiency was rated Modest as the ex-post IRR was significantly lower that the ex-
       ante one (13.2% compared to 30%), very low financial rate of return, and the project experienced
       implementation delays, slow disbursement, and challenges in implementing activities. Based on the
       assigned rating to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Unsatisfactory.

      Post restructuring 1: Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall efficacy was Modest. While the
       PDO 1 statement was not revised, water production activities (construction of a pumping station at
       Grandes Chutes Dam and the construction of a water treatment plant at Yessoulou) were dropped and
       the scope of distribution network increased as part of the 2020 restructuring. The project exceeded its
       revised targets for PDO1. However, the envisioned increase in water supply through the rehabilitation of
       Kakoulima water production system was not achieved. While the project met most of targets for IRIs for
       Objective 2, some activities were not implemented including the hydraulic levels of abstraction, and non-
       revenue water baseline. In addition, the PDO target indicator pertaining this objective “Working ratio of
       water utility (ratio between O&M cost and revenue)” was not measured. Efficiency was rated Modest as
       the ex-post IRR was significantly lower that the ex-ante one (13.2% compared to 30%), very low financial
       rate of return, and the project experienced implementation delays, slow disbursement, and challenges in
       implementing activities. Based on the assigned rating to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated
       Moderately Unsatisfactory.

      Post restructuring 2: Relevance of Objectives was rated High. Overall Efficacy was rated Substantial
       with moderate shortcomings. The project exceeded its revised outcome indicator targets. The project
       also contributed to efforts to control COVID -19 through supporting the construction of hand washing
       facilities. Regarding the second objective to improve operational efficiency of the urban water utility, the
       project significantly exceeded its PDO outcome targets pertaining to this objective. While the project met
       most of targets for IRIs, some activities were not implemented including the hydraulic levels of
       abstraction, and non-revenue baseline. Efficiency was rated Modest as the ex-post IRR was significantly
       lower that the ex-ante one (13.2% compared to 30%), low financial rate of return, and the project

                                                                                                    Page 16 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



       experienced implementation delays, slow disbursement, and challenges in implementing activities.
       Based on the assigned rating to the three outcome criteria, Outcome is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

                        Pre-                   Post Restructuring Post Restructuring
                        Restructuring          1                  2
Relevance of Objectives High                   High               High
                                                                  Substantial with
Overall Efficacy             Modest            Modest             moderate
                                                                  shortcomings
Efficiency                   Modest            Modest             Modest
                             Moderately        Moderately         Moderately
Outcome
                             Unsatisfactory    Unsatisfactory     Satisfactory
Numerical Value              3                 3                  4
Disbursement (US$,
                             5.01              8.57                  15.15
million)
Share of disbursement        0.17              0.30                  0.53
Weighted Value of
                             0.52              0.90                  2.11
the Outcome rating
                                                                     0.52 + 0.90 + 2.11 =
                                                                     3.52 which round up
                                                                     to 4
Final Outcome
                                                                     Moderately
                                                                     Satisfactory




a. Outcome Rating
   Moderately Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

The following risks could potentially impact the Development Outcome:

1. Financial risk. While SEG is sufficiently equipped to continue operations without major issues, it still
needs to achieve financial equilibrium, with tariffs that cover both capital and operating costs. Investments
have been beneficial in ensuring adequate management of the network and water installations. The
preparation of the follow-on Water and Sanitation Project (PEAG-P179017) is expected be able to scale up
the Utility Operational Efficiency Improvement program (PACT) intervention in different areas and to keep
gains already made in NRW reduction and social water connections.




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 25
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



2. Political risk. On the political and socio-economic front, Guinea continues to vulnerable with elections to
be held next year.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry
        Strategic relevance and approach. The project was strategically relevant and in line with the
            Government priorities. The PDO was also in line with the Bank strategies (see Section 3 for
            details). The project was expected to help Guinea improve access to urban water supply services
            and reduce the ratio of non-revenue water (NRW) in Greater Conakry.
           Technical, financial and economic aspects. The PDO statement could have benefited from
            more clarity on the term “improved water services.” for people already connected. The project
            design reflected a focus on urban water infrastructure combined with capacity building activities to
            improve to improve overall utility performance. However, the estimated cost of the proposed
            production facility (the Yessoulou booster station and associated infrastructure) was not
            accurately estimated as the feasibility study was delayed. The PAD reflected an adequate
            economic and financial analysis that justified the project investments.
           Poverty, gender, and social development aspects. The project was expected to contribute to
            poverty reduction and shared prosperity through increasing the availability of clean water. This
            would contribute to reducing poverty by and boosting shared prosperity by lowering health-related
            costs. The project was classified as gender informed; gender-specific actions were to be
            undertaken during project implementation and were reflected in the Results Framework. The
            project design ensured women participation in project activities since women accounted for 51.7%
            of project beneficiaries. The project was expected to reduce the time families spend fetching
            water, a task typically carried out by women and girls. This was expected to free up time for
            women to engage in productive activities generating additional income and increasing the
            likelihood of girls receiving formal education.
           Environmental and Fiduciary aspects. The project design underestimated the environmental
            and fiduciary challenges. The project experienced environmental related delays and procurement
            was problematic as well. The ICR (paragraph 99) reported that “the preparation of safeguard
            documents, including the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the implementation of mitigation measures took
            longer than expected.”
           Implementation arrangements. The MEHH was the overall coordinator of the project. Given the
            limited capacity at MEHH, a dedicated PIU was established within the MEHH. Implementation
            arrangements faced challenges including the lack of core staff within the PIU; delay of an
            independent dam safety assessment; procurement management and processing delays; and a
            reduction in the scope of NRW activities and eventually dropping this activity.
           Risk assessment. The overall risk in achieving the development objective of the project was
            rated Substantial. Several risks were identified at appraisal including Fiduciary (High); Political
            and governance; Macroeconomic; Sector strategies and policies; Technical design of the project;
            Institutional capacity for implementation and Sustainability (all were rated Substantial). Political
            risk and technical design of the project proved to be more challenging than anticipated. While the
            PAD reflected several risk mitigation measures, it appears that those did not work as anticipated

                                                                                                     Page 18 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



         since the project faced challenges on multiple fronts including fiduciary, political and technical
         design. Finally, the risk related to the capacity to ensure social safeguards compliance was
         overlooked.
        M&E arrangements. The PIU was responsible for collecting, verifying, and consolidating
         information and submitting progress reports to the World Bank. Overall, M&E design reflected a
         clearly articulated results framework (RF) that outlined key desired outcomes and objectives.
         However, M&E design could have benefited from indicators that defined and measured enhanced
         water supply services and the inclusion of other indicators that captured improved capacity and
         energy savings, among others (see section 9a for details).

  Summary of Quality at Entry (QAE) Assessment. The project was strategically relevant. While the
  design reflected relevant components, costs of the infrastructure activities (the Yessoulou booster station
  and associated infrastructure) was not accurately estimated due to a delay in launching the feasibility
  study. Poverty, gender, and social development aspects were adequate. The project faced environmental
  and fiduciary challenges which raises questions about the adequacy of those arrangements at appraisal.
  Also, implementation arrangements were not adequate in an environment of weak institutional
  capacity. While several risks were identified at appraisal, some proved more challenging than anticipated
  as noted above, and the risk related the capacity to ensure social safeguards compliance was
  overlooked. M&E arrangements were adequate, but limited capacity to implement activities was a
  concern and M&E design would have benefited from additional indicators. Overall, Quality at Entry is
  rated Moderately Unsatisfactory due to significant shortcomings pertaining to technical design,
  environmental and fiduciary aspects, and implementation arrangements. Shortcomings in the afore
  mentioned aspects severely undermined the project and contributed to significant implementation delays.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Moderately Unsatisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
       The project faced challenging implementation conditions as it became effective after an Ebola crisis
           in the country, followed by the outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020, and a military takeover in
           September 2021 which prompted a suspension of activities for six months.
          The Bank conducted 14 implementation support missions over the duration of the project. This
           included virtual missions during the COVID-19 restrictions.
          The Bank provided regular guidance and addressed implementation constraints. Supervision had
           two task team leaders (TTLs) over the project duration which supported continuity. The task team
           conducted, on average, two implementation support missions per year, with the TTL based first in
           Dakar, Senegal and at the end in Paris, France during the entire implementation period.
          While the Bank team provided timely support, implementation was negatively impacted by poor
           implementation readiness and limited M&E implementation capacity. This situation was
           exacerbated by the outbreak of COVID-19 and the associated restrictions. Furthermore, the
           implementation of OP7.30 on the heels of the Military coup in September 2021 slowed down
           adequate supervision by World Bank staff.
          The project implementation benefited from the recruitment of a short-term consultant (STC) Water
           Supply and Sanitation Specialist in 2022 based in Conakry. According to the ICR (paragraph 101)

                                                                                                  Page 19 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



        the STC “added significant value to the team and to the dialogue at different levels with the client,
        enabling the anticipation and resolution of potential issues, ensuring effective coordination with
        other donors, and preventing duplication of efforts.”
       The task team also provided support to address some of these key challenges and improve project
        implementation including one-on-one training on procurement to the PIU. The task team also
        recruited consultants to support the PIU and SEG in the review of technical documents as part of
        the civil works and NRW components. The Bank also worked with the client to restructure the
        project and reduce its ambition once it was clear that the original outcomes were unachievable.

 Summary of Quality of Supervision Assessment. The project faced challenging implementation
 conditions combined with poor implementation readiness and limited M&E implementation capacity. The
 Bank supervision adapted to the political climate, and COVID-19 pandemic challenges with all revised
 activities implemented by the end of the project. However, the Bank team could have addressed the
 absence of clear monitoring indicators to measure improved water supply services as well as the utility
 operational efficiency. This would have provided a more comprehensive assessment of the project
 outcomes. Overall, Bank Supervision is rated Moderately Satisfactory.

 Based on the assigned ratings for QAE and Quality of Supervision, the Overall Bank Performance is rated
 Moderately Satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Moderately Satisfactory


9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
      The PAD did not include theory of Change (ToC) since it was not yet required by the Bank at the
        time of Appraisal. Nonetheless, the ICR included a ToC that reflected the relationship between the
        project activities, outputs, intermediate outcomes and outcomes. This Review reconstructed a ToC
        for each Objective based on the detailed project description in the PAD, the restructuring papers,
        and the ToC reported in the ICR.
       The achievement of the PDO was measured by four PDO outcome level indicators. There were no
        baselines for the indicators in the RF. The ICR (paragraph 79) noted that the ‘working ratio
        indicator” was difficult to measure and was eventually dropped. The first two PDO indicators were
        not clear. As mentioned earlier description of enhanced water supply services could have been
        defined (whether increased piped water volume, increased duration of water availability, and/or
        safe or affordable water). Also, The RF design could have benefited from covering other important
        aspects related to NRW reduction targets, the project’s contribution to energy savings and
        greenhouse gas reduction and climate change, and the sustainability of WSS services, such as
        citizen engagement and hygiene behavior change (ICR, paragraph 79).


                                                                                                  Page 20 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



       The Results Framework (RF) included 13 intermediate results indictors (IRIs) to track the different
        project activities and assess the achievement towards realizing the PDO. Most IRIs were relevant,
        measurable and connected to the stated activities.
       Overall, M&E design reflected a well-articulated results framework that clearly outlined key desired
        outcomes and objectives. However, some key aspects of the project were not tracked as noted
        above.



b. M&E Implementation
       The PIU was responsible for monitoring progress through a monitoring and evaluation specialist to
         organize collection, verification, and consolidation of information, and submit progress reports to
         the World Bank.
        The project failed to track aspects of social behavior change to monitor effectiveness of
         handwashing and behavior change communications, even during the COVID-19 pandemic period
         when handwashing was the key mitigation measure. Also, M&E activities were undermined by
         disbursed activities among different institutions that lacked effective coordination. This was
         exacerbated by the late and ineffective establishment of a steering committee.
        Restructuring and revision of the RF. Under the first restructuring in 2020, some targets for PDO
         level indicators were revised to reflect the activities that were added and dropped, narrowing of
         scope of the project. The second restructuring narrowed the scope of the project further, added
         and dropped new indicators, cancelled some activities and revised targets. In both the first and
         second restructurings, changes made to the results framework were due either to a change in
         project scope, or to a better understanding of the project context, which improved the quality of
         the project's M&E design. However, dropping the working ratio PDO indicator was not substituted
         by a relevant alternative indicator to measure improved utility efficiency.
        Overall, M&E implementation failed to facilitate timely implementation of activities as it was
         hindered by limited capacity, poor project management and coordination challenges among key
         project actors. Also, changes to major components without specifying how these changes would
         be monitored in the M&E system hindered progress.



c. M&E Utilization
       The M&E system was inadequate in addressing delays, explaining deviations between targets
         and results, and informing on some key project outcomes and project decision-making (ICR,
         paragraph 87).

        M&E activities also experience bottlenecks in collecting, monitoring, and reporting on indicators
         which negatively impacted utilization as the M&E system was not effectively used.

  Summary of M&E Quality. While M&E design reflected a well-articulated results framework, some
  aspects of the project were not tracked. M&E implementation was challenging, and design shortcomings
  were not addressed as part of the restructuring. In addition, progress in renewing the old network,
  disconnecting illegal connections, adding new customers, and addressing NRW were not captured, as
  no indicators reported on these areas. Utilization was limited due to implementation challenges and
  design shortcomings. Overall, the M&E system was inadequate in addressing delays, explaining

                                                                                                  Page 21 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



  deviations between targets and results, and informing project decision-making. Therefore, the Quality of
  M&E is rated Modest.



  M&E Quality Rating
  Modest

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
        Environmental Category and Safeguards. This project was classified as environmental category B
          - Partial Assessment since the project activities were expected to be temporary and site-
          specific. Three environmental and one social safeguards were triggered: Environmental Assessment
          (OP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Involuntary
          Resettlement (OP 4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and Social
          Management Framework (ESMF) were prepared and published in Guinea on May 09, 2017, and on
          the World Bank’s website on May 10, 2017, to address potential environmental and social issues.
          According to the second project restructuring paper, the safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP
          4.37) was dropped. While the reason for dropping (OP/BP 4.37) was not clear in the restructuring
          paper and not mentioned in the ICR, it is possible that this was due to cancelling of the Kakoulima
          pumping station activity.
         Compliance with Environmental and Social Safeguards. The PIU was responsible for processing
          compensation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs). This process experienced significant delays after
          the coup d’etat of 2021 complicated the process by including additional bureaucratic steps that were
          required to approve payments. As a results civil works began only in April 2022, which was very late
          in the implementation cycle. The ICR (paragraph 94) noted that 79 PAPs remain uncompensated.
          To address this, the World Bank task team recommended, through official communication to the
          Government, opening an escrow account for the 79 validated PAPs (paragraph 94). The escrow
          account was moved to be under the coordinator and Financial Officer for the new Water and
          Sanitation Project, PEAG (P179017) to ensure that any legitimate PAPs claims get compensation
          after the closure of this project.
         The ICR did not include an explicit statement on the compliance of the project with the World Bank
          safeguard policies. In a further communication, the project team confirmed that “no compliance
          issues were reported, and the project adhered to the Bank’s safeguard policies.”




b. Fiduciary Compliance
        Financial Management (FM). The project maintained adequate FM arrangements throughout
           implementation. FM maintained satisfactory bookkeeping; conducted timely transmission of
           financial reports deemed acceptable; and timely transmission of the 2022 audit report and
           certification of the 2022 accounts without reserves. However, there were some weaknesses
           including: the absence of an internal auditor; late convening of the Steering Committee; and low
           budget execution rate. FM performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the final project ISR.

                                                                                                 Page 22 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



         Procurement. Procurement activities faced challenges and contributed to implementation delays.
           Procurement activities were divided between the PIU and SEG. However, this arrangement was
           poorly executed and resulted in significant delays. Procurement challenges were partially due to
           poor capacity of the PIU staff who struggled to handle the World bank procurement process. Also,
           SEG struggled to ensure contractors on the civil works component adhered to their contracted
           schedules. Furthermore, there were procurement delays that resulted from the complicated
           approval process that required some contracts to be signed by both the sector minister and the
           Minister of Finance, before they became effective. Overall, the project faced challenges to adhere
           to World Bank procurement procedures with frequent payment delays to sub-contractors resulting
           in work disruptions. The project required two extensions to complete the contracted work.
           Procurement performance was rated Moderately Satisfactory in the final project ISR.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   None.



d. Other
   The ICR (paragraphs 71, 72 and 73) highlighted three important aspects of the project that were impactful:
   first, cost savings increased the number of beneficiaries and activities; second, the sanitation component
   and associated activities while small relative to urban water, inspired the Guinean Government to officially
   request the Bank’s assistance to establish a national sanitation utility in Guinea; and third, the preparation
   of the Greater Conakry Masterplan to 2040, brought together Government agencies, various development
   partners and the private sector to mobilize financing in support for water and sanitation investments.



11. Ratings
                                                                                 Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                    IEG
                                                                                 Disagreements/Comment
                                Moderately
Outcome                                               Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
                                Moderately
Bank Performance                                      Moderately Satisfactory
                                Satisfactory
Quality of M&E                  Modest                Modest

Quality of ICR                  ---                   Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR included five lessons. The following three are emphasized with some adaptation of
language:



                                                                                                    Page 23 of 25
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



1. Projects that come after re-engaging Bank support following an extended hiatus require
thorough preparation, careful assessment of the client’s capacity, willingness to reform the
sector, and political instability to increase the chances of a successful outcome. Ensuring
project design quality, readiness and timely execution are key aspects. This project experienced
substantial delays in timely output delivery, resulting in extension of the closing date by two years to
meet the project objectives. To enhance the performance of future projects, it is essential to
incorporate additional customized technical assistance from the preparation phase, improve PIU
effectiveness with rigorous readiness measures and performance assessments, intensify focused
procurement and safeguards training for implementing entities, and closely monitor portfolio
performance.

2. M&E design needs to reflect relevant indicators and baseline data to accurately measure
utility performance improvement via the use of practical data sources and measurement
tools. Water utility capacity building programs require reliable and relevant data to measure and
demonstrate their performance results, and impacts. However, if data collection and analysis due to
the technical complexity of service level issues and staffing constraints prove difficult, the use of
appropriate and practical data sources, instruments and tools, such as remote sensing, GIS, mobile
surveys and dashboards, which can improve the accuracy, timeliness and accessibility of monitoring
and evaluation data must be introduced. The project operated in a complex and dynamic
environment, with social, economic, political, and environmental factors influencing the results and
impacts of interventions. These factors made it difficult to establish clear and consistent baselines,
indicators and targets for monitoring and evaluation. To meet these challenges, TTLs need to adopt
a flexible, adaptive approach to M&E that enables regular feedback and learning, adjustment of
program design and implementation to changing contexts.

3. Increasing water production through establishing new water treatment stations require
that the downstream network systems are in good condition and efficient to be able to
transport and distribute water with minimum losses. Thus, establishing a robust leak
management system combined with a NRW strategy are key prerequisites to effectively
control water loses. It is important to capture the impacts of changing the aging pipes in terms of
pressure increase and additional water gained versus water loss reduction, and connections with
required standards to reduce NRW. This could be facilitated through the installations of remote
monitoring meters in any head of the distribution line connected to the feeder pipes.

IEG includes the following lesson:

4. Projects that aim to help reduce Non-Revenue Water of utilities could benefit from
comprehensive baseline assessment to reveal gaps and to be able to capture actual results
at closing. The project could have included an organizational capacity assessment of the NRW
department, and establishing baseline data on total customers, metered customers, production and
sales volumes, fixed-rate customers, illegal connections, billing, sales, and network efficiency ratios
for comparison at project closure. However, a pilot was undertaken in one of SEG’s coverage areas,
to install bulk water meters, establish a baseline for water losses in this pilot zone, train SEG staff on
measuring water losses and improve reporting and new estimates. It would have been useful to
expand this pilot to other SEG project areas.




                                                                                                      Page 24 of 25
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       Guinea Urban Water Project (P157782)



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

      Quality of Evidence. The ICR reflected an evidence base that was slightly adequate to assess the
         project outcomes.
      Results Orientation. The ICR used the available data to the extent possible to discuss the achievement
         of the PDO.
      Quality of Analysis. The ICR assessment of outcomes was slightly adequate and some relevant areas of
         the PDO were not assessed due to M&E design shortcomings.
        Internal Consistency. Various parts of the ICR were internally consistent and logically linked and
         integrated.
        Lessons. Lessons reflected the project experience and were based on evidence and analysis.
        Consistency with guidelines. The ICR used the standard structure defined in the Guidelines and used
         available evidence to justify the assigned ratings. However, the ICR did not include an explicit statement
         on the compliance of the project with the World Bank Safeguard policies. The ICR also did not explain
         why one safeguard policy was dropped.
        Conciseness. Overall, the ICR was well-written and provided a concise coverage of project activities to
         the extent possible, and candidly reported on most shortcomings. However, the disbursement amounts
         at the time of restructuring reported in the ICR Data sheet were slightly different compared to the
         amounts reported in the corresponding Restructuring Papers.

Summary of the Quality of ICR Assessment. The assessment of the achievement of the PDO was
undermined by M&E shortcomings at the design and implementation levels. The lessons drawn by the ICR
were relevant. Most sections were concise and reflected relevant information. Overall, the Quality of the ICR is
rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
         Substantial




                                                                                                     Page 25 of 25
