     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



                                                                                     Report Number: ICRR0024384

1. Project Data



 Project ID                                  Project Name
 P145037                                     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project

 Country                                     Practice Area(Lead)
 Uganda                                      Agriculture and Food


 L/C/TF Number(s)                            Closing Date (Original)                 Total Project Cost (USD)
 IDA-56110                                   31-Mar-2022                                         147,595,817.72

 Bank Approval Date                          Closing Date (Actual)
 09-Apr-2015                                 31-May-2024

                                             IBRD/IDA (USD)                                      Grants (USD)

 Original Commitment                            150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Revised Commitment                             150,000,000.00                                               0.00

 Actual                                         147,595,817.72                                               0.00




 Prepared by                 Reviewed by                   ICR Review Coordinator          Group
 Shashidhara Laxman          Vibecke Dixon                 Avjeet Singh                    IEGSD (Unit 4)
 Kolavalli




2. Project Objectives and Components

DEVOBJ_TBL
a. Objectives
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) was to raise on-farm productivity, production, and marketable
   volumes of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographic clusters.

   For this review, the project objective will be parsed into three subobjectives:




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



   Subobjective 1: To raise on-farm productivity of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographical
   clusters

   Subobjective 2: To raise production of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographical clusters

   Subobjective 3: To raise marketable volumes of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographical
   clusters



b. Were the project objectives/key associated outcome targets revised during implementation?
  No

c. Will a split evaluation be undertaken?
   No

d. Components
   Component 1: Support for Intensification of On-Farm Production (Approved: US$85 million
   (Revised: US$62.02); Actual: US$59.66 million)

   The component aimed to support intensification of on-farm production of five priority commodities namely,
   maize, cassava, beans, rice and coffee. The activities included 1) a time-bound, partial and diminishing
   matching grants to help finance the purchase of key inputs and on farm storage, 2) targeted training in the
   most effective use of inputs, and 3) support to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal industry, and Fisheries
   (MAAIF) to strengthen its capacity to collect, analyze, and provide information on agricultural input markets
   and to offer capacity building services to its input suppliers.

   Component 2: Value Addition and Market Access (Approved: US$45 million (Revised: US$52.23);
   Actual: US$43.71 million)

   The component aimed to support activities and investments to improve marketing and post-harvest handling
   of farm produce; and support measures to eliminate bottlenecks and trouble spots in rural access road
   critical for the movement of farm produce to markets. The activities included 1) building the capacity and
   institutional development of producer organizations, including the Area-Based Commodity Cooperative
   Enterprises (ACCEs), Rural Producer organizations (RPOs) and farmer cooperative to manage their
   enterprises effectively and scale up their operations, 2) supporting investments of locally based farm
   cooperatives and associations in community level post-harvest handling, grading, bulking and storage and
   processing for value addition, and 3) supporting clusters to make improvements in existing farm access
   road, while focusing on eliminating key choke points that regularly impede the inflow and outflow of
   agricultural inputs and commodities, respectively.

   Component 3: Policy, Regulatory and Institutional Support (Approved: US$10 million (Revised:
   US$14.29 million); Actual: US$14.29 million)

   The component aimed to put in place institutional frameworks to support key MAAIF functions. The activities
   included 1) strengthening the regulatory capacity of MAAIF, 2) support to preparation of studies and design
   for irrigation and drainage infrastructure, formation and training of Water User groups for irrigation schemes,
   development of integrated and soil and water management plans for irrigated areas, and capacity

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 18
    Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
    UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



  development of MAAIF’s water for production unit, 3) strengthening MAAIF’s agricultural statistical capacity,
  and 4) support for surveillance and control of Fall Army Worm (FAW) infestation.

  Component 4: Coordination and Management, and ICT Platform (Approved: US$ 10 million (Revised:
  US$18.96 million); Actual: US$18.96 million)

  This component aimed to provide supporting services to the three technical components. The components
  included 1) providing overall coordination of the project, 2) building Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and
  Impact Evaluation (IE) capacity within MAAIF to track project performance and produce evidence based
  reports, and 3) promoting the use of disruptive digital technologies to transfer and disseminate production,
  climate, market and advisory information to the stakeholders.



e. Comments on Project Cost, Financing, Borrower Contribution, and Dates
  Project costs

  The project was appraised to cost US$150 million and the actual costs was US$136.63 million.

   Financing

  The project was funded by a US$ 150 million IDA grant.

  Borrower Contribution

  The borrowers were expected to contribute US$98 million, and they contributed US$21.90 million
  (According to the World Bank team from an exchange on February 29, 2025)

  Dates

  The project was approved in April 2015 and became effective in January 2017. The Mid-Term Review
  (MTR) was undertaken in September 2020. The project was scheduled to close in March 2022 but after an
  extension of 26 months, it closed in May 2024.

  Restructurings

  The project went through 7 level two restructurings. (The changes made in November 2023 restructuring is
  in some cases reported having involved two restructurings, raising the total to eight)

  December 2016: to modify the effectiveness condition related to the appointment of an e-VMA who would
  be responsible for up to US$85 million of project proceeds. As a result, the effectiveness condition on the
  appointment of e-VMA was broken into two parts. The project became effective after fulfilling the first part of
  the condition.

  June 2018: to improve project implementation performance and increase its disbursement rate. It entailed i)
  simplification of project technical design through reorganization of project activities, 2) changes to
  component costs, 3) changes to institutional and implementation arrangements, 4) changes to
  implementation schedule, and 5) changes to results indicators.


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



   May 2019: to reallocate resources across activities to achieve the MTR identified need for stronger linkages
   across activities. It entailed a budget reallocation from the e-voucher program.

   March 2022: To extend project closing and reallocate funds among activities. The project closing date was
   extended by 18 months from March 31,2022 to September 30, 2023.

   November 2023: To ensure that the proposed measures under the social risk management framework with
   respect to non-discrimination and inclusion are incorporated in the project’s operations. It included a
   meeting for all staff on the mitigation measures and a one-month extension of project form September 30,
   2023 to October 31, 2023.

   December 2023: To extend closing date for completion of on-going activities. It resulted in six-month
   extension of closing date from November 30, 2023 to May 31, 2024.

   February 2024: To extend the project closing date. The closing date was extended by four months from
   May 31, 2024 to September 30, 2024.

   Changes to Results Framework

   The changes to two indicators (yields of selected commodities and area under improved technology)
   entailed only changes in measurement units and changes to another indicator (percentage of women
   among beneficiaries) reduced the target from 50 percent to 30 percent.

   Changes to Components

   The components before the 2018 restructuring were: 1) support for Intensification of on-farm production, 2)
   preparation of Agricultural water management investments, 3) market linkages, post-harvest handling,
   storage, and value addition, and 4) project management, policy, regulatory, and ICT functions of MAAIF.
   The changes introduced related to addition, reorganization within activities, and change in the focus of sub-
   activities to 1) capacity building for production organizations and value chain actors, 2) support to
   agricultural statistics, 3) management of FAW, and 4) monitoring & evaluation and impact evaluation.




3. Relevance of Objectives

Rationale
Country context

In the decade ending in 2015, economic deceleration along with rapid population growth in Uganda held
back growth in per capita incomes; the economic growth had slowed from an average of 9.3% (2001-2008)
to 6.6% (2009-2011) and further down to 4.5% (2015), while the population grew at 3.3% (ICR, para 1). The
agriculture sector grew at around 2 percent annually, slower than the national economy and the population,
although Uganda is widely considered to be one of the countries with the highest agricultural potential in
East Africa (PAD, para 5).



                                                                                                    Page 4 of 18
                       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                       UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



Uganda’s agricultural productivity lagged behind that of neighboring countries and its potential because of
low input use, poor quality of inputs, limited agricultural infrastructure, weak market linkages and minimal
mechanization (ICR, para 2). Uganda was one of the African countries with the lowest use of inorganic
fertilizers and adoption of improved seeds. Limited irrigation infrastructure and poor management of water
left the abundant water resources underutilized, and commercialization was hampered by inadequate
agricultural extension services and poor market access.

Country Strategy

The PDO was consistent with operationalization of Agriculture Sector Development Strategy and
Investment Plan (DSIP), which Uganda adopted in 2012 (PDO, para 10). The PDO remains relevant to
evolving national priorities of Uganda articulated in NDP II, NDP III and the upcoming NDP IV (ICR, para
15). NDO II emphasized production and value addition, while NDP III changed its focus towards agro-
industrialization and commercialization. The upcoming NDP prioritizes agro-industrialization through ICT.

World Bank Strategy

The PDO contributed to achieving World Bank’s Country Assistance Strategy (CAS for FY11-FY15),
particularly its outcome 1.3 (increased productivity and commercialization of agriculture) and outcome 1.4
(increase efficiency and sustainability of natural resource management) (PAD, para 11). The objective
remains relevant to the Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (2016-2021), which emphasizes
agricultural commercialization, sustainable growth and poverty reduction through increased yields, market
access, innovation, and private sector involvement (ICR, para 16).

The PDO was consistent with and complemented those of two projects that were approved: Uganda multi-
sectoral Food Security and Nutrition project and Agricultural technology and Agribusiness Advisory
Services (PAD, para 13).

The level at which PO is pitched

Pitched at outcome levels, the project objective to increase yields, production, and volumes marketed would
directly contribute to achieving the country’s and the Bank’s strategies.

Summary

Economic growth in Uganda had decelerated in the decade prior to 2015, enough to slow down the growth
in per capita income of the population that was growing at one of the highest rates in Africa. Despite the
potential, agricultural sector was growing slower than the overall economy and the population. The country
strategy sought to increase productivity and growth. The PDO was pitched at the outcome level to
contribute directly to achieving the strategies. The objective to increase productivity, production, and
marketed volumes was highly relevant to Uganda’s strategies and the World Bank’s strategy to support
Uganda in commercializing its agriculture.


Rating Relevance TBL




Rating
High



                                                                                                        Page 5 of 18
                  Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                  UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



   4. Achievement of Objectives (Efficacy)

EFFICACY_TBL




               OBJECTIVE 1
               Objective
               To raise on-farm productivity of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographic clusters.

               Rationale
               Theory of Change (ToC)

               The retrospectively articulated ToC in the ICR (paras 4 and 5) states that project inputs were expected to
               achieve sustainable agriculture through three interconnected pathways. One, the project activities/inputs,
               such as matching grants to finance inputs, targeted training, and capacity building services to input suppliers
               would lead to producers adopting technologies/increasing the use of inputs to increase productivity. Two, the
               project activities that address post-harvest operations, such as matching grants to producer organizations or
               ACCEs to invest in bulking, storage, and processing facilities, and rehabilitation of market access roads to
               eliminate bottlenecks would help farmers obtain higher prices and boost profitability, thus stimulating demand
               for agricultural technologies/inputs, reinforcing the first pathway. Three, the project activities/inputs that
               strengthen institutional capacity, such as support for preparation of studies for irrigation and drainage
               investments, strengthening of statistical capacity, and support to surveillance and control of FAW would build
               institutional resilience and a foundation for agricultural modernization.

               The ToC was plausible. But several assumptions needed to be held. Key among them was whether farmers
               would be convinced by the benefits from using fertilizers and other inputs supplied at subsidized prices to
               continue to use them, when the extent of subsidization is gradually reduced.

               Outputs

                     Percentage of farmers using improved agricultural technology increased to 66, exceeding the target of
                      65 percent
                     Area under improved technology increased to 216,586 ha, exceeding the target of 182,100 ha
                     535,197 benefited directly from the project, exceeding the target of 450,000
                     Of them, 45 percent were female, exceeding the revised target of 30 percent

               Other reported outputs/outcomes without targets

                     634,000 farmers enrolled in the e-voucher program; of whom, 440,293 ordered inputs and 411,872
                      redeemed the vouchers
                     293,891 farmers were trained in agro-input use

               Outcomes

                     Rice yields increased to 4.22 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 1.6 tons per ha
                     Maize yields increased to 4.39 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 1.615 tons per ha
                     Beans yields increased to 1.32 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 0.4 tons per ha

                                                                                                                 Page 6 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




      Cassava yields increased to 9.78 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 6.72 tons per ha
      Coffee yields increased to 3.01 tons per ha, exceeding the target of 0.48 tons per ha

The above yield indicators were constructed using information collected through seasonal routine surveys of
the M&E system (ICR, para 19). The reported end-of- the- project yields are several folds greater than the
targets.

The e-voucher program, which gave farmers access to a wide range of inputs, such as seeds, chemical
fertilizers, pesticides, and equipment, encouraged them to adopt the technologies. The farmers found that he
quality of inputs supplied through the project were higher than those distributed free to farmers. In a study of
the e-voucher program, 60% of the respondents expressed greater trust in ACDP provided inputs compared
to that of other projects (ICR, para 28). Both the proportion of farmers adopting technologies and the area
under new technologies increased significantly. But pattern of purchases by those who participated in the e-
voucher program suggest a modest increase in inputs use: only 50% of the beneficiaries purchased farm
equipment, including tarpaulins, 39% purchased fertilizers, 23% improved seeds, and 16% pesticides (ICR,
para 26). The borrower’s ICR notes that only a small percentage of beneficiaries transitioned from cycle 1 to
cycle 3 of the e-voucher program (ICR, Annex 5, page 45). While the tarpaulins could have reduced post-
harvest losses, only the use of fertilizers, seeds and pesticides could have contributed to yield increases.
Overall percentage of farmers that adopted technologies was only 65 percent. This level of adoption does not
seem to be commensurate with several fold improvements in crop yields indicated by the M&E. In an email
exchange on February 7, 2025, the World Bank reiterated that the M&E system followed conventional data
collection and reporting measures and that the team monitored the data.

The Impact Evaluation (IE) of the e-voucher program, which employed a quasi-experimental design using
propensity score matching, indicated that participation in the program significantly boosted yields (ICR para
24). The beneficiaries harvested 132, 335, and 324 kg per ha more of cassava, coffee, and rice than non-
beneficiaries. The differences were statistically non-significant for maize (174 kg per ha) and beans (-18 kg
per ha). The tons per ha yields of participants reported in IE (cassava: 2.8; coffee: 1.3; maize: 2.08; rice: 2.3;
and beans: 0.78) (Report, page 125, table 4.3) seem more reasonable, except in the case for cassava. The
ICR notes that some of the baseline yields estimated in 2018 were higher than the targets (para 21) which
may indicate that the targets were on the conservative side.

The efficacy with which the sub-objective 1 is achieved is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.



Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 2
Objective
To raise production of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographic clusters.

Rationale
Theory of Change



                                                                                                     Page 7 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



The ToC offered for achieving objective one applies here.

Outputs

      304,696 participating farm households used post-harvest technology inputs, exceeding the target of
         300,000

Outcomes

Increased production by participating farmers

      Rice production by participating farmers in the project areas grew by 284.51 percent, exceeding the
         target of 50 percent
      Maize production by participating farmers in the project areas grew by 138.75 percent, exceeding the
       target of 50 percent
      Beans production by participating farmers in the project areas grew by 368.75 percent, exceeding the
       target of 50 percent
      Cassava production by participating farmers in the project areas grew by 64.74 percent, exceeding the
       target of 50 percent
      Coffee production by participating farmers in the project areas grew by 1,362.50 percent, exceeding
       the target of 50 percent

Increased production in production areas

        Rice production in the project areas grew by 246 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Maize production in the project areas grew by 292 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Beans production in the project areas grew by 336 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Cassava production in the project areas grew by 159 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Coffee production in the project areas grew by 288 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent

The information from the M&E suggest that production of the selected crops by participating farmers and in
the project, area exceeded the target of 50 percent. The changes were large: from 65 percent to 1,362
percent increase in production by participating farmers and 159 to 292 percent in project area.

Production could have increased from higher productivity on the one acre plots for which the participants
received subsidized inputs through e-vouchers, higher yields from increased use of inputs on the rest of their
cultivated area, and reduced post-harvest losses from improved practices. The ICR notes that spillover effect
of the farmers investing in inputs for the rest of their land contributed to increased production (para 23).
However, the IE offers contradictory evidence by noting that participation in the voucher program is not
associated with increasing the crop area fertilized (page 1). However, the most popular input that was
purchased by the participants was tarpaulins (purchased by about one-half of the participants), which could
have reduced post-harvest losses considerably to increase the production.

The efficacy in the achievement of this objective is rated Substantial.




                                                                                                  Page 8 of 18
   Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                              Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
   UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




Rating
Substantial


OBJECTIVE 3
Objective
To raise marketable volumes of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographic clusters.

Rationale
Theory of Change

The ToC offered for achieving objective one applies here.

Outputs

      85.80 percent of ACCEs and apex producer organizations improved their operating capacities, falling
         short of the target of 100 percent
        119 percent of supported ACCEs invested significantly in post-harvest and/or marketing (more than
         US$5,000), exceeding the target of 30 percent
        84,869 MT of additional storage capacity was established through the project, exceeding the target of
         45,000 MT
        A functional national platform for exchange of market information and negotiations between ACCEs
         and wholesale traders and agribusinesses was established, as planned
        335 road bottlenecks were fixed, exceeding the target of 100
        Profit-cost ratio for rice was 2.87, exceeding the target of 1.53
        Profit-cost ratio for maize 1.33, exceeding the target of 1.24
        Profit-cost ratio for beans was 1.76, exceeding the target of 1.48
        Profit-cost ratio for Cassava was 12.11, exceeding the target of 1.43
        Profit-cost ratio for coffee was 6.50, exceeding the target of 1.53

Other outputs/outcomes without indicators

      National productive alliance committee platform was established
      7 produce buyers provided 45 million MT of storage space and committed to buying at above market
         prices
      38 ACCEs signed formal marketing contracts with buyers
      358 ACCEs/RPOs were awarded matching grants for bulking, value addition and collective marketing
      345 road chokes, including swamps spanning 1,110 km, were constructed and rehabilitated.

Outcomes

        Marketed rice increased by 585 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Marketed maize increased by 286 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Marketed beans increased by 186 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent
        Marketed cassava increased by 231 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent


                                                                                                 Page 9 of 18
                                Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
                                UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




                                  Marketed coffee increased by 301 percent, exceeding the target of 50 percent

                            The volume of commodities marketed increased by 186 to 585 percent, against the target of 50 percent. The
                            IE study suggests more modest changes that do not meet the 50 percent target (Technical Evaluation of the
                            e-Voucher Input Subsidy under the Agriculture Cluster Development Program in Uganda, Table 4-16).

                            The ICR attributes the increase to the project’s matching grants to enhance post-harvest handling capabilities
                            (para 32). The recipient ACCEs invested in storage and processing facilities which increased their operational
                            capacity and storage capacity (para 32). The IE of the matching grant, however, suggests modest changes in
                            producer practices. For example, they increased participation in bulking by 16 to 17 percent, in storage by 17
                            percent, and in value addition by 23 percent with considerable variation among crops (Impact Evaluation of
                            Group Based Matching Grant Intervention on Farmer Organizations, slides 20-22).

                            As in the achievement of the other objectives, IE of matching grants suggest more modest changes: bulking
                            rose by 16-17 percent, storage facilities increased by 17 percent, and contract transactions increased by 6
                            percent.

                            The indicators suggest that marketed volumes increased to a higher extent than the targets. The increase
                            could be attributed to project activities that enabled producer organizations to improve their post-harvest
                            practices and reduced infrastructure bottlenecks. The efficacy with which this subobjective is achieved is
                            rated substantial.



                            Rating
                            Substantial


OVERALL EFF TBL




                  OBJ_TBL




                            OVERALL EFFICACY
                            Rationale
                            The ToC stated that project activities that encourage the use of improved inputs through an e-voucher
                            program, support farmer organizations to invest in post-harvest operations, and increase market access by
                            eliminating some of the infrastructure bottlenecks would help farmers increase productivity, production, and
                            the volumes they market. Farmers increased productivity, production, and volumes marketed exceeding the
                            targets. The evidence from M&E and IEs do not support each other, although it is evident that project
                            activities contributed to the changes and the program participants increased productivity, production and
                            volume marketed to a greater extent than non-participants. The overall efficacy in the achievement of the
                            objective is rated Substantial with moderate shortcomings.



                            Overall Efficacy Rating
                            Substantial



                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




 5. Efficiency
The analysis at appraisal was based on nine farm models in which inputs from the e-voucher program are used
on one acre of land. The estimated EIRR was 16.4 percent. The sensitivity analysis confirmed that EIRR was
robust, with an EIRR of 12 percent if at least 75 percent of the projected number of beneficiaries were reached
(PAD, para 60).

The analysis at closing was based on i) investments in e-vouchers, ii) investments in storage, bulking, and
processing, iii) the fixing of road choke points, and iv) monetized environmental benefits from reduced GHG
emissions and increased carbon sequestration (ICR, para 40). Without the social value of carbon mitigation, the
estimated EIRR was 26.80 percent over a 20 year horizon. When only the benefits from component 1 was
considered, as was done at appraisal, the estimated returns was 20.7 percent (ICR, Para 40). Including the
benefits from carbon sequestration with low and high social price of carbon, the EIRR varied from 24.64 and
26.36 percent.

Many factors influenced its implementation.

Parliamentary delays: The project took nearly two years to become effective because of delays in ratification of
the credit and in meeting the effectiveness conditions because of complexity of the procurement process for an
e-voucher management agency – the project was restructured to modify the effectiveness condition.

Political support: The integration of aspects of agricultural sector DSIP into the project ensured ownership of
the project and consensus about it among government entities, including MAAIF, MoPED, and the Office of the
Presidency (ICR, para 49). However, the project faced political challenges because two programs, National
Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and Operation Wealth Creation (OWC), distributed free inputs in ACDP
districts. Local politicians didn’t come forward in favor of a project implementing a market-driven approach,
although farmers eventually recognized the superiority of the voucher program (ICR, para 51).

There were shortcomings in operational efficiency due to unanticipated events. The pandemic related
restrictions delayed road construction. Floods and heavy rains since 2019 delayed road repairs and required
budget reallocations, and increased input prices along with high exchange rates following Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine adversely affected the e-voucher program (ICR, para 54). The project management costs were nearly
double the funds allocated initially.

The efficiency with which the project is implemented is rated Substantial with some shortcomings on the
administrative/operational efficiency.


Efficiency Rating
Substantial


a. If available, enter the Economic Rate of Return (ERR) and/or Financial Rate of Return (FRR) at appraisal
  and the re-estimated value at evaluation:
                               Rate Available?            Point value (%)          *Coverage/Scope (%)


                                                                                                  Page 11 of 18
      Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                  Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
      UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



                                                                                          0
 Appraisal                                                     16.40
                                                                                           Not Applicable
                                                                                          0
 ICR Estimate                                                  20.70
                                                                                           Not Applicable

* Refers to percent of total project cost for which ERR/FRR was calculated.

6. Outcome

The PDO to increase productivity, production, and volumes marketed of selected crops was highly relevant to
Uganda’s strategy to increase production and value addition. The efficacy with which the objective was
achieved was substantial with moderate shortcomings. Although evidence from different sources on the level of
changes did not align with each other, there was strong evidence that the changes could be attributed to project
activities. The efficiency of implementation was rated substantial with some implementation delays. The
outcome is rated satisfactory.


a. Outcome Rating
   Satisfactory


7. Risk to Development Outcome

Although some important aspects of ASDP have been incorporated into the following project Climate Smart
Agricultural Transformation Project, the project outcomes are at risk (ICR, para 67).

Policy Risk: Shifts in policies on inputs and community engagement may jeopardize the private enterprises-
led input supply system encourage by the project.

Market Risk: Fluctuations in input prices and supply shocks could reduce their availability and affordability,
significantly affecting profitability of their use.

Limited Credit Risks: Participation in the voucher program plummeted in the second and third rounds in
which the subsidy component was gradually reduced. Without making credit available, even those convinced
of the benefits from using fertilizers may not be able to continue to do so.

Technology Risk: Without sustained efforts to supply technologies/production practices that increase the
profitability of input use, there is the risk of reaching the limits of maintaining profitability through subsidies.




8. Assessment of Bank Performance

a. Quality-at-Entry


                                                                                                           Page 12 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                               Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



  The project, focusing on increasing input use, reducing post-harvest losses, and easing some of the
  marketing constraints, was designed to meet the strategic objective of the country to increase productivity
  and commercialize agriculture. The key components of it – a voucher program to make inputs available at
  discounted prices, grants to producer organizations to assist in post-harvest operations and investments
  to reduce roadblocks – could be expected to achieve the project objectives. The design concepts were
  based on project assessments, commissioned studies, and lessons from similar programs in other
  countries (ICR, para 38).

  The M&E system with appropriate outcome indicators was adequate to track project implementation and
  measure the outcomes. The targets for the indicators could have been set more appropriately based on
  crop specific potential to increase productivity and production. The RF was also designed so that it can
  be integrated into that of the implementing organization.

  The project exposed the ministry through study tours to novel features of the project, such as e-vouchers,
  and proposed phased implementation, so that the project could adapt and scale appropriately (ICR, para
  64).

  As the project was designed with appropriate activities to meet strategic objectives, an adequate M&E
  system, and flexibility to implement in phases to adapt and scale appropriately, the Quality-at-entry is
  rated satisfactory.



  Quality-at-Entry Rating
  Satisfactory


b. Quality of supervision
 The World Bank team organized regular missions, 18 in all, with required expertise, except for expertise in
 road construction, the absence of which affected supervision effectiveness (ICR, para 65). The team
 leveraged additional resources through trust funds to organize activities, such as the innovation challenge,
 that complemented and strengthened project activities. The bank team, however, missed an opportunity to
 revise the RF when it found that the targets set had been met in the early stages.

 Overall, with minor shortcomings, the quality of supervision is rated satisfactory.

 The project was designed suitably to achieve the objectives and the team took actions to reduce the risks
 from implementing novel features but the supervision had some shortcomings. The overall Bank
 Performance too is rated satisfactory.



  Quality of Supervision Rating
  Satisfactory

  Overall Bank Performance Rating
  Satisfactory

                                                                                                   Page 13 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




9. M&E Design, Implementation, & Utilization

a. M&E Design
 The M&E design was adequate to monitor project implementation, measure the outcomes, and validate the
 pathways articulated in the ToC.

 The PDO indicators were clear and measurable. The targets were, however, set rather arbitrarily before the
 baseline study was conducted. For example, production by households and in the area and the share
 marketed were to be increased for all crops by 50 percent with no consideration to crop-specific potential to
 change yields and production area based on available technologies and the scale of project support. The
 system depended on external studies to measure the outcomes; the key PDO indicators were to be
 measured by commissioned studies or Uganda National Panel Survey (UNPS) (PAD, page 33).

 There were 16 intermediate indicators. The systems was designed so that it was consistent with and could
 be integrated in the long run with that of the implementing organization MAAIF.



b. M&E Implementation
  The ICR notes that data were collected regularly and uploaded to MIS (para 56). The Bank team,
  however, failed to make changes in the system to response to its outputs. . A revised baseline survey in
  2018, for example, showed that the yields of some crops had already exceeded the targets. Although the
  8th mission discussed the need to raise the targets, the team did not revise the targets through a
  restructuring (ICR, para 56).

  Several impact evaluations (on e-voucher, matching grants, road choke and agro-dealers) were
  conducted as planned using the M&E data or additional surveys, but the team failed to check the veracity
  of the data generated through the system, particularly on project outcomes, which are inconsistent with i)
  the information generated by the system on input use and technology adoption by farmers, and ii) the
  outcomes suggested by the IEs. The yields reported by the IE on e-voucher participation, for example,
  are significantly lower than information generated by the M&E, but consistent with the level of
  participation in e-voucher and the average yields reported by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics.



c. M&E Utilization
  The M&E data, along with the IEs, provided adequate information on project outcomes in addition to
  achievement of project outputs. The data were used by support missions, and the ICR reports that M&E
  data and findings informed subsequent interventions (para 57). Some of the restructurings were based
  on and informed by the M&E.

  Summary: The M&E design with appropriate indicators was adequate to monitor project and assess the
  outcomes, although it could have benefited from more output indicators. The targets could have been
  revised as some of them were met in early stages of the project itself. The system, including several
  impact assessments, was implemented as planned, but better quality control could have made their
  findings consistent with each other. M&E quality is rated substantial with moderate shortcomings.


                                                                                                  Page 14 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                             Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




  M&E Quality Rating
  Substantial

10. Other Issues

a. Safeguards
   Environmental

   The project, assessed as category B, triggered i) Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), ii) Natural Habitats
   (OP 4.04), iii) Pest Management (OP 4.09), iv) Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), and v) International
   Waterways (OP 7.50).

   The project developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), along with
   Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and a Pesticide Management Plan (PMP).
   However, in the early stages, the project encountered hazardous waste accumulation; Despite the
   development of necessary management plans, improper disposal of chemicals and delays in issuing
   hazardous waste guidelines persisted leading to a downgrade of the environmental performance rating from
   "Satisfactory" to "Moderately Satisfactory" by project closing. The MTR in 2020 flagged contractor non-
   compliance to rate environmental risk as "Substantial." Monitoring missions continued to find gaps in
   Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) reporting, dust control measures, and waste management practices,
   keeping the rating at "Moderately Satisfactory" at closing (ICR, para 59).

   Social

   The project also triggered the Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and a Resettlement Policy
   Framework (RPF) was prepared at appraisal. The ICR does not provide any further information on that.

   The project developed a social risk management plan and a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to
   address early risks, such as with Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA). Despite the efforts noted in the
   MTR, such as activating the GRM and engaging stakeholders, grievances remained with unresolved
   complaints. Delays in grievance resolution and incomplete Gender Strategy execution resulted in a rating of
   Moderately Satisfactory (ICR, para 60).




b. Fiduciary Compliance
   Financial Management

   The project, in the early stages, faced low fund utilization, delays in disbursements, and difficulties
   migrating to the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) (ICR, para 61). Foreign exchange losses
   and delayed submission of financial reports from district levels affected the overall timeliness and accuracy
   of financial reporting. The project team strengthened internal control, which improved disbursement to
   reach 98% at project closing. Problems, such as undocumented expenditures and delayed audits,

                                                                                                   Page 15 of 18
     Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                                Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
     UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



   persisted until the project's final stages. The project complied with key fiduciary requirements, submitting
   external audit reports on time and receiving unqualified opinions. However, the audits flagged operational
   deficiencies —such as delays in contract execution, budget approvals, and the functioning of the e-voucher
   management system—which could have been overcome with better financial and project management.
   The FM was rated Moderately Satisfactory at closing (ICR, para 61).

   Procurement

   Low procurement capacity, internal procedural difficulties, and inconsistencies between World Bank
   procurement guidelines and national regulations caused significant delays initially, leading to several
   uninitiated or canceled procurement activities (ICR, para 63). The introduction of a Delegated Contracts
   Committee and other measures helped streamline the procurement process. The project demonstrated
   commitment to overcoming procurement issues to adhere to World Bank guidelines. At project closure,
   most procurements were either completed or in advanced stages and the project was rated Moderately
   Satisfactory.




c. Unintended impacts (Positive or Negative)
   ---

d. Other
   The e-Voucher and matching grants fostered a market-oriented approach where previously farmers
   received free inputs. The voucher program and the matching grants mobilized US$11.9 million and US$8.1
   Million, respectively. It spurred private sector engagement, attracting their investments (ICR, para 46). The
   matching grant model has been adopted by other projects in Uganda.



11. Ratings
                                                                                  Reason for
Ratings                         ICR                     IEG
                                                                                  Disagreements/Comment
Outcome                         Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Bank Performance                Satisfactory            Satisfactory

Quality of M&E                  Substantial             Substantial

Quality of ICR                  ---                     Substantial


12. Lessons

The ICR offered four lessons. Three of them that are likely to be widely relevant are presented with
some modifications:




                                                                                                    Page 16 of 18
       Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                            Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
       UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)



Partnering with local pioneers on implementing interventions, such as e-vouchers, that need
to be tailored to local contexts can improve the chances of success (ICR, para 68). Local
fintech companies and digital service providers – who knew how to cater to clients without formal
identification documents and access to banks – offered the project flexible, cost-effective, and
tailored solutions.

Complementing programs that plan to phase out subsidies with credit support systems has
the potential to enable users to continue using inputs (ICR, para 69). The high dropout from the
subsidy program as the subsidies declined did not indicate intension to abandon the practice of input
use. Many attempted to reenter the early phases through their family members. Provision of access
to micro credit, for example, would have enabled them to buy unsubsidized inputs.

Organizing farmers into groups offers opportunities to give communities tools, equipment,
and machinery they can share and more effectively disseminate technologies. Technology
diffusion takes place faster through communities when group learning is involved compared to
learning from individual demonstrations.



13. Assessment Recommended?

  No

14. Comments on Quality of ICR

The report meets the requirements, although it could have offered some of the information in the main text. For
example, planned and actual expenditures and the safeguards triggered by the project. The report makes use
of information from several sources, offering them in sufficient detail in annexes. The approach taken is
reasonable, as the report builds on the links in the ToC to argue that the outcomes could be attributed to project
activities. The writing is clear, and the ICR is kept within the recommended 15 pages, which is commendable.

However, there were shortcomings. The ICR would have assessed the credibility of different sources and,
importantly, reconcile their findings.

Overall, the rating is Substantial.



  a. Quality of ICR Rating
       Substantial




                                                                                                    Page 17 of 18
Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)                 Implementation Completion Report (ICR) Review
UG-Agriculture Cluster Develop Project (P145037)




                                                                                Page 18 of 18
